INTERNATIONAL 


ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.14 
20 October 1958 
General Conference ENGLISH 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FOURTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 22 September 1958, at 3 P.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. RAAB (Austria) 
President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the Par agraphs 
agenda* 
1 Opening of the session 1 
2 Minute of silent prayer or meditation 2 
Address by the Temporary President 3 -8 
3 Election of the President 9 18 
4 Appointment of a Credentials Committee 19 
5 Election of the Vice-President: 20 -22 
6 Appointment of the General Committee 23 -25 
Statement by the Representative of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 26 -31 
10 Statement by the Director General 32 — 50 


* GC(II)/57. 
N.E. 
The list of delegations attending the second regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/1/Rev,3 

GC(II)/OR.14 
Page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the second regular session of the 
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency open0 
MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION 


2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited the Conference to observe one minute's 
silence for prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


ADDRESS BY THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT extended a welcome on behalf of the Federal 
Government of Austria and offered those participating in the Conference the 
wishes of the Austrian Government and people for the success of their work. 
4. The International Atomic Energy Agency was called upon to make a decisive 
contribution to the activities which would enable mankind 'to enjoy in the near 
future the blessings of atomic energy. The Agency must not,, however, confine 
itself to serving the cause of scientific progress, encouraging the exchange of 
experience and knowledge on a world-wide scale and providing the administrative 
machinery for such an exchange. It must also assist the technically lessdeveloped 
countries to take advantage of the benefits of atomic energy. 
5. Extraordinary progress had already been made in that field. Atomic problems 
were nowadays openly discussed and free exchanges of views on the subject 
could be held. Only thus, in peaceful competition and international 
co-operation, could atomic energy be used to conquer humanity's worst enemies, 
poverty, sickness and need. 
6. However, many of the problems created by the use of atomic energy still 
remained unsolved, in particular the protection of human health and safety. 
Among the most important tasks enjoined on the Agency by its Statute were the 
investigation of suitable methods of applying atomic energy and the development 
of effective safeguard procedures. 
7. To a very large extent the Agency had been able to justify the great confidence 
placed in it by the peoples and Governments of the world. The First 

GC(II)/OR.14 
Page 3 


Annual Report of the Board of Governors to the General Conference—' described 
important initial successes. 

8. He wished to add a few words in his capacity as Federal Chancellor of 
Austria. The Austrian Government had particular satisfaction in placing the 
Eofburg at the Agency's disposal for the Conference's work. The Hofburg 
would he a worthy setting for the Conference's deliberations. Vienna itself 
7/as the capital of a country which through its international status seemed 
particularly well suited to offer favourable conditions for the Agency's work. 
The hall in which the plenary meetings of the General Conference were to take 
place would serve as a symbol% the walls of the Hofburg now housed the most 
up-to-date equipment and wore to look down on discussions devoted to the 
problems of developing the newest sources of energy,} past and present thus 
combined together to promise a fairer, better and happier future. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


9. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, citing Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, 
invited nominations for the office of President of the General Conference. 
10. I-Ir. BHABEA (India) nominated Mr. Sudjarwo, head of the Indonesian 
delegation, who had taken a very active part in the work of the Conference on 
the Statute, the Preparatory Commission and the first session of the General 
Conference. His outstanding qualities and his long experience in international 
affairs made him eminently suitable to act as President of the second 
regular session of the General Conference. 
11. Mr. BERNARDIDS (Brazil), warmly supported the nomination and proposed 
that the General Conference elect Mr. Sudjarwo by acclamation. 
There were no other nominations. 


Mr Sud.jarwo (Indonesia) was elected President of the second regular 
session of the General Conforence by acclamation. 


Mr. Sud.jarwo (Indonesia) took the ohair. 


12. The PRESIDENT expressed the gratitude of all to the head of the 
Austrian delegation for having been good enough to act as Temporary President 
of the General Conference. He was sure that he was interpreting the general 
1/ GC(II)/39. 



GC(II)/0E.14 
Page 4 


feeling in thanking the Federal Chancellor for his words of welcome. He 


(Mr. Sudjarwo) had been deeply touched by the kind words addressed to him by 


the representatives of India and Brazil. Expressing his gratitude for the 
honour done to his country and himself, he undertook to do all in his power 


to contribute to the success of the session. 


13. The first session of the General Conference of the Agency had rightly 
aroused great hopes. The world was still wondering whether the atomic age would 
he the age of light sought by humanity or an age of darkness,, The efforts of 
the world's leaders must be directed to providing an answer to that question. 
Limited though its fiold of action was, the second session of the General 
Conference must assist them in those efforts. The events of the past twelve 
months had maintained the hopes of mankind - indeed had raised them still 
higher. The participation of new Members was also a source of encouragement 
and. would assist the Agency to achieve its objectives. Moreover, the second 
United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, 
held recently at Geneva (the Geneva Conference) had marked a now stage on the 
road which the Agency was following in the accomplishment of its tasks. 
14. Ho had no doubt that the General Conference would consider the statement 
of the Director General and the report of the Board of Governors with good 
will and in the spirit which had marked the birth of the Agency. Without 
the patience and understanding of all countries, and more particularly, the 
close co-operation of the main atomic Powers, what had been achieved could not 
have been achieved. To build on that work and to ensure the final success of 
the Agency the harmonious co-operation of those Powers would be no less 
necessary in future. 
15. It was true that patience was demanded but it was no loss true that many 
Members of the Agency, especially those representing the "less-developed" or 
"under-privileged" areas, were impatient inasmuch as they had an urgent need 
to improve the welfare of their millions of inhabitants. It was therefore 
not without good reason that they placed their greatest hopes in the Agency, 
since it held out the promise to them of a fair share in the benefits of atomic 
power. 
16. The Statute itself rightly emphasized the need to pay due regard to the 
special requirements of the under-developed countries. Those countries 

GC(II)/OR.14 
Page 5 


contained two-thirds of mankind, whose well-being was an important factor for 
the prosperity and peace of the world. Hence the tasks that awaited the 
Agency were by no moans small ones. 


17. He had no doubt that in its wisdom the General Conference would respond 
to the challenge by taking decisions which would express its determination to 
give practical effect to the Agency's work in the interests of all, and which 
v/ould turn it into an instrument capable - in accordance with its Statute - of 
accelerating and increasing the contribution of atomic energy to the peace, 
health and prosperity of the entire world. The decisions of the General Conference 
would be not only of great practical value to the Agency itself, but 
also of great moral value in the dawning era of atomic energy, 
18. He promised to direct his efforts towards success in the common task, 
working in close collaboration with all the delegates, the members of the 
General Committeej the Director General, his staff, and the Chairman and 
members of the Board of Governors. He hoped that the second regular session 
of the General Conference of the Agency would mark a new stop towards the 
peaceful use of atomic energy for the greatest possible benefit of the whole 
human race. 
APPOINTMENT OF A CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 


19. The PRESIDENT proposed that the Credentials Committee should be 
appointed immediately in accordance with Rule 23 of the Rules of Procedure, 
and should consist of the following Member States, Australia, Ceylon, Pakistan, 
Peru, Sweden, the Union of South Africa, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 
the United States of America and Venezuela. 
The proposal was adopted. 


The meeting was suspended at 3.55 P.m. and resumed at 4.05 p.m. 

ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 


20. The PRESIDENT, citing Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, invited 
delegates to submit nominations for the election of the eight Vice-President:. 
21. Mr. BROCH (Norway) nominated the following Member Statess Canada, 
Cuba, Philippines, Thailand, Turkey, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 
the United Arab Republic and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland. 

GC(II)/OR.14 
Pago 6 


22. Mr, SOLE (Union of South Africa) seconded those nominations. 
There wero no other nominations. 


Those Member States were elected to the eight Vice-Presidencies. 


APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


23. The PRESIDENT said that to comply with Rule 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure the General Conference had to elect four additional members to the 
General Committee. He therefore invited delegates to submit nominations in 
accordance with that Rule. 
24. Mr. TAMMES (Netherlands) nominated France, Japan, Romania and the 
United States of America, 
25. Mr. LUJAN (Venezuela) seconded those nominations. 
There wore no other nominations. 


Those Member States were elected to the General Committee. 


STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Seynes, Representative of 
the Socrotary-General of the United Nations, mounted the rostrum. 


26. Mr. de SEYNES (Representative of the Socrctary-Gcneral of the 
United Nations), after conveying the wishes of the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations for the success of the second regular session of the 
General Conference of the Agency, stressed the great importance of the session.' 
The Agency had completed the first stage of organization and now possessed in 
its staff of technicians a tool which might be put to groat uses. The General 
Conference was called upon to give direction to the activities of the Agency for 
the coming years, and on its decisions would depend to a large extent the 
success of those activities, not only for one year but for a long period. 
27. The Agency could play an important role in economic and social matters, with 
which ho was particularly concerned by virtue of the post ho occupied. In 
previous years the United Nations had attached an ever-growing importance to 
the problems of raising the standard of living of the under-developed countries. 
The establishment of the Agency had aroused a great hope that the solution of 
the problem could be hastened by an international co-operative effort in the 

GC(II)/0H.14 
Page 7 


atomic field. The recent Geneva conference had perhaps slightly damped that 
hope, but there was no need to be a prophet to foresee that some day atomic 
onorgy would make ar. important contribution to the progress of those countries 
which v/cre still under-developed. International organizations should take 
a long view in planning their activities. On such a view the execution of a 
programme of action for the under-developed countries was already fully justified. 
The Geneva conference had also confirmed that peaceful uses other than 
the generation of pov/er would bring to agriculture, industry and medicine 
benefits which, although less spectacular than those of nuclear energy, would 
be of ever-increasing value5 it seemed that some of those uses could be put 
into effect immediately in under-developed countries. 


28. The compete it organs of the United Nations had followed with keen interest 
the development of the Agency's work, every part of which concerned problems 
closely bound up with the purposes of the Charter. Because of those bonds, 
co-operation between the Agency and the United Nations was indispensable and 
naturalc Ten years' experience had shown that co-operation of that sort between 
institutions whoso fields touched and sometimes overlapped, could not rest 
exclusively on the existence of an agreement, which was only its legal 
expression. To become living and fruitful, such co-operation must be continuous 
and creative; the organizations must at all times pay strict attention 
to each other's problems5 joint schemes must be very flexible both in planning 
and in execution; and each organization must recognize the very great benefits 
which it could derive from the existence of the other. 
29. A certain amount of co-operation, still modest in scope, had taken shape 
in the past year in a certain number of spheres, which the draft report to the 
United Nations General Assembly—' summarized in detail. Now that the period 
of organization was over, now and larger spheres had begun to require fuller 
co-operation botween the two organizations. Such spheres must widen and increase 
in number as the uses of atomic energy developed, 
30. Many economic questions must be investigated and studied relating, for 
instance, to statistics, costing and the incorporation of nuclear energy into 
power systems. Although the purely nuclear aspect of those problems principally 
concerned the technicians of the Agency, their effect on the other forms 
2/ GC(II)/40. 



GC(II)/OR.14 


Pago 8 


of onorgy and on economic development as a whole would be of particular interest 
to the United Nations, whoso regional economic commissions offered further 
opportunities of fruitful co-operation. The effects of ionizing radiation wore 
also important. The United Nations would, he repeated, always co-oporato with 
the Agency wherever the need arose. 


31. On behalf of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, he thanked the 
Federal Chancellor and the Austrian Government for their welcome and hospitality. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


32. The DIRECTOR GENERAL welcomed the delegates, the representatives of 
the United Nations and the specialized agencies, the observers of non-member 
States and regional intergovernmental organizations, the representatives of 
non-governmental organizations, and all other persons present. 
33. He said that no one who considered the impressive surroundings in which 
the General Conference was meeting and the ancient Viennese heritage of understanding 
and tolerance could doubt that Vienna would increasingly become a 
centre of international conferences and activity, 
34* The Agency was deeply grateful to the Austrian authorities, who had gone 


to considerable effort and expense to help it to become established. In addi


tion to the conference halls at the Hofburg, it was using the whole of the Grand 
Hotel for its Secretariat's offices. But arrangements had to be made for expansion; 
studies wore in progress for the selection of a site for the permanent 
headquarters of the Agency, and for the housing of its staff. 


35. Ho would roviow in turn the Agency's activity during its first year of 
existence, the programmes recommended for 1959, and possible additional programmes 
for the near future. 
36. Thanks to the effective working relationship which had existed between the 
Board of Governors and the Secretariat, the Agency's efforts during its first 
year showed a distinct mark of progress and accomplishment. 
37. Recruitment had been carried out with a high degree of care, thanks to the 
help given by the Secretariats of the United Nations and of the specialized 
agencies, which had seconded the necessary personnel. In accordance with the 
provisions of the Statute, recruitment had been based on efficiency, competence 

GC(II)/OR.14 
Pago 9 


and integrity, particularly in the scientific field. The wide geographical 
distribution of the staff was almost certainly unmatched by that of any other 
member of the United Nations family. 


38. The Secretariat's first major task had been to prepare the budget estimates 
and programme for 19595 which had boon revised by the Board of Governors and 
were now being submitted to the General Conference—'. 
39. Applications for 251 fellowships had boon received from 25 countries, and 
132 candidates had already been selected for placement. The ready response 
to Agency fellowship opportunities emphasized the great need for them, and so it 
was important that the target set in the draft budget for voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund should be reached by the generosity of the Member 
States. 
40. A study of the need for nuclear training centres in Latin America had been 
completed by a team of experts headed by Dr.Norman Hilberry of the United States, 
which had visited 17 of the 20 Latin-American countries. 
41. A directory of peacetime reactors throughout the woi'ld could be prepared 
if those Member States having reactors would reply to the questionnaires sent 
them, A similar compilation, to provide a source of information on every kind 
of atomic equipment and materials was also under way. 
42. A technical library, which would be particularly useful for the less 
advanced countries, was being established. A small laboratory had boon set up 
for the standardization of radioactive samples and the comparison of electronic 
equipment of different nations. 
43. A panel of experts headed by Mr. Gunnar Randers of Norway had helped the 
Agency to compile a draft manual of practices for the safe handling of radioisotopes. 
"When approved by the Board, it would serve as a code to be followed 
in all Agency projects and as a pattern for the many countries which did not 
have such codes, 
44. He hoped that agreements at present being negotiated to establish conditions 
for the transfer of special fissionable material to the Agency would 
shortly be submitted to the Board of Governors. 
3/ GC(II)/36 and Corr.1. 



GC(II)/OR.14 
Pago 10 


45* Already a considGrable number of requests for technical advice and assistance, 
covering a wide range of atomic energy activities, had been received. 


46. Several members of the Secretariat had participated in. the Second Geneva 
conference. That conference had enabled the staff of the Agency to mingle 
with world scientists, discuss technical problems with them, and gather ideas 
for future activities. Because of its scientific staff, the Agency provided 
a forum for exchange of views between loading scientists of the world;; it 
might well promote specialized scientific and technical gatherings in order to 
deal with specific subject areas and thus meet more precisely the needs of 
particular geographical regions. Its scientific competence would soon be 
further strengthened by the appointment of a high-level scientific advisory 
committee to advise the Board of Governors and the Director General on the 
direction of its programmes, and particularly to consider methods for exploiting 
the results of the second Geneva conference. 
47. During its formative months the Agency had had to determine its position 
among the other international organizations dealing with the peaceful development 
of atomic energy on a world-wide and regional level, and its Relationship 
Agreement with the United Nations had the greatest significance-^. The 
conclusion of that Agroemont had been followed by the negotiation of other 
agreements with the International Labour Organisation, the Pood and Agriculture 
Organization, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Y/orld Meteorological Organization. 
No formal agreements had yet been negotiated with the regional intergovernmental 
organizations, but the Agency was aware of the importance of close 
co-operation with them. 
48. Turning to the Agency's accomplishments in the first year of its 
existence, he said that the services which it could offer, though interdependent, 
might be divided into two main spheres, first, direct service to 
individual nations or regions5 and secondly, services of a universal nature 
to all nations, whatever their stage of development. Direct service included 
the entire range of assistance which the Agency might provide, such as fellowships, 
exchange of scientists, assistance to educational institutions, technical 
information, advice in planning, consultative missions, economic and 
i/ GC.1/3. 



GC(II)/OR.14 
Page 11 


technical analysis of proposed projects, research assistance and guidance, and 
supply of fuels, isotopes and equipment. The other field in which the Agency 
could servo included all those activities which would contribute to the 
establishment of a healthy environment for a truly international effort to 
exploit the peaceful potential of atomic energy, 


49. One essential requirement, if the Agency were to provide under the most 
satisfactory conditions the facilities needed, was the development through 
international processes of uniform rules for health and safety wherever atomic 
onorgy activity was undertaken. There should also ho developed a practical 
and universally applicable system of accounting and safe-keeping to ensure 
that international atomic development did not "further any military purposes". 
It could be foreseen that countries which produced source material from which 
weapons might be made would agree that all foreign shipments of uranium and 
thorium, for example, be registered with the Agency. It was essential for 
the Agency to undertake the co-ordination of research and other technical 
operations, and that it should itself engage in some branches of research, 
particularly on the construction and use of reactors. Some countries, it 
was true, had solved the problem in their national law, but there could be 
no fully satisfactory solution until it had been treated on a world basis. 
Such was the general direction which the efforts of the Agency might take. 
50. Bilateral agreements wore a temporary expedient only. Their conclusion 
had boon quite natural before the creation of the Agency5 but all States - in 
both the atomic and the non-atomic areas - should begin to utilize more and 
more the facilities which the Agency could provide. If nations found it 
necossary to continue bilateral agreements, there should also be world-wide 
acceptance of uniform health and safety practices and safeguards against 
diversion or loss of nuclear products. If bilateral agreements were to be 
continued alongside Agency assistance in obtaining nuclear fuel, some 
preferential terms must be given to the Agency by the offering countries, to 
induce governments to utilize the channels of true international co-oporation. 
It was only by such international co-oporation that scientific accomplishments, 
which were not the exclusive property of the nation responsible for them, could 
be put to the service of humanity in order to create a better world. . 
The meeting rose at 5 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.15 
29 October 1958 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 23 September 1953, at 3.25 p.m. 

President, Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda-' 

Czechoslovak proposal regarding the 1-14 
representation of non-member States 

7 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation 15 
of items to Committees 

9 Rsport of the Credentials Committee 16 69 
Determination of the closing date for 70 
the General Conference 

* GC(II)/57. 
N.B. The lis t of delegations attending the second regular session 
of the General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/17/Rev.3. 

GC(II)/OR.15" 


Page 2 


CZECHOSLOVAK PROPOSAL REGARDING THE REPRESENTATION OF NOJMIEMBER STATES 


1. I"Ir. BRAZDA (Czechoslovakia) said that the Agency should allow all 
countries which, so desired to send observers to the sessions of the General 
Conference. The Agency must apply the principle of universality if it wished 
to attain the objectives set out in Article II of its Statute, and fulfil the 
functions devolving upon it under the terms of Article III. It was,moreover, 
contrary to the principles of the Statute to make a distinction between two 
categories of countries. The Czechoslovak delegation accordingly proposed 
that the General Conference should invite all States which so desired to send 
observers to the second session of the General Conference of the Agency. 
2. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under the terms of Rule 30 of the 
Rules of Procedure, "Representatives of States Members of the United Nations 
or of any of the specialized agencies which are not Members of the Agency 
shall DG invited to attend the General Conference ..."„ The Director General 
had acted in accordance with the provisions of that Rule when sending out 
invitations for the present session. It was, however, for the General 
Conference to decide whether invitations should be sent to States other than 
those referred to in Rule 30. 
3. Mr. NICUTZA (Romania) supported the Czechoslovak proposal. He 
recalled that, under the terms of Article II of the Statute, the Agency must 
seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world. It must -therefore allow all 
States to participate in its work. Certain sovereign States not Members of 
the United Nations or of a specialized agency desired to send observers to 
the General Conference in order to sec for themselves what advantages there 
would be in becoming Members of the Agency. It was unjust that they were 
not invited while international inter-governmental and non-governmental 
organizations which had no atomic resources were authorized to send 
representatives. 
4. Ilr. WERSHOF (Canada) said that there had been lengthy discussion-' 
on that point at the previous session, when the General Conference had adopted 
the present text of Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure. The Director General 
1/ GC.1(S)/OR.12 and 13. 



GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 3 


could not, therefore, be blamed for abiding by the provisions of that Rule 
and the Czechoslovak delegate should not be allowed to re-open discussion 
on the natter. Ills proposal should JO ruled out of order. 


5. If the delegates of Romania and Czechoslovakia wished to amend Rule 30 
of the Rules of Procedure, they should act in accordance with Rule 104, which 
provided that proposals for amendments should he submitted to the appropriate 
committee, 


6. Ilr. RkJAli (India) said that, under Rule 30, representatives of 
States I'loi/ibers oP the United Nations or of any of the specialized agencies 
had to be invited to attend 'ohe General Conference. The Rule did not, 
however, exclude the possibility of inviting other States, The Czechoslovak 
proposal was therefore receivable under that Rule and had to be considered on 
its merits. Article II of the Statute provided that the Agency should 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the worl'1. Article III.A.I authorized the Agency to 
encourage and assist research on, and development and practical application 
of, atonic energy for peaceful purposes throughout the ~'orld. It was clear 
from those Articles that universality was one of the basic premises of the 
Agency's work. That universality could not be achieved if certain areas 
wore excluded from participating in the ".ork of the Conference even as 
observers. For that reason, his delegation would support the Czechoslovak 
proposal. 
7. I'lr. VSRICBJ (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) oaid that all 
the countries of the world should participate in the work of the Agency, 
.whose aim was to ha,sten and increase the contribution of atomic energy to 
world peace, health and prosperity. To achieve that aim the principle of 
universality would have to be strictly applied. He therefore supported the 
Czechoslovak proposal and hoped that all the members of the Conference would 
do likewise 
8. T-Ir. McCOHE (United States of America) said that the question raised 
by the Czechoslovak delegation was not a new one. He agreed with the Canadian 
delegate that the Czechoslovak proposal was a, breach of Rule 30 and therefore 
out of order. If the proposal wore to be put to the vote, his delegation 
would vote against it. 

GC(II)/OR.15 


Page 4 


9. Mr. BRALiM (Czechoslovakia) said that when the Canadian delegation 
had proposed an amendment to Rule 30 at the first session, the Canadian delegate 
had said that nothing in the proposed amendment would legally prevent the 
General Conferonoo from inviting a State which was not a Member of the United 
Nations or of a specialized agency to attend the Conference5 the General 
Conference, he had explained, was master of its own procedure and could always 
2/ 
adopt a motion inviting a country to participate—'. That statement was 
totally at variance with what the Canadian delegate had just said. 


10. Ho also pointed out that the Canadian delegate's opposition had taken up 
more of the time of the Conference than the Czechoslovak proposal itself. 
11. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) said that ho could not accept the 
Indian dolcgatols interpretation of Rule 30§ f°r i^s title, "Representatives 
of States not Members of the Agency", showed that it embodied all the 
provisions relating to States not Members of the Agency. 
12. He was surprised that delegates who wished to make the Agency a scientific 
and technical organization concerned mainly with assistance to under-developed 
countries should try and delay the work of the Conference. If the Czechoslovak 
delegate wished to amend the Rules of Procedure, he should proceed in accordance 
with Rule 104§ if he wished the Rules of Procedure to be suspended, ho should 
submit a proposal to that effect, whereupon the Conference would have to 
proceed in accordance with Rule 105. 
13. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the Czechoslovak proposal that the 
General Conference should authorize the Director General to invite all States 
so desiring to send observers to the oecond regular session of the General 
Conference, 
At the request of Mr. McCono (United States of America), the vote was 
taken by roll-call. 


2/ GC.1(S)/COM.2/OR.4, paragraph 53. 



GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 5 


Korea, having, been draw, by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first, 


The _rasult of the voting was as follows i

_
For: I'orocco, Poland, Romania, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United 
Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, Albania, Bulgaria, Burma, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Ceylon, 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, India, Indonesia. 
Against Korea, Luxembourg, llexico, Uonr.co, Sothcrlande, New 
Zealand, Liearagua, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, 
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 'turkey. 
Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain 
ard Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vatican 
City, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, 
Brazil, Canada, China, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, 
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Federal Republic 
of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Iceland, Iran, Italy, Japan. 
Abstentions Israel. 

The Czechoslovak proposal was rejected by 43 votes to 16, with one 
abstention. 

14. JTr. IHCHAELS (United Kingdom) observed that the vote which had just 
taken place created an unfortunate precedent. The Czechoslovak proposal 
.amounted to an amendment either to the Statute or to the Rules of Procedure; 
in either case a decision should be taken by a two-thirds majority of members 
present and voting. 


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AID ALLOCATION OF ITEMS TO COMMITTEES (GC(II)/35 and 
Corr.1 and Add.1, GC(II)/55) 


15. The PRESIDENT invited members of the General Conference to consider 
the relevant report by the General Committee (GrC(ll)/55) submitted under Rule 
42 of the Rules of Procedure. 
The report by the General Committee was adopted. 



0C(II)/OR.15 


Page 6 


REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(II)/56 and Corr.1). 


16. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan), Chairman of the Credentials Committee, 
presented the Committee's report (GC(II)/56 and Corr.1). 
!7. Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) declared that 
certain persons were attending the Conference without any justification, since 
they represented nothing more than a political clique which was enjoying a 
last loase of life under the protection of the United States of America. 
The attitude of the United States Government was the only obstacle to the 
admission of the People's Republic of China. The proposal of the United 
States delegation contained in paragraph 5(^) of the report was not based 
on any argument at all. He hoped that the L-eneral Conference would put an 
end to the practice of subordinating the interests of the Agency to those of 
certain Governments, and that it would recognize the indisputable rights of 
the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China. He 
requested that a separate vote be taken on the credentials of the Chinese 
delegate. 

18. Mr. 70RSHIRK (Dominican Republic) said that the Credentials 
Committee, in accordance with Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure, had duly 
examined the credentials of the delegate of the Republic of China and 
considered that they entitled him to be accredited as the delegate of a 
Member State of the Agency. 
IS". The delegate of the Soviet Union had claimed that a representative of 
the People's Republic of China should occupy the place legitimately occupied 
by the delegate of the Republic of China. But, before approving the 
admission of a State, the General Conference should make sure that it was 
able and willing to carry out the obligations of membership in the Agency, 
and due consideration should be given to the ability and willingness of the 
State to act in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations Charter. Recent world events and what was happening in the Straits 
of Formosa showed clearly that Communist China had no desire to act in 
conformity with those principles, and that the delegate of the Soviet Union 
had chosen a bad time to plead its cause. 



GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 7 


20. He then asked the Conference to approve the report of the Credentials 
Committee and to end a discussion which could only impede its real work. 
21. Hr. FAHIIY (United Arab Republic) made the following statement-^. 
"Sir, with your permissicn, I would like briefly be state 
the views of ";he delegation of the United Arab Republic in connexion 
with the report of the Credentials Committee which is under 
discussion. While my delegation is in a position to approve, 
generally., the report as submitted to us, nevertheless we would 
like to put on record that this approval is coupled with a reservation 
regarding the representation r.f China in the Conference. 
As you all are aware, the United Arab Republic recognizes the 
Government of the People's Republic of China as the only Government 
whichj legally and in fact, represents China, and consequently is 
entitled to sign the Statute on behalf of the Chinese people. 
Therefore, 39 far as China is concerned, we cannot consider any 
other credentials as valid except those issued by the Government 
of the People's Republic of China. 


"It is not my intention to debate this question or to adduce 
any arguments to this effect. .The question is very well known, 
and we believe that if you put aside political considerations and 
base yourselves on the Statute and its purposes, and if you will 
bear in mind the lofty aims of the Agency, you will agree that it 
is indispensable for this Agency to have the Government of the 
People's Republic of China among its Members. 


"It may, once again, be argued tiuat the United Nations General 
Assembly has already taken a stand on this issue. I humbly submit 
that this is an old argument which has no value, especially if you 
take into consideration the various important developments which 
have very recently taken place. Among the most important, in our 
opinion, are the conclusions which the scientists from East and 
West recently reached in Geneva regarding the detection of explosions 
of atomic weapons. In our opinion - I hope you will all a.gree and 
realize this - these historic conclusions cannot be acted on unless 


3/ This statement is-reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 8 


there is close co-operation with the Government of the People's 
Republic of China, Similarly, if this Agency is to have any 
role whatsoever, either in this connexion or in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, it must admit that the Government of the 
People's Piepublic of China represents 600 million people and that 
its territory occupies a major part of the globe. 


"lot only that, hut as you all know, because of this 
situation and because of the particular nature of this Agency, 
it is the first time to my knowledge that an international 
organization, whether a specialized agency or not, has failed 
to include China among the members of its main organ - I mean 
the Board of Governors. This very important fact proves beyond 
any doubt that this Agency is not similar to other agencies and 
therefore should see its way clear to seek the co-operation of 
the authorities on the mainland in China, if it rashos to reach 
its ^oal, as defined in Article II of the Statute, which provides 
that the Agency shall 'seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world1. Gentlemen, in my opinion international Cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy is not only a 
boundless field, but also a matter of international concern to 
all peoples all over the world. 

"Mr. President, the Statute, in our opinion, does not prevent 
any State or any nation from benefiting from the Agency. The 
Agency is international in character and ivas created to serve the 
human race and ameliorate its conditions. And this in itself 
could not, in our opinion, be achieved by ignoring 600 million 
people. For this reason, Mr. President, wo hope that the time will 
come to realize this fact and give the Government of the People's 
Republic of China its rightful place." 


22, Ijr._ T/IITKLER (Czechoslovakia) made the following statements-^ 


"In view of the fact that the only legitimate Governmont of 
China is the Central People's Government of the People's Republic 


4/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 9 


of China, uhc Czechoslovak Government, in conformity with its 


previous statements made at the International Conference en the 


Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency and at the 


First General Conference; does not recognize any signature for 


China appearing in the Statute in the name of China which is not 


the signature of a representative of the Central People's 


Government of the People's Republic of China. For the same 


reasons, the Czechoslovak Government does not recognize any 


credentials issued on behalf of China which do not originate 


fron the legitimate Government of China". 


23. He expressed on behalf of the Czechoslovak delegation deep regret that 
the People's Republic of China was still debarred from becoming a Member of 
the Agency and that that great country was therefore not represented at the 
Conference. It was well known that the so-callod representatives of the 
Chiang Kai-shek clique did not in fact represent anybody and that their very 
presence at the Conference was possible only because of the protection given 
that clique by the armed forces of the United States of America. He was 
convinced that the time was not far distant when that clique would no longer 
be in a position even to claim that they represented China. 
24. He added that he supported the proposal of the Soviet Union delegation 
asking that the part of the Committee's report dealing with the representation 
of China should be put to the vote separately. 
25. Mr. PAL (Hungary) made the following statement-^. 
"The proposal contained in the report of the Credentials 
Committee that the question of the credentials of the delegate from 
the Hungarian People's Republic should remain in abeyance has filled 
me with profound indignation. 


"By disputing, without any cause, the credentials of the 
representative of the legitimate Hungarian authorities, certain 
States, Members of the Agency, which for several years have been 
entertaining diplomatic relations with the Hungarian People's 
Republic, are tending to turn the Agency into an instrument for 
their political manoeuvres, which is in flagrant contradiction 
to the spirit and letter of the Statute. 


%/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 


GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 10 

"I must emphasize in the most formal manner possible that 
neither the Credentials Committee nor the General Conference, nor 
any international organization whatever, has the right to question 
the legitimacy of the government of any country. Allow me also 
to state in this connexion that in deciding to leave in abeyance 
the question of the credentials of the Hungarian delegation, the 
twelfth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations 
seriously violated the United nations Charter. 

"I consider it essential to recall that the representative 
of the legitimate Government of the Hungarian People's Republic 
took an active part, in New York, in the work of the Conference 
on the Statute. Now the Credentials Committee proposes that the 
question of the credentials of the delegate of the Hungarian People's 
Republic, which is a founder member of the Agency, should remain in 
abeyance. 

"As delegate of the legitimate Government of the Hungarian 
People's Republic, supplied with full credentials, I protest against 
the proposal in question which on the one hand represents a discrimination 
against the Hungarian People's Republic and on the other 
poisons the atmosphere of the Conference. 

"May I be allowed to express the hope that the General 
Conference will reject as being void of any foundation the proposal 
to leave in abeyance the question of the credentials of the 
Hungarian delegate." 

26. He then turned to the question of the representation of China, and 
protested most vigorously on behalf of his delegation against acceptance of 
the credentials of the Chiang Kai-shek authorities. The only lawful government 
of China was that of the Chinese People's Republic, with which an increasing 
number of countries maintained diplomatic relations. The Agency 
should decide without more ado either to recognize the representatives of the 
do facto and de jure government of 600 million people or to accept the 
credentials of the Chiang Kai-shek delegate^ the latter course would involve 
the exclusion from the Agency's activities of one of the major world powers. 

GC(II)/OR.15 
Pago 11 


27. Under Article II of the Statute it was the Agency's task to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. The Agency could not fully discharge those duties if 
it excluded from its activities the Chinese People's Republic, without which 
it was impossible to reach decisions of truly international significance. 
The Chiang Kai-shek Government had the greatest difficulty in asserting its 
nominal authority over a s-nall territory which formed an integral part of 
the Chinese People's Republic. The lawful Government of the Chinese People's 
Republic, on the other hand, supported by 600 million Chinese, was the de facto 
authority. Under its direction the Chinese people had already o.chiaved, in 
the space of a few years, striking economic, cultural and scientific successes. 
28. His delegation recognized the representatives of the Central People's 
Government of the Chinese People's Republic as the sole representatives of 
China, and it v/culd therefore vote against recognition of the credentials of 
the so-called Nationalist China. 
29. Mr. McCONE (United States of America) said that the recommendation 
of the Credentials Committee that no decision be taken on the credentials 
submitted by the Hungarian delegation was in conformity 7/ith decisions taken 
by the United Nations General Assembly. 
30. The United States could not accept the charges levellod against it by 
the Soviet Union delegate and regretted that questions irrelevant to the 
work of the Conference had been raised. 
31. Two years prsviously the Republic of China had taken part in the 
Conference on the Statute of the Agency; it had signed and ratified the 
Statute and was a member of the Agency. Only the delegate of the Republic 
of China could represent China in the Agency as in other international 
organizations. 
32. The Soviet request for a separate vote on the credentials of the 
Chinese delegation dealt with the very point which the Credentials Committee 
had already considered and on which it had put forward its recommendations 
in paragraphs 5 a"d 7 of its report. His delegation felt that the report 
itself and its recommendations should be voted on. If the Soviet proposal 
were to be put to the vote it would constitute a motion for division under 

GC(II)/OR.15 


Page 12 


Rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure. His delegation was opposed to such a 


division and hoped that the Conference would adopt the Committee's report. 


33. Mr. SOCT (Republic of Korea) said that the question of the 
representation of China had nothing to do with a conference mainly concerned 
with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Moreover, the Agency had been sot 
up under United Nations auspices and should abide by United Nations decisi: ns, 
and a resolution adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 1 February 
1951—'had branded the People's Republic of China as an aggressor. The Korean 
delegation considered that China was properly represented at the Agency. 
34. Mr. SEVCIIBUKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
China's seat legitimately belonged to the delegate of the People's Republic 
of China and not to the delegate of the Chiang Kai-shek clique. It was 
inadmissible that a country representing one-quarter of the world's population 
should not be represented in an international organization such as the Agency; 
such a situati'n diminished the Agency's authority and the scope of it3 
activities. 
35. At the present time, no international problem could usefully be studied 
or settled without the People's Republic of China, which had immense resources 
and was making onorrn us progress economically, culturally and scientifically 
and which, contrary to the slanderous abortions against it, was proving its 
desire for peaceful co-existence in all its activities, 
36. The dclcgati n of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic would 
therefore sup ort the Soviet Union motion f' r a division and vote against 
the recognition of the alleged credentials of the Chiang Kai-shek delegate. 
37* Mr. "JEN (China) said that no now line of reasoning could be expected 
from the ruling circles of Communist imperialism. The Government of the 
Republic of China had on many occasions challenged the Peking puppet regime, 
the tool of the Kremlin, to hold free, elections in China under the supervision 


of the United Nati ns, in order to ascertain whom and what party the Chinese 
people would support. The Government of the Republic of China would abide 
by such a verdict, but the Kao Tse-tung clique had refused to accept the 


challenge. 


6/ Resolution 498(v). 



GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 13 


38. It was regrettable that the Conference should waste time on political : 
discussions and ho formally moved the closure of the debate under Rule 60 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 
39* Mr. WINKLER (Czechoslovakia) said that he could not support the 
motion. If only for the sake of courtesy, the General Conference should give 
the floor to delegates who wanted to state their views. To propose such a 
motion •'./as a trick by which the delegation making use of it hoped to suppress 


the truth. But nothing could prevent the truth from coming to light, 


40. Another reason for not adopting the motion for closure was that some of 
the quoo cionc' in the Committee' s report, which had b^-ori submitted hastily, had 
still not been tackled. 
41. Ho reserved the right to speak on the USSR motion. 
The motion for closure was adopted by 33 votes to 14, with 6 abstentions. 


42. Mr, WII-IKLER (Czechoslovakia), referring to the USSR motion, said 
that it was normal and legitimate to request a separate vote on part of a 
report or proposal. As a rule, such a request was readily granted in all 
international organizations and was, moreover, a matter of elementary courtesy. 
It was regrettable not only that there was a departure frcm the usual practice 
at the present meeting but also that it was not even thought necessary to give 
any reasons. 
43. He also pointed out the difficulty that would arise if the motion for a 
separate vote wore rejected,, many delegations would be obliged to oppose the 
report as a whole, which might throw doubt on the validity of the credentials 
of other delegations. 
44. For all those reasons, and in the interests of the Agency itself, the 
motion should be carried, 
45. Mr. McCOHE (United States of America) said it was necessary to be 
quite clear on the issue before the Conference. The Soviet proposal 
constituted a request for division under Rule 75, ^° which his delegation 
had made objection. The Conference should now vote on the request and not 
on the substance of the issue of the representation of China. He had 
previously stated his delegation's opposition to the Soviet proposal for a 

GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 14 


division of the report of the Credentials Committee and for a separate vote 
on the credentials of China. He considered that a vote should be taken on 
the report as a v/hole or on its recommendations as contained in paragraphs 
5 and 7. 


46. Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), after pointing 
out that the United States representative had failed to offer any argument in 
support of his objection to the motion, said that if it wore rejected he would 
be forced to vote against the report as a whole. 
47. The PRESIDENT said that, as the Conference was at present engaged 
only in considering the Credentials Committee's report, he must interpret the 
Soviet Union proposal as a motion to vote separately on that section of the 
Committee's report which dealt with the representation of China. He 
accordingly put that motion to the vote. 
At the request of Mr. Inan (Turkey), the vote was taken by roll-call. 


Brazil, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 


vote first. 
In favours Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Ceylon, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, 
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Norway, Poland, Romania, 
Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, 
Yugoslavia, Albania. 
Against; Brazil, Canada, China, Cuba, Dominican Republic, 
El Salvador, France, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Greece, Guatemala, Iceland, Iran, Italy, Japan, 
Republic of Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Pakistan, 
Peru, Philippines, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, Union 
of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, 
Vatican City, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, 
Belgium. 
Abstentionsg Ethiopia,Morocco, Portugal, Switzerland, Austria. 


GC(II)/0E.15 
Page 15 


The motion was rejected by 35 votes to 19, with 5 abstentions. 


48. Mr. BRAZ MIMOSO (Portugal) said that, consistently with his 
delegation's past attitude, he had abstained from voting in the belief that 
the Agencys which was first and foremost a technical body, should not be 
called upon to settle political problems which were the concern of the United 
Nations. 
49. Mr. V/IMLBR (Czechoslovakia), referring to the Credentials 
Committee's recommendation in paragraph 18, proposed an amendment to add at 
the end of the draft resolution the words "with the exception of the tenth 
name in the first column of the list contained in paragraph 13". Strictly 
speaking, of course, his delegation should abide by the provisions of Rule 63 
of the Rules of Procedure in submitting that amendment, and was ready to do so. 
However, hu pointed out that "chat rule had not been complied with in the case 
of the recommendation itself, 
50. In the United Nations ovary motion for a separate vote on the representation 
of China had been carried, ~-.nd that had enabled delegations which had 
objections to the present representation of that country to support the report 
of the Credentials Committee as a whole. The United Nations considered that 
a regrettable precedent would be created if the report as a whole were not 
adopted unanimously, since that would cast doubt on the credentials of all the 
members of the Cencral Assembly. In submitting its amendment, the Czechoslovak 
delegation was rraking a final effort to avoid such a precedent. 
51. llx. CARSTEHS (Federal Republic of Germany) regarded the Czechoslovak 
amendment as unacceptable because, in a different form, it sought to secure a 
separate vote on part of the report - a procedure which the General Conference 
had just rejected by defeating the motion for division. 
52. Mr. 1ERSH0F (Canada) said he also considered the Czechoslovak draft 
amendment unacceptable, but for a different reason. The General Conference had 
adopted a motion for the closure of the debate in accordance with Rule 60 of the 
Rules of Procedure, and therefore no delegate was entitled to submit an amendment 
on the substance of the question. 
53. Mr. SOLE (Union of South Africa) agreed with the delegate of Canada. 
Acceptance of the Czechoslovak amendment would be contrary to Rule 66 of the 

GC(II)/0E.15 


Page 16 


Rules of Procedure, for it would be equivalent to reconsidering a proposal 
without obtaining the requisite two-thirds majority. He therefore asked 


the President to declare the Czechoslovak amendment out of order. 


54. The PRESIDENT remarked that the objection raised to the Czechoslovak 
amendment by the delegate of the Gorman Federal Republic was well founded, 
although both technically and legally there were undoubtedly some differences 
between that amendment and the motion for division. 
55. Mr. FAHMY (United Arab Republic) recalled that in the United 
Nations the practice of deliberative bodies examining any question was to 
hold a general discussion first and then consider proposals and amendments. 
He agreed with the delegate from the Union of South Africa that after closure 
of the general debate, delegations should abstain from making statements of a 
general nature. However, all had the right to give their opinions on proposals 
and amendments and, if necessary, to make new proposals on condition that no 
vote had boon taken. The question whether the Czechoslovak amendment was 
acceptable in substance was an entirely different one and could be decided by 
the General Conference by vote. 
56. Mr. McCONE (United States of America) considered that the Czechoslovak 
amendment was out of order. He asked the President to make a more precise 
ruling and to 'state whether he intended to put the Czechoslovak amendment to 
the vote. 
57. The PRESIDENT said that ho had no intention of putting the amendment 
to the vote. 
58. Mr, WINKLER (Czechoslovakia), replying to the objection raised by 
the delegate from Canada, observed that the Czechoslovak amendment could not 
have been put forward earlier, namely, before the result of the preceding vote 
had been known. If the motion for the division of vote had been accepted, 
it would not have been necessary to propose an amendment to the recommendation 
of the Committee. The Czechoslovak amendment could not therefore be out of 
order for the reason given by the delegate from Canada, No other reasons had 
been advanced against the acceptance of the Czechoslovak amendment. As it 
had always been the policy of the Czechoslovak delegation to support the 
President wholeheartedly it would respect whatever ruling he made. 

GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 17 


59. The PRESIDENT noted that the Conference accepted his ruling and 
put to the vote the report of the Credentials Committee as a whole. 
At the request of Mr. McCono (United St'tes of America) the vote was 
taken by roll-call. 
Ethiopia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon 


to vote first. 
In favours Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Iceland, Iran, Italy, Japan, Republic of 
Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New 
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, 
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, 
Turkey, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great. 
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, 
Vatican City, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Cuba, Denmark, El 
Salvador. 
Against; Hungary, India, Indonesia, Poland, Romania, Ukrainian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia. 
Abstentions; Ethiopia, Morocco, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, 
Burma, Ceylon. 

The report of the Credentials Committee was adopted by 4-2 votes to 11, 
with 6 abstentions. 


60. Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)explained that 
the rejection of his delegation's motion for division had obliged him to vote, 
against the adoption of the report. Ho had already had occasion to define 
his country's attitude to the representation of China and the credentials 
of the Chinese delegate. 
61. Further, he could not accept paragraph 10 of the report in which, on a 
motion by the United States representative, an attempt had been made to cast 
doubt on the vaLidity of the credentials of the Hungarian delegate. Suoh an 

GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 18 


attitude did not contribute to the creation of the atmosphere necessary for 
the success of the Conference and was harmful to the Agency's work. It was 
a tactical move by the United States, forming part of that country's subversive 
activity against Hungary. There was no justification for paragraph 10, since 
the Hungarian delegate had been appointed by the legal Government of the 
Hungarian People's Republic Hungary could contribute much to the development 
of the Agency's activities, and it had sent an eminent scientist to take its 
legitimate place at the Conference. 


62. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that he had 
voted against the adoption of the report, because he could not accept the 
validity of the credentials presented by the Chiang Kai-shek group. China's 
place at the Conference should only be occupied by a delegate appointed by the 
Central Government of the Chinese People's Republic. The attitude adopted by 
the United States was depriving the Agency of the co-operation and assistance 
of eminent Chinese scientists. The statement by the so-called delegate of 
China and the insinuations he had made showed that it v/as Chiang Kai-shek's 
followers who were poisoning the atmosphere of international relations. 
63. Mr. MEILER-CONRAD (Poland) regretted that the Conference had 
rejected the proposal for a separate votes that had prevented him from voting 
for the adoption of the report. It was clear that the Kuomintang group wanted 
a third world war, while the Chinese People's Republic had demonstrated that 
it was a peace-loving country. Moreover, it had made immense progress in 
atomic science during the last ten years. 
64. Mr. RAJ AN (India) said that he had been instructed to make a brief 
statement on his country's attitude to the credentials of the Chinese delegate 
and to vote in favour of the adoption of the report. The motion for closure 
of the discussion had prevented him from making that statement. The rejection 
of the proposal for a separate vote had made it impojsiblc for him to express 
his views in any other manner, and ho had thus had no alternative but to vote 
against the adoption of the report. His vote did not in any way mean that 
he wished to cast doubt on the validity of the credentials of other delegates, 
65. Mr. FAHMY (United Arab Republic) said that he had intended to vote 
in favour of the report, with the reservation ho had made when he had first 

GC(II)/OR.15 
Page 19 


spoken, but he had boon obliged to abstain from voting for reasons similar to 


those _,iven by the Indian delegate and in particular because the Conference 


had not agreed to separate voting. 


66. "drm NAKICBNOVIC (Yugoslavia) said that he had abstained from voting, 
because the representation of China had been dealt with in an unsatisfactory 
manner in the report of the Credentials Committee. His delegation believed 
that the Government of the People's Republic of China was the only one entitled 
to represent China. 
67. His Government had always been of that opinion, regardless of the attitude 
adopted by the People's Republic of China towards the Federal People's Republic 
of Yugoslavia, because it believed that the prinoiple of universality should 
prevail in international organizations. 
68. Finally, his delegation did not believe that such discussions contributed 
to the success of the Agency's j/ork-^ . 
^9. Mr. NICUTZA (Romania) said that he had voted against the adoption 
of the report, because he Ix d not been able to cast separate votes on the 
representation of China and Hungary. His delegation considered that the only 
person entitled to represent China was the delegate of the Chinese People's 
Republic. Furthermore, it was inadmissible that doubt should be cast on the 
validity of the credentials of the Hungarian delegate, who was his country's 
legitimate representative. 


DETiRMINllTOSr OF FEE CLOSING DATE FOR THE SESSION 


70. The PRESIDENT announced that the General Committee had provisionally 
fixed Saturday 4 October as the closing date. It was too soon, however, to 
regard that as a firm date. 
The meeting rose at 6.45 P.ra. 


2/ This summary of a statement which was not delivered at the meeting, is 
inserted in the record by direction of the President. 



INTERNATIONAL 


ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr . 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.l6 
21 October 1958 
General Conference ENGLISH 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 24 September 1958, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
Paragraphs 


11 
General debate and report of the 1-60 
Board of Governors for the year 
1957-53 


Statements by the delegates 
of France, Union of South 
Africa. Poland, Yugoslavia 
and Brazil 


* GC(II)/57. 
N. B. The list of delegations attending the second regular session of 
the General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/l7/Rev.3. 

GC(II)/0B.16 


Page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1957-58 
(GC(II)/39) 


1. Mr. COUTURE (France) said that the French Government, which was 
represented on the Board of Governors, approved the Board's First Annual Report 
to the General Conference (GC(II)/39) and wished to express its appreciation of 
the work carried out by the Agency staff during what had proved to be a difficult 
initial period. The Agency.1 s activities in the first year had been severely 
limited because the senior staff,and more particularly the principal technical 
personnel, had not taken up their duties until the first months of 1958* For 
that reason his Government attached great importance to the Agency's performance 
in 1959,'the real test year which would show the Agency's probable contribution 
to international atomic co-operation. 
2. The French delegation had participated in the preparation by the Board of 
the Programme and Budget for 1959 . I"t approved them, but was aware that the 
programme did not define sufficiently clearly the Agency's proper sphere of 
activity. The Agency had come into being during a delicate transitional stage 
in the development of atomic energy. Since 1954 "the veil of secrecy surrounding 
the atom had begun to lift and the exchange of nuclear raw material had become 
freer and more general. International atomic co-operation had thus started 
before the inception of the Agency, and then had continued to develop independently 
of it. For instance, bilateral agreements, regional organizations and 
multilateral agreements, fruitful scientific meetings such as the First and 
Second United Nations International Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy (the first and second "Geneva Conferences"), and the activities of 
specialized agencies and other organs had all made significant contributions to 
international co-operation in which the Agency had not participated. 
3. Thus the Agency had not yet begun to discharge what had at its inception 
seemed its most vital function - that of a broker of nuclear raw materials intended 
for exclusively peaceful purposes. In spito of offers made by several 
great powers to supply large quantities of uranium 235 ,natural uranium and 
^ GC(II)/36. 


GC(II)/OR.l6 
Page 3 


thorium, no request for such material had so far been received by the Agency. 
Nor had the Agency ever been invited by any party to a bilateral or multilateral 
agreement to extend to that agreement the application of safeguards to ensure 
the peaceful use of atomic energy, it had consequently been unable to exercise 
the supervisory powers defined in Article XII of its Statute, 


4. Horeover, in the sphere of nuclear power stations proper the Agency's role 
would of necessity at the outset be a limited one, since not until several years 
had elapsed would the loss-developed countries be able to make real use of the 
power reactors whose prototypes the atomically-cleveloped countries were at 
present bringing into operation, nevertheless the- Agency should begin to encourage 
the less-advanced countries to prepare for the atomic era, as it was 
already successfully doing in the training of technicians and research workers. 
France had contributed to the 1958 training programme with an offer of some 
thirty places in its main universities and nuclear institutes, about a dozen of 
which wore accompanied by fellowships, and had learnt with satisfaction that 
the number of requests for fellowships already exceeded the offers made during 
the Agency's first year. The French Government had consequently decided to make 
the same contribution to the 1959 as to the 195*3 programme. 
5. His Government also approved the technical assistance programme and the 
sending of export missions to countries requesting assistance and advice for the 
introduction of radioisotope schemes or the inauguration of their own atomic 
programmes. France had boon happy to participate in those activities by providing- 
a French expert Tor the recent mission sent out to report on the possibility 
of establishing one or more regional training centres for Latin-American 
technicians. 
6. The Agency had an important part to play in the exchange of information, 
by the translation and circulation of the world's main scientific publications 
and by the organization of conferences of experts limited in numbers and scope. 
The successful holding of such symposia would certainly enable some reduction 
to be made in the number of large-scale conferences, such as that just held at 
Geneva, the programme of which was clearly so extensive as to begin to reduce 
its effectiveness. 

GC(II)/OR.l6 
Page 4 


7. The IAEA could accomplish useful work on the utilization, handling and 
standardization of radioisotopes, and the French Government had therefore 
favoured the establishment, on a modest scale at first, of an Agency laboratory. 
He was happy to announce that France intended to contribute to the equipment of 
the laboratory, in particular by supplying electronic apparatus. 
8. Public health and safety was undoubtedly the field in which the Agency 
could most quickly come to play an important role by investigating, in agreement 
with the World Health Organization and the International Labour Office, problems 
of standards, regulations and the disposal of radioactive waste - more particularly 
since the recent discussions among experts at Geneva had shown that the 
main countries concerned were far from agreement on waste disposal. The Agency, 
in oo-operation with laboratories in its Member States, could undertake a study 
of such problems immediately, for its own staff included a team of experts 
eminent in a number of different branches of science. That team was one of the 
Agency's most precious possessions, and only practical results would enable it 
to be preserved, still loss enlarged. The French Government felt that the overfrequent 
meetings of the Board of Governors diverted the Agency's staff from 
their constructive activities. The Board had sometimes become too deeply involved 
in discussions about details during the hundred or so meetings that it 
had held since the previous autumn. Loss extensive discussions, and shorter 
and more widely spaced meetings, were essential if the Board wcro to work with 
proper efficiency and retain representatives playing an active part in the 
atomic development of their own countries, 
9. The importance of the role which the Agency's Statute conferred on the 
Board of Governors made it a component essential to the proper working of the 
Agency. Ho was most happy that the Board had finally decided to call upon a 
Scientific Advisory Committee composed of experts who wore primarily responsible 
for the atomic programmes of their own countries and might, for the sako 
of good co-ordination, be those who sat on the Advisory Committee on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy of the Secretary-General of the United Nations* If 
the Agency's Scientific Advisory Committee mot once or twice a year it could 
assist in establishing the programme and in defining duties in the fields 
shared with the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies. 

GC(II)/OR.l6 
Page 5 


10. The problem of the relations of the youngest international organization 
with the older onss was extremely important. The French Government was happy 
to learn that agreements laetwoen the Agency and the principal specialized 
agencies concerned wore soon to he concluded. Effective discharge of those 
agreements was indispensable hut the geographical separation of the parties 
made it difficult. Therefore, wherever possible and reasonable, symposia or 
joint services, perhaps later even small joint laboratories, should be set up 
in Vienna by the Agency and the various specialized agencies. The Agency's 
primary responsibilities, conferred on it by its founders, in regard to the 
peaceful use of atomic energy should make Vienna, which had given it such a 
generous welcome, the international atomic capital. 
11. The Agency's special responsibilities entitled it to a voice in all technical 
investigations connected with the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and 
especially those at present being carried out under United Nations auspices, 
such as the preparation of a third "Geneva Conference", the work of the Scientific 
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and preparation to control 
radioactivity throughout the world. It was admittedly'ofton difficult to 
distinguish between the technical .and political aspects of such matters, and 
hence it might be necessary to draw closer the links between the Agency and the 
United Nations. 
12. France had participated at all stages of the Agency's establishment, and 
was deeply concerned that as soon as possible it should become a useful and 
reliable organization, in tiio hope of later becoming an indispensable instrument 
of international atomic co-operation. To that end the Agency should participate 
technically in alL important atomic activities, oven if the political aspect of 
some of its duties compelled changes in its operation, its Statute, or its 
relations with other international organizations. 
13. Ihr. SOLE (Union of South Africa) said that the primary purpose of the 
general debate was to review the progress of the Agency in its first year and to 
permit Ilembcr States, particularly those not represented on the Board, to publicize 
their views on the past and future activities of the Agency. The Report of 
the Board of Governors was in essence an account of the stewardship of the Agency's 
executive organ, and the South African delegation hoped that that Report and the 

GC(II)/OR.16 
Page 6 


Programme and Budget for' 1959 would be subjected to penetrating and constructive 
criticism, which, would serve as a welcome guide to the Board in its 
deliberations and planning in 1959. 


14. Prom the very nature of its composition the Board was not a homogeneous 
body, and differences ,/ere bound to arise, South Africa nevertheless believed 
that its members were broadly responsible for its decisions and should not 
hesitate to accept that responsibility. In that respect the Agency differed 
considerably from the specialized agencies, where executive responsibility was 
vested to a much larger extent in the Director General. His delegation therefore 
believed that all criticism should be addressed to the Board as a whole 
and to the Governments represented on it, rather than to the Director General. 
15. Since the Union of South Africa was a member of the Board, it was more 
fitting that he should refrain from discussing and commenting on the principal 
documents submitted to the Conference by the Board. He intended instead to 
concentrate on certain general problems, to two of which he had endeavoured 
to call attention at the first session of the General Conference. 
16. The most important condition for the Agency's success was that it should 
be primarily a technical body. Politics should be allowed the minimum possible 
influence both on the organization of the Secretariat and on the day-to-day 
working of the Board. If politics were permitted to get out of hand, the Agency 
could all too easily develop into a propaganda forum - yet another platform for 
the vrasteful and time-consuming exposition of conflicting ideologies. 
17. In that respect, as the controversies which had marked the opening of the 
General Conference had once more shown, there was room for much improvement in 
the conduct of Agency affairs. It was significant that not one of the major 
officers of the General Conference of a scientific agency should be a scientistj 
indeed, the number of scientists present was significantly smaller than at the 
first session. As a non-scientist and a diplomat he again pleaded earnestly 
tha.t the Agency, and particularly its loading Members, should resist the temptation 
to play politics and instead emulate the pattern of scientific cooperation 
and goodwill established at the two "Geneva Conferences". 
18. A corollary to the concept of the IAEA as an essentially technical agency 
was that it must command respect among the world's scientists and technical 

GC(II)/0E.l6 
Page 7 


exports. That respect was not easily earned. A valuable nucleus of scientific 


staff had been gathered together in the Agency's Secretariat, hut that by itself 
was not enough. One of the conclusions drawn by many of those who had attended 
the second "Geneva Conference" was that there should be associated with the 
Agency in one way or another a small advisory body composed of atomic scientists 


of world renown in their respective fields,, The Agency's prestige would be 


significantly raised thereby, and it was extremely gratifying that the Board 
had finally decided to sot up such a body, 


19. Of similar importance in that respect was the need to ensure that the 
scientists, technicians and consultants made available through the Agency to 
Ilembcr States voro of the highest possible calibre. The usefulness of the 
Agency to Member States and the role it would play in the application of atomic 
energy to peaceful purposes would be measured to a large extent by the achievements 
of those experts. Member States who held offered the services of such 
experts would therefore have a special responsibility towards the Agency. 
20. The Agency's prestige was a fundamental factor in the proper co-ordination 
of the activities of the various inter-governmental organizations, both regional 
and world-wide, concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Nothing 
would more detract from the effectiveness of a planned approach to the problems 
before the Agency than the emergence of a growing -number of international 
organizations seeking to compete with one another in popular appeal, duplicating 
one another's functions, building up vested interests in one sphere or another, 
and in the process not only occasioning wasteful expenditure but also dissipating 
the world's insufficient resources of technological manpower. 
21. The Agency's Secretariat was very much alive to that particular problem 
and had made commendable progress in the establishment of satisfactory relations 
with the Secretariats of the United Nations and the specialized agencies. That 
progress was, however, far from keeping pace with the dimensions of the problem. 
One of the major difficulties was not only the vested interests established in 
each international secretariat, but also the lamentable lack of co-ordination 
on the part of Member States, which so often spoke with one voice in Vienna, 
another in Nov; York, a third at Geneva and a fourth in Paris. 

GC(II)/0E.16 
Page 8 


22. Unless the problem of co-ordination were solved effectively and at an earlydate 
- the principal responsibility for which lay with the major Powers - the 
very future of the Agency would be at stake. Its role for some time to come 
would be very far removed from its original purpose of encouraging and facilitating 
the rapid development of nuclear power plants throughout the world. In 
the immediate future it would stand or fall ''oj its ability to secure recognition 
as the international organ most effectively equipped to undertake responsibility 
for the co-ordination of international atomic energy activities for peaceful 
purposes, and as the most competent source of advice on health and safety 
standards. He did not belittle the long-range importance of the training programme 
and other forms of technical aid;, but if the Agency failed to secure 
international recognition of its responsibilities for co-ordination and for the 
development of standards - for example because its authority and mandate wore 
shared with or ovor-shadowed by bodies sot up by the United Nations or other 
organizations - then it would become little more than an expensive and wasteful 
means of dispensing a limited amount of technical assistance and information 
about atomic energy to the under-developed countries. 
23. That was a development which all present would deplore, but it would be 
foolish to ignore the incipient trends shown by lobby talks at Geneva and in 
the proposals submitted to the United ITations General Assembly for an expansion 
of the activities of the Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Eadiation. 
The South African Government was deeply concerned about those trends. It had 
confidence in the ability of the scientists in the Agency to measure up to the 
tasks assigned to them by the Statute, and would welcome constructive suggestions 
for improvements, but deplored the emergence of what might be termed 'a crisis 
of confidence' in the future of the Agency. It therefore made a particular 
appeal to the five atomic Powers to demonstrate by their activities, not only 
in Vienna but also in l\Tow York and Geneva, that they had faith in the ability 
of the Agency to surmount the difficulties which inevitably beset the early 
years of a new international organization, 
24. If the Agency was to succeed, however, the smaller as well as the major 
Powers must contribute their share. An opportunity to do so was provided by 
the projected pledging conference for the financing of the Agency's operational 
expenditure. The support given during the past year to the $250,000 fellowship 

GC(II)/OR.l6 
Page 9 


fund had been disappointing, hut it was perhaps not too much to expect that the 
smaller countries would be willing to make at least token contributions to the 
operational programme in the twelve months which would elapse before the third 
session began. 


25. South Africa had endeavoured to do its share. It was among the eight 
countries that had contributed to the fellowship fund,, It had offered to make 
consultants available in the field where its experience was probably uncqua.lled 
anywhere, namely the prospecting, mining and extraction of source material. 
It was co-operating actively with the Commission for Technical Co-operation in 
Africa South of the Sahara, in encouraging the wider use and application of 
radioisotopes throughout that vast region. It had offered to make available 
to the Agency supplies of source and reactor material, and had indicated in its 
latest communication to the Director General what it expected to be a maximum 
price for its uranium 3 8 concentrates, namely £.3° 10. 0 or US $9.80 per pound. 


26. The Board had drafted the programme for 1959 without having before it the 
results of the second "Geneva Conference". It would be wise for the General 
Conference to authorize the Board to make changes of emphasis in the 1959 programme 
in the light of the conclusions to be drawn from the "Geneva Conference". 
For example, experience at Geneva had confirmed that the development of nuclear 
energy for power purposes on a considerable scale was still a long way off. 
On the other hand, Geneva had shown that there wore numerous problems of coordination, 
particularly in relation to safety standards, whore international 
action ~by a body such as the Agency was urgently needed. 
27. Financial and technical resources were necessarily limited. That made it 
necessary to establish some system of priorities to ensure that Agency resources 
were applied whore they could prove most beneficial. It was always a temptation 
for a new agency to spread its coverage over as wide a field as possible, in the 
belief that it would thereby gain a larger measure of international support; 
but such a belief was usually mistaken. The experience of certain other organizations 
provided a useful lesson. Good performance of a limited number of 
carefully-selected tasks would enhance the Agency's prestige and benefit the 
international community far more effectively than dissipation of the Agency's 
resources over a heterogeneous range of tasks, few of which could make any real 
impact on the problems immediately ahead. 

GC(II)/OR.l6 
Page 10 


28. In his opening address the President had called for patience and good 
will. Patience was required, because some time would inevitably elapse before 
the Agency could realize the brave hopes that attended its birthj good will, 
because without it the Agency could never become more than an empty husk. 
Mutual good will was especially important, for it bred confidence, and the 
question of confidence lay at the heart of the problems with which the Agency 
was oonfronted. It was the earnest hope of the South African delegation that 
the Agency would move forward from the second regular session of the General 
Conference with renewod confidence in itself and in the willingness of Member 
States to assume the responsibilities they had set themselves when they had 
brought the Agency into being. 
29. Mr. BILLIG (Poland) said that, while the past year had seen a great 
surge forward in the use of nuclear onergy throughout the world, for various 
reasons the atomic Powers were planning in terms of using their own resources, 
whereas the loss-developed countries were planning in terms of assistance under 
bilateral agreements:; there seemed little prospect of that situation changing 
in the near future. 
30. Poland itself was receiving help, under a bilateral agreement, from the 
Soviet Union. The Soviet Union had provided it with a reactor and a cyclotron 
for research, assisted it in training specialists and had exchanged research 
results. The agreement with the Soviet Union signod in January 1958 would 
furthor promote the development of nuclear science and techniques in Poland; 
technical assistance was being obtained under it, for example, in uranium 
prospecting, mining and processing, the construction of now experimental reactors, 
and the building of a first atomic power station. But whereas equipment had 
previously been purchased from the Soviet Union, Poland was now endeavouring to 
build new reactors largely with its own resources, relying on the Soviet Union 
merely for technical help in the form of advice and documents, and certain 
materials and equipment not yot available in Poland. All that help was being 
provided without political or other strings of any kind. 
31. Poland was also co-operating with the Democratic Republic of Germany, 
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia in the training of specialists, the organization 
of symposia, exchanges of information and so on. France, the United Kingdom 

GC(II)/OR. 16 
Page 11 


and the Scandinavian countries were taking young Polish scientific workers 
for periods of studys friendly relations were being maintained with India, 
and contacts had recently been established with specialists in the United 


States. Poland hoped to maintain relations with all the countries of the 
world. Its case might be regarded as typical. 


32. In its plans and programmes the Agency must not fail to bear in mind the 
needs of its Lenber States and the special conditions obtaining in each of 
them. F/hile doing everything it could to help llcmber States to carry out 
their programmes, however, it must not squander its energy on things that were 
not strictly necessary at the moment. The proposal to establish a Division of 
Safeguards was a case in point. The problem of safeguards and controls required 
for its solution a wider framework of international co-operation than 
the Agency by itself could provide; if the Agency were to try to tackle that 
problem, it might simply make the task moro difficult - beside harming its 
work as a whole - by giving the impression that it wished to impose its own 
control. Koreover, since no requests had yet been made for fissionable and 
source materials, the establishment of a Division of Safeguards seemed 
premature. 
33. There were four fields in which it was generally considered that the Agency 
might now usefully expand its activities. The first was the provision of assistance 
for training specialists, and organizing the exchange and dissemination 
of scientific and technical information. There, the range of the Agency's usefulness 
was practically unlimited, but a fciv of the most important forms its 
assistance could take might be mentioned. 
34* The Agency could arrange fellowships. Poland had, in the past year, sont 
about a hundred scientists to the USSR to study, thirty to Czechoslovakia, and 
twenty to the German Democratic Republic! it had also sont various scientific 
workers to Franco, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Norway, Switzerland and Austria. 
But that was no~ sufficient, and Poland was glad to know that it was to be 
granted a number of fellowships through the Agency. 


35. The Agency could itself arrange specialized courses and symposia for 
scientific and technical personnel, or it could arrange for pexsonnel from 
Member States to attend such courses at national or international scientific 
institutions. 

GC(II)/OR.l6 
Page 12 


36. It could also promote the exchange of scientific and technical information 
- the collection of material for use by Member States. Exchanges of 
information on national legislation relating to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, and on economic problems were also required, and a glossary of scientific 
and technical terminology would be increasingly needed as time went on. 
37. Lastly, the Agency could convene conferences - both of a purely scientific 
nature and on special economic, technical and other problems of an international 
character. The "Geneva Conferences" had shown how immensely valuable the exchange 
of nuclear knowledgo could be. Conferences on specific, narrowly 
defined subjects were certainly essentials no doubt more general ones would 
be valuable as well. A number of conferences were already planned, but still 
more were needed, for example, on methods of planning the development of 
nuclear energy in particular countries, and on the various types of reactor 
considered from an economic point of view, Poland itself would be particularly 
interested in a conference on radiation chemistry. Not only was the holding 
of such conferences in different countries technically valuable, but it would 
also help international co-operation in general. His country would be very 
glad to have one held in its territory. 
38, The second field in which the Agency's activities might expand was the 
protection of health and life from harmful radiations. It was to be hoped that, 
as a result of certain current developments, nuclear tost explosions might be 
halted. But even if they wore, the increasing use of nuclear energy would bring 
with it further radiation dangers, and effective protection from them would 
only be possible if preventive work, and the necessary research connected with 
it, were started at once. Various United Nations bodies wore already engaged 
in such works their efforts should be spoedod up, and made more practical and 
concrete. They should also be properly co-ordinateds none of those bodios dealt 
with the problem as a whole. 


39* Incidentally, development of the utilization of nuclear energy was being 
held up by continuing difficulty in purchasing certain basic equipment and 
research apparatus, particularly in connexion with hr>,p\t, measures. 

40. The third field in which the Agency might expand its act_vities was that 
of relations with other international organizations.Their co-operation was 
most urgently needed in connexion with the problem of international standards, 

GC(II)/0fi.l6 
Page 13 


and that of international and national legislation. In addition, the Agency 
might organize and co-ordinate certain types of research which entailed mass 


observation of different areas and conditions, with a view to establishing the 
uniform methods of study necessary for obtaining comparable results, 


41. The fourth field of expansion was assistance to the under-developed 
countries. The development of nuclear technology was, though some might dispute 
it, the best way of raising certain under-developed countries, such as 
India, to the level of the I7est. A certain amount had been done towards performing 
that essential task of the Agency - various countries had made 
specialists available - but it was necessary to go further. The Agency ought 
to prepare a long-range programme of assistance to the under-developed countries, 
adapted to their needs. The preparation of such a programme should be 
one of its primary tasks in the coming year. 
42. It was essential that the Agency should omploy scientific methods and the 
most up-to-date scientific knowledge and techniques available. It should use 
the services of the foremost atomic scientists, who should exert a greater influence 
upon its work than they had hitherto. The Agency should not, of 
course, engage in pure research but, while maintaining its own staff of 
specialists, it should set up machinery for enlisting additional assistance 
from the world's leading scientists. It should also promote close co-operation 
between the various research institutes and utilization of the results of that 
co-operation for purposes it had at heart. The Agency's success would very 
largely depend on how far it managed to convince countries that it was competent 
to do its work. 
43. The Agency would not be able to perform its exalted task, unless the world 
wore relieved from the threat of an atomic war - unless the preparations for 
such a war wore discontinued, tost explosions were halted and the use of atomic 
weapons were prohibited; unless, indeed, there were general disarmament, and 
the resources thus freed were devoted to the assistance of the under-developed 
countries, It was to be hoped that the United Nations General Assembly was 
making headway in that direction. 
44. Mr. MKI03HOVIC (Yugoslavia) stated that the work of the Agency had 
developed under special conditions during the first year of the Agency's 

GC(II)/OR.16 
Page 14 


existence. During that period the Board of Governors, the Director General 
and the Secretariat had done much to implement the recommendations of the 
first session of the General Conference. Bearing in mind the results achieved 
by the Agency so far, as well as the fact that initial steps in all fields of 
international co-operation were always accompanied by difficulties, the 
Yugoslav delegation wished to emphasize that it endorsed the Board's First 
Annual Report. 


45. By continuing to promote international co-operation in various ways 
within its competence, the Agency would help to establish harmony in international 
relations in general. Conversely, improvement in international 
relations, for example through the discontinuation of nuclear test explosions 
of which there was now some likelihood, would open up wider prospects for the 
Agency1s work. 
46. The promotion of scientific research and the application of scientific 
achievements in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy constituted 
the basic task of the Agency. The Agency could implement its tasks only on 
the basis of developing scientific co-operation. Consequently one of its main 
objectives should be the co-ordination of nuclear research throughout the world, 
particularly in the field of fusion. Though such co-ordination might hardly 
be practicable at present, sooner or later it must form part of the Agency's 
programme. By undertaking it the Agency would improve conditions for the 
peaceful use of atomic energy throughout the world, and particularly for assistance 
to under-developed countries - one of the chief objects for which it had 
been set up. He was confident that the Board and the Director General would 
keep that ultimate aim constantly before them in their everyday activities. 
47. The Agency was to be congratulated on its work in connection with assistance 
to under-developed countries, the training of technical and scientific 
personnel, and the granting and organization of technical assistance, as well 
as in the stops it had taken towards making itself a centre for the exchange 
of information and the study of questions of international importance. 
48, It should not, of course, stop there, but should prepare to perform all 
its statutory functions, taking existing needs into account. New staff should 
be recruited and activities should expand gradually, pari passu with the growth 



GC(II)/QR.16 
Page 15 


of those needs, as expressed in requests from the Ifember States. In that way 
the Agency would become a true intermediary between the developed and the underdeveloped 
countries. The major part of its resources should be devoted 
primarily to promoting co-operation between the two groups, and to securing 
assistance for the under-developed countries in the fields where their need 
was greatest. Since the developed countries had immense resources available, 
it was reasonable to hope that the assistance given would be very varied, and 
adapted to the individual requirements of countries in need of such assistance. 


49. As regards the programme 01 work of the Agency, it might be wise to reconsider 
the whole question of building an Agency laboratory^ such a project 
would be very costly, and various Member States and international organizations 
already had laboratories which might be able to serve the Agency's purposes. 
50. Yugoslavia would gladly place its own institutes and laboratories at the 
Agency's disposal, and the facilities they could provide were continually improving, 
ICore and more work was being done on the application of nuclear 
energy in industry, agriculture, medicine and biology^ on uranium prospecting 
and mining5 and on reactors and reactor techniques. A zero-power reactor had 
already been built by Yugoslav scientists, and a 6.5-10 Ml research reactor 
had, under an agreement with the USSR, almost boon completed. Yugoslav scientists 
had also constructed a 2 Ilev Van do Graaf generator and a 16-20 Mev 
cyclotron. Special attention was being given to extending the uses of nuclear 
energy, to training the personnel required in industry, medicine and agriculture, 
and to improving protection against radiation. As a result, Yugoslavia was 
becoming able to play an increasingly large part in the Agency's activities. 
The Yugoslav Government had expressed its readiness to receive a number of 
fellowship holders in its institutes and laboratories, and was prepared to 
place certain electronic equipment at the disposal of Member States which 
needed it. In addition, the International Summer Seminar of Physicists, which 
had been meeting regularly in Yugoslavia for some years, could be used by the 
Agency, if it wished, as a forum for scientists. 
51. To conclude, despite the fact that the work the Agency had done during the 
period under review had been constructive, there were a number of problems which 
required further study. Therefore it was imperative that, in extending its 

GC(II)/OR. 16 


Page 16 


activities in the future, the Agency should, on the one hand, take into account 
the concrete needs of its members, and on the other hand, co-operate with the 
United Nations and its specialized agencies. An increasingly constructive and 
close relationship between the Agency and those organizations, which should 
make itself felt in the Agency's day-to-day work, could not but assist the 
Agency to carry out its mission. 


52. His Government would continue to give the Agency every assistance that 
lay within its power, in order to help it fulfil its mission in the most constructive 
manner for the benefit of all the nations of the world. 
53. Mr. CUHHA (Brazil) observed that the regular annual session of the 
General Conference appeared to have two main purposes, to exchange views on 
the progress of the Agency's work under its Statute, and to exchange information 
on the development of each Member's national nuclear energy programme. 
2/ 


Since the Director General had already made a statement—' on the first year 
of the Agency's life and the First Annual Report of the Board of Governors was 
before the Conference, he need not himself review the work done by the Agency5 
he would merely thank the Board of Governors, the Director General and the 
Secretariat for their outstanding performance in guiding the Agency through 
its first and probably most difficult year, and give a short account of the 
progress of the Brazilian atomic energy programme in that year. 


54' In his Government's view an atomic energy programme was a statement of 
the action required to promote the economic exploitation and development for 
civilian purposes of sources of atomic energy, within the limits set by the 
available human, financial and material resources and by national and international 
law. It had three main objectives. The first was to create and 
expand the technical staff needed at all levels of the programme§ it could 
be attained by training, which in turn called for research reactors and other 
training equipment and for appropriate budgetary provision. The second objective 
was to ensure a steady supply of source and fissionable materials, from 
either domestic or foreign sources, according to the availability of raw 
materials, processing facilities, financial resources and foreign exchange. 


& GC(II)/OR.14, paragraphs 32 - 50. 


GC(II)/OR.16 
Page 17 


The third objective was to plan and carry out a programme of investment in 
nuclear power plant, with domestic industry participating to the greatest 
possible extent, and with due regard to the nation's conventional power 
resources, the economics of the potential water-power resources, and the 
availability of fossil fuels. 


55. The Brazilian programme proposed to approach the first objective by 
developing national training and teaching facilities and by taking advantage 
of fellowships abroad, A large swimming-pool research reactor which had been 
in operation a'; Sao Paulo since September 1957 bad enabled Brazilian technicians 
to study and solve a number of instrumentation, safety and operating 
problems:,, it had also begun to produce radioisotopes, which were already 
helping the development of industrial, agricultural, medical and biological 
research. The application of radiations to agricultural research and foodpreserving 
might play an important part in improving the standard of life in 
less-developed areas of Brazil. Three further research reactors were being 
ordered for training purposes in the Universities of Rio de Janeiro and Belo 
Horizonte and the Technical Institute of Sao Jose dos Campos, and the use of 
existing training equipment was being intensified. 
56. Under a decision of the Board of Governors taken on a proposal of the 
Governor from Brazil, supported by the Governors from Argentina and Guatemala, 
the Director General had appointed a working group to survey the Latin-American 
countries and determine the need for one or more regional training centres.; 
the report of that mission was now before the General Conference for its information*
7. The working group'3 observations and conclusions indicated the 
part that the Agency could play in promoting the use of atomic energy in Latin 
America even before any centres were established. The information it had 
gathered would help the Agency to assess the kind and scale of the assistance 
needed by each country visited, and to use the facilities locally available in 
the more developed countries of the region. 
57. With regard to the second objective, under the Brazilian programme nuclear 
fuels would both be imported as initial or reprocessed charges and fabricated 
at homo from natural uranium and thorium. The programme also included a pilot 
& GC(II)/IIIF/I9. 


GC(II)/0E.l6 
Page 18 


plant for the study of uranium enrichment by the centrifugation process. 


58. The Brazilian power reactor programme, aiming at the third objective, 
was still in its preliminary stages. The National Nuclear Energy Board of 
Italy had kindly invited two observers for the Brazilian Government to follow 
the final stages of the consideration of the international tenders called for 
by the Italian Government for the construction of a large nuclear power 
project in Southern Italy, that experience would be of great value to the 
Brazilian Nuclear Energy Commission in initiating its power programme. Brazil 
was consulting the Agency with a view to enlisting its co-operation in placing 
the specific projects of the Brazilian programme on a sound technical and 
economic footing and in providing an expert mission to carry out fact-finding 
studies, and was also asking it to assist in a thorough assessment of Brazil's 
needs in connexion with radioisotopes. 
59. Brazil had confidence both in its own efforts and in any assistance it 
might receive from the Agency. The spirit of understanding and co-operation 
that had guided the Agency sinco its inception was an earnest of the increasingly 
important part the Agency would play in promoting the world-wide use of nuclear 
energy for peace, health and good will among men. 
60. The PRESIDENT reminded delegates that a mobile radioisotope laboratory 
presented by the United States would be handed over to the Agency at the conclusion 
of the meeting in a ceremony which all delegates were invited to attend. 
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m. N 



INTERNATIONAL 


ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.17 
21 October 1958 
General Conference ENGLISH 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Wednesday, 24 September 1958, at 3.30 p.m. 

President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
Paragraphs 

agenda* 


11 General debate and report of the Board 1 - 61 
of Governors for the year 1957/1958 
(continued) 


- statements by the delegates of Japan, 
Sweden, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic and the Federal Republic of 
Germany 
* GC(II)/57. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the second regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/17/Rev.3. 

GC(II)/OR.17 
Page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AWD REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAH 1957/58 
(GC(II)/39) (continued) 


1. Mr. FURUTJCHI (Japan) stated that the Japanese Government continued 
to attach great importance to the activities of the Agency, and wished to 
express its satisfaction at the work carried out during the first year. The 
present Conference would certainly mark a new and important stage in the 
history of the Agency and of its efforts to harness atomic energy for the 
cause of peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. 
2. The Agency had been brought into existence in accordance with the 
magnanimous suggestions of President Eisenhower, whose desire it was that 
nuclear energy should cease to be a source of perils, and should instead be 
employed for peaceful purposes. The Agency should continue to meet the 
aspirations of mankind by effectively fulfilling the functions laid down in 
the Statute. 
3. Japan, as a loyal member of the Agency, intended in the future to rely on 
the assistance of the Agency, and to make that assistance the corner-stone of 
its programmes in the peaceful utilisation of nuclear energy. He therefore 
wished to give the Conference a survey of Japan's present situation in thatfield. 
4. Under a bilateral agreement concluded with the United States, there had 
been installed in Japan a boiling water reactor, of 50 K17 thermal output, 
for research and training purposes, and in addition a CP-5 type reactor of 10 
Ml, thermal output was under construction. It would be used for more advanced 
research, in particular for test production of radioisotopes and reactor 
material testing. 
5. Japan, which was determined to remedy the shortage of resources in conventional 
energy supply by using nuclear energy, had recently concluded with, 
the United States of America and Great Britain bilateral agreements for 
electricity production. 
6. However, in the opinion of the Japanese Government the time had come when 
the under-developed countries should seek the assistance and advice of the 
Agency to implement their programmes of atomic energy. Therefore, on 23 
September 1958, his Government had made a formal request to the Agency for its 

GC(II)/OR.17 
Page 3 

assistance in obtaining about three tons of natural uranium of reactor grade 
in the form of ingots, required for its first national research reactor. 

7. In that connexion he fully agreed with the view submitted by the Director 
General on the opening day-/ , that the conditions offered by the Agency for the 
supply of materials should be more favourable than those under bilateral 
agreements. In the absence of such inducement to apply to the Agency, the 
countries in the under-developed areas might be obliged to seek elsewhere the 
assistance they required, to the detriment of the development of the Agency. 
8. One of the most important functions of the Agency, laid down in Article 
III, paragraph A.5 of the Statute, was to establish a.nd administer safeguards 
designed to ensure that special fissionable and other materials, services, 
equipment and information made available by the Agency or at its request or 
under its supervision or control were not used in such a way as to further 
any military purpose, and to apply safeguards, at the request of the parties, 
to any bilateral or multilateral arrangement. 
9. In the two bilateral agreements which Japan had concluded with the United 
States and the United Kingdom respectively, it was stipulated that the 
contracting parties intended to request the Agency to administer its safeguard 
provisions to those agreements, 5.nd that the parties would consult each 
other in order to determine in what respect and to what extent they would make 
use of its services. The Japanese Government had already informed the 
Government of the United States that it intended to request the Agency to 
apply its safeguard provisions with respect to the agreement concluded with 
the United States, as scon as the Agency was in a position to perform that 
service. 
10. It was therefore essential for the Agency to take steps as soon as possible 
to develop those services and recruit the necessary personnel, while at the same 
time establishing the requisite safeguards. The Japanese Government would 
welcome any proposal to that effect submitted by the Director General or by one 
of the Member Sts/fces. 
11. In conclusion he expressed the hope that, as the Japanese programmes in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy developed, Japan v/ould be able to co-operate more 
and more actively v/ith the Agency, not only in technical matters, but also in 
training schemes. 
l/ GC(j.l)/0ft. 14, paragraph 50* (provisional) 


GC(II)/OR.17 
Page 4 

12. Mr. ALLARD (Sweden) stated that, as a member of the Board of Governors, 
Sweden had closely followed the initial activities of the Agency and had had the 
opportunity to voice its views on that subject. On leaving its seat on the 
Board, S^veden would like to present its views with respect to the present and 
future activities of the Agency, on the basis of the Board's report to the 
Conference (GC(II)/39) and its draft programme and budget proposals-/ . 
13. One of the most important problems before the Agency and all its member 
countries was clearly the question of what form international co-operation 
should take in regard to atomic energy and related subjects. 
14. His Government noted with great satisfaction the preparation of relationship 
agreements between the Agency and a number of specialized agencies-' , for 
it was of primary importance for all members of the United Nations family to 
maintain close and harmonious relations with each other. In that way they would 
be able to benefit from each other's experience and resources and avoid, to the 
greatest possible extent, duplication of work and unnecessary expenditure. 
International organizations should not regard themselves, or act, as competing 
bodies with exclusive rights and obligations. 
15. The need for co-ordination was particularly vital in the atomic sphere, in 
view of the extremely wide and important implications of the uses of the atom 
for peaceful purposes. Together with the Relationship Agreement with the 
4/ 
United Nations-' , the agreements between the Agency and some of the specialized 
agencies formed the essential bases for effective co-ordination. 

16. However, the consultations and the co-operation provided for in those 
agreements would probably not always be sufficient to solve the complete range 
of problems of co-ordination. It was of particular importance and urgency to 
co-ordinate closely the work on radiation effects being carried out by various 
international organizations, governmental as well as non-governmental. He drew 
5/ 

attention to the note-' in which the Director General had dealt with the problem. 

2/ GC(II)/36 and Corr.1. 
3/ GC(II)/46 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1, GC(II)/47, GC(II)/48, GC(II)/49, 
GC(II)/50 and Corr.1. 
4/ GC.1/3. 
5/ GOV/203 and Add.1. 



GC(II)/OR.17 
Page 5 


That document would be of special interest and use to delegations when considering 
the report of the Secretary-General of the United ITations on the question of 
strengthening and widening scientific activities in the field of the effects of 
atomic re„diation. 


17. The Swedish Government was also happy to note that preliminary exchanges of 
views had taken place on the establishment of fruitful relations between the 
Agency and certain regional intergovernmental organizations such as the European 
iMuclear Energy Ag€ncy of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) 
and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). His Government was glad 
that thor.c organizations were represented by observers at the Conference, and he 
hoped th\t their relations with the Agency would soon become formalized in an 
appropriate manner. 
18. Nevertheless, helpful and important as the delimitation of functions between 
various international organizations might be, it constituted only one element of 
the activities of the Agency. It ~as of equal importance for the Board of 
Governors, the Director General and the General Conference to find out what kind 
of services Member States were in fact requesting, which of those services should 
be supplied by the Agency, and which could be more effectively supplied by other 
media. In short, the problem was to know how to put the necessarily limited 
resources of the A.gency to the most profitable use. 
19- The previous year his Government had indicated its general approval of the 
.Report of the Preparatory Commission, on the understanding that the Pieport 
indicated the broad lines for possible future activities of the Agency. His 
Government had not then considered - and did so even less at present - that the 
endorsement of the Report by the Member States had put the Agency under any 
obligation to acquire financial and staff resources enabling it to start or to 
pursue all the activities mentioned in that Report. While it was true that the 
Report had been drawn up by a highly competent body, its authors had not claimed 
to be establishing an exact list of the activities that would in reality be 
undertaken by the Agency in the initial period of its existence. 


20. His Government felt that the foremost considerations in planning the Agency's 
programme should be to ascertain whether the activities proposed were really 
called for, whether the Agency would be in a position to carry them out more 

GC(II)/OR.17 

Page 6 


effectively than any other existing organization or whether indeed they could 
be carried out without the assistance of any international body at all. 


21. It was in the light of those considerations that his Government had 
participated in the planning of the Agency's programme during the first year. 
It had noted with satisfaction that its views had been taken into account to a 
certain extent in the formulation of the proposed budget. In many instances, 
however, the decisions of the Board had been contrary to its views. His 
delegation therefore reserved its right to maintain its opposition during the 
committee stage of the budget debate. 
22. Furthermore, certain developments which had taken place after the proposed 
budget had been formulated by the Board had shed new light en some of the Agency's 
proposed activities. In particular, he referred to the Second United Nations 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy which had just 
been held in Geneva, and to the continued tendency of many governments to prefer 
bilateral or multilateral agreements to enlisting the assistance of the Agency 
for the supply of materials and equipment, 
23. If the Agency was to continue to be a viable and useful organization, it had 
to take into account the developments arising out of scientific and technological 
progress and the policies considered by Member States to be in their best 
interests. In other words, the \gency had to adapt itself to such inevitable 
changes and concentrate its efforts in fields in which it could render real and 
valuable assistance. 
24. There was no doubt that there were many such fields. The various forms of 
technical assistance to the under-developed countries - and with regard to 
atomic energy, most countries were under-developed - certainly provided the best 
example. It was important that, wherever necessary, countries should be provided 
with expert advice on the form of investment, in particular with regard to the 
use of radioisotopes in agriculture, industry and medicine, which "would lead to 
the quickest and best results from the economic and social points of view. 
The Agency could also contribute to progress in many countries by promoting the 
exchange and training of students at various levels of education. His country 
had already promised to assist the Agency in that respect, both financially and 
in admitting students and trainees to Swedish institutions. 



GC(II)/GR.17 
Page 7 


25. The Swedish Government also thought that in many cases the Agency could 
play an important part in planning conferences, symposia and similar meetings 
on vp.rious topics. Swedish scientists and technicians were ready to share in 
such planning and, whenever appropriate, to take part in meetings organized 
under the auspices of, or in co-operation with, the Agency. 
26. The Agency h.-xL taken a most useful step in drawing up a draft manual of 
practices for safe handling of rcdioisotopes5 his country would follow future 
work concerning the transport of such isotopes with great interest. On its part, 
the Board of Governors, on a Swedish proposal, had just requested the Secretariat 
to examine the possibilities of undertaking a similar otudy with respect to the 
transport of fuel elements. Other studies might deal, inter alia, with the 
safety of reactors and their location. 
27. Such activities would he of benefit to Members as a whole . .nd would ensure 
widespread support for the Agency. Nevertheless, the Agency's principal function 
in that field should be co-ordination°9 technical and legal advice should be 
furnished mainly hy such experts as countries made available to the Agency, so 
that it would not have to increase its staff for that purpose. It would be of 
value if the Agency took as an exaraplo the practice followed in that respect by 
the European Nuclear Energy Agency of OCJDC. 
28. The Swedish Government, at least for the time being, entertained serious 
doubts about the usefulness of certain undertakings that were contemplated. 
29. In his statement to the General Conference-' , the Director General had pointed 
out that the Agency, in order to be able to act as an intermediary in the supply 
of materials and equipment between countries, should receive somewhat better terms 
than those offered to buyers. It was of course possible that the Agency might 
be granted such preference in the future on political grounds, but it was obvious 
that no other considerations - such as economic ones - would justify giving the 
Agency preferential treatment. 
30. It was not only a question of price, control conditions Tore also of groat 
significance. A certain tendency seemed to be discernible of late to make control 
arrangements which, to say the least, appeared to be less orthodox than those 
6/ GC(II)/QR. 14, paragraph 5,0 (provisional). 



GC(II)/OR.17 


Page 8 


provided for in the Statute. That apparent tendency would hardly serve to 


strengthen the Agency's position as a possible supplier of materials and 


equipment. 


31. The Swedish Government did not therefore consider the Agency justified in 
employing for the time being a large staff for either supply or safeguards 
services. Elaborate planning in those fields seemed wholly premature, and a 
waste of resources. The principle that the permanent staff should be kept to 
a minimum was hardly in accordance with suoh. activities. 


32. With regard to the size of the staff in general, he was convinced that the 
need for personnel, particularly administrative personnel, had been regarded by 
the Director General as somewhat pressing during the Agency's first year. 
Certainly a great many of the administrative staff had not only worked hard, but 
had done really useful work. Nevertheless, if the number and duration of Board 
meetings were reduced, if some contemplated activities were put in cold storage 
for the time being, and if the undoubted talents of the leading members of the 
Secretariat were devoted to placing the available administrative staff in 
positions where they were most urgently needed, it would surely be possible to 
put an effective check on the further growth of the Secretariat. 
33. The same considerations applied in part to the technical staff. Their 
activities, however, were more intimately related to the main tasks of the Agency, 
they were less interchangeable, and their numbers were less liable to increase 
and decrease. 
34* He concluded by stressing that his remarks should not be considered as a 
negative criticism^ they had been offered in a constructive spirit and as an 
attempt to indicate a realistic course to be followed by the Agency at the outset. 
Such an approach would be in the best interests of the Agency as well as of all 
those countries which, like Sweden, would like the Agency to develop into a 
useful instrument for international co-operation. 


35. Mr. SCHMUDSKY.(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
prospects for the peaceful uses of atomic energy were constantly improving and 
foreshadowed a radical transformation in poxver supplies, technology, transport, 
public health and living conditions. Mankind was at the beginning of a new 
era of world-wide distribution of productive power. 

GC(II)/OR.17 
Page 9 

36. Unfortunately, the peaceful uses of atomic energy had not yet achieved 
their full development, because the efforts of scientists, the resources of 
the various countries in fissionable materials and their industrial and 
technical potentialities were being exploited for military purposes. Obviously 
the prohibition of the use of atomic energy for military purposes would give a 
decisive impetus to international co-operation among scientists and technicians^ 
and it would markedly facilitate the Agency's task. The first step had been 
taken on that road by the initiative of the Government of the Soviet Union, 
which had decided to stop nuclear and therrno-nuclear weapon tests and had 
invited other governments to follow its example. 
37. The United States and the United Kingdom had not hitherto answered that 
appeal by the Soviet Unions thereby they ran the risk of seriously hindering 
progress in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and of causing i mense and 
irreparable harm to mankind. People throughout the whole world failed to 
understand the views of the United States and United Kingdom Governments, 
especially now that the conclusions of the United Nations Scientific Committee 
7/ 
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation-1-' and those of the conference of experts 
v/hich had been he id at Geneva ha,d been published. 


38. He hoped that in the near future the United States and United Kingdom 
Governments 'would follow the example of the Soviet Union, thereby hastening the 
moment when, in the words of Article II of the Statute, atomic energy would be 
used exclusively for "peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". That 
was of prime importance to the Agency. 
39. During the past year the Ukrainian S.S.R. had continued to pay attention to 
the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. Great success had buen achieved in 
the use of radioisotopes in the scientific, industrial, agricultural and medical 
fields. At the Geneva Conference the delegates of the Ukraine had submitted 
very important scientific reports on each of those subjects. 
40. The Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine was in the process of completing 
the construction of a research reactor. The methods used in the Ukraine for 
mining uranium ores had attracted much attention from various foreign experts, 
particularly Canadians. 
7/ United Hations Document A/3833. 



GC(II)/OR.17 

Page 10 

41. In the view of the Ukrainian Government the essential function of the Agencylay 
in the assistance it could give in the atomic field to the less-developed 
countries, so that the present disparity between the industrial and non-industrial 
countries might be reduced. The Ukraine was ready to offer the benefits of its 
experience to all who needed it, as the Ukrainian delegation had already pointed 
out at the first session of the General Conference of the Agency-' . 
42. After studying the first annual report of the Board of Governors to the 
General Conference, the Ukrainian delegation did not consider the Agency's 
activities during the period entirely satisfactory. 
43. It could not approve the terms of paragraph 9 oi the report when it stated 
that at the present time it was "as yet uncertain to what extent power, research 
and training reactors may be constructed in the near future outside the atomically 
more advanced countries". It appeared that the authors of the report based 
their views on the preconceived, and mistaken, notion that the construction of 
reactors in the less—developed countries would be impossible. However, the 
experience of those countries, and the research carried out there, had demonstrated 
the advantages and the future prospects held in store for them by the 
construction of research and training reactors, and eventually power reactors. 
44. It was surprising that the Agency had not taken any steps to convince the 
under-developed countries that research reactors were of interest to them and to 
rate at its real value the execution of a reactor building programme. Furthermore, 
it emerged from the report trat the Agency doubted even the possibility 
of building reactors in under-developed countries. However, the initial programme 
expressly envisaged that the Agency should take steps "to encourage and 
assist a special programme of reactor building"^. 
45* The Ukrainian delegation was astonished to read in paragraph 9 of the report 
that "it is not yet possible to formulate the policy the Agency should follow" 
with regard to the price ^t which fissionable and source materials might be 

supplied through the Agency. The Ukrainian delegation considered that the 
guiding principle in determining the prices of materials should be that those 

8/ GC.1(S)/OR.10, paragraph 33. 
9_/ GC.1/l, paragraph 45



GC(II)/0H.17 
Pago 11 

supplied by the Agency should be the cheapest on the world market. The report 
of the Board of Governors should have drawn attention to this principle, the 
more so because certain countries had expressed the intention to deliver 
materials at commercial prices. 

46. From the beginning it had been the opinion of* the Ukr -.inian delegation that 
the Agency should not be a commercial organization enabling those './ho provided 
materials and equipment for the Agency to make profits. Otherwise the Agency 
would h'.rdly be in a position to offer disinterested assistance to under-developed 
countries, which vrould then have to find other ways of satisfying their requirements. 
4T. In a speech at Chicago, the Governor from the United Stated of America on the 

Board of Governors had defined the Agency as a device backed up by a real profit 
motive. But it was precisely the profit motive which should be firmly 
excluded from the Agency. 

48. The report of the Board mentioned, on the subject of staff recruitment, 
that the Agency had had recourse to the United Nations for aid in completing 
its staff. So as not to contravene the principle of geographical representation 
laid down in the Statute, however. United Nations officials transferred to the 
Agency must be considered, not in their capacity as officials of an international 
organization, but as representing the geographical areas to which they belonged. 
49. The report, regrettably, said nothing about th^ activities of the Agency 
with regard to information - activities which left much to be desired. It was 
difficult to see why the Agency's non-technical bulletin had not yet appeared, 
nothing was known about the ways in which the Agency informed the public as to 
its activities or issued information on progress made towards the peaceful use 
of atomic energy. The fact that the public was,unfortunately, hearing more and 
more often about the military applications of atomic energy made the Agency's 
responsibilities in regard to information all the more important. The man in 
the street would largely depend on the Agency's information work for his views 
on the prospects of atomic energy, and it would, moreover, enhance the Agency's 
moral authority. The non-technical bulletin should - from the very first year be 
produced in that spirit. 

GC(II)/0H.17 
Page 12 


50. It must be admitted that there w,.s a pernicious tendency to turn the Agency 
into an international body merely to supervise the utilization of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes instead of also making of it an organization capable of 
contributing substantially to the economic development of many countries 
throughout the world. 
51. During the preceding year, a disproportionate amount of the Agency's 
activities had been administrative, concealing all the other, much more important, 
aspects of its task. Having laid down excellent principles, it was time for the 
Agency to start putting them into practice; that was what the nations expected 
of it. 
52. The Ukrainian delegation reserved the right to put forward its suggestions 
for the future during the examination of the programme, budget and operating 
fund for 1959. 
53. Mr. CARSTJ3JS (Federal Republic of Germany) said he had heard with 
satisfaction the remarks made by the Director General at the opening meeting of 
the Conference-' . His delegation wished to congratulate the Director General 
on the speed with which he had succeeded in providing the Agency with an 
administration and with the services of outstanding officials. The Agency as 
a result was already able to carry out some of its essential functions, connected 
with the exchange of scientific and technical information, assistance to students 
and experts, world co-operation on health matters, and assistance to underdeveloped 
countries in regard to atomic energy, 


54. His delegation therefore fully approved the Agency's programme for 1959 
calling scientific conferences and symposia on atomic matters, which could give 
an impetus to the co-ordination of scientific research, and exploit the results 
of the recent Geneva Conference. The need for all countries to develop their 
atomic energy programmes should be underlined, and fruitful international 
co-operation would thus ensue. 
55. For its part, the Federal Republic of Germany was operating research reactors 
at the Universities of Munich and Frankfort. A reactor for research on nuclear 
ship propulsion would go into operation in Hamburg in 1958p another reactor 
10/ GC(II)/OR.14, paragraphs 32 to 50. 
11/ GC(II)/36 and Corr.1. 



GC(II)/OR,17 
Page 13 


at Berlin would serve the same purpose. Research work would rlso be starting 


soon n*fc J.VCH* lsruhe and at Julich. Thus the number of reactors which could be 
used for research in his country within the near future would total seven, of 
which six had been supplied by the Governments of the United Kingdom and the 
United States, to which he wished to express his gratitude. 


56. German industry was taking a keen interact in the development of nuclear 
generators. Industrial concerns had formed themselves into groups to investigate 
types of generators which would soon be able to compete with standard 
electric power stations. The MRheinisch-7estfalischc Elektrizitatswerke", with 
the assistance of the United States, had decided to build an experimental boilingwater 
generator, with a capacity of 15 MW, near As chaffenburg, while another 
high temperature generator of the same capacity was to be built near Diisoeldorf. 
.Both of these would of course be experimental reactors and could not for the 
moment compete with standard-type power stations. 
57* His country was also engaged in the production of material such as heavy 
water for reactors and nuclear equipment. The electrical industry in Germany 
was manufacturing instruments for measuring radiation and for protection against 
radiation. 


58. Since there was no shortage of natural uranium in the world, the Federal 
Republic was not intending to intensify uranium mining on its own territory, 
but was importing uranium to meet its needs. 
59. With regard to the activities of the Agency,, the appointment of the 
Scientific Advisory Committee was a very timely step, which would enable the 
Agency to develop the co-ordination of scientific work. His delegation, which 
was anxious to see close contact established between the Agency and other 
organizations, noted with satisfaction that agreements with several international 
organizations had been submitted to the Conference for approval. It was true 
that the many new organizations which had been established during the last ten 
years - particularly regional organizations - were designed to meet particular 
requirements and occupied a clearly defined place in the vast field of international 
co-operation, but it was desirable none the loss that close contact 
should be established between them and the Agency. Effective co-operation was 
particularly necessary in the matter of third party liability for damages and 

GC(II)/OR.17 
Page 14 


insurance against atomic risks. A number of regional organizations, such as 
the European Nuclear Energy Agency had already undertaken studies of those 
questions, which might be of value to the Agency. 


60. Since the first plans for the establishment of the Agency hjd been made, 
his Government had always stated that it earnestly desired the development of 
international co-operation in the field assigned to the Agency and that, for its 
own part, it was prepared to do everything possible tc attain that end. Although 
the Federal Republic was still in the early stages of the development of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, it was particularly anxious to help other countries 
in educating specialists, and had offered the Agency twenty subsidized fellowships, 
in addition to the sixty fully paid fellowships which it had placed at 
the disposal of various countries under bilateral agreements. The fellowships 
were intended mainly to enable students to perfect their knowledge in various 
fields of the basic sciences. 
61. In conclusion, ho would assure the Conference that his country would spare 
no effort in assisting the Agency to bring to a successful issue the work which 
it had undertaken in the interests of all its members. 
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 


ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.18 
29 October 1958 
General Conference ENGLISH 

SFCOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTEENTH PLENARY MEETING. 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 25 September 1958, at 11.5 a.m. 


President: 
Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


Order of business 
1-8 


Determination of the closing date for 9 
the General Conference (continued) 


11 
General debate and Report of the Board 10 - 52 
of Governors for the year 1957-58 
(continued) 


- 
Statements by the delegates of 
the United States of America, 
Tunisia and the Netherlands. 
* GC(II)/57. 
N. B. The list of delegations attending the second regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/l7/Rev.3. 

GC(II)/OR.l8 
Page 2 


ORDER OF BUSINESS 


1. The PRESIDENT announced that since there were only three speakers 
in the general dehate on the list for the present meeting, the General Committee 
had decided,, at its fourth meeting earlier that morning, to recommend 
that the General Conference should take up agenda item 23, "Election of 
Members to the Board of Governors", after the listed speakers had made their 
statements. 
2. Mr. BT3RWARDES (Brazil) said that, while his delegation fully sympathized 
with the desire of the President and the General Committee to 
expedite the work of the General Conference, the election of Members to the 
Board entailed much consultation among delegations, particularly as specific 
geographical areas had to he represented. Furthermore, the item did not 
appear as part of the business of the Conference either for that day or for 
the following day. He therefore proposed that consideration of the item be 
deferred to the end of the general debate. 
3. Mr. SOLE (Union of South Africa) fully agreed. It was quite un-" 
precedented that the general conference of an international organization 
should be called on to elect members of its governing body at a few hours' 
notice. He felt that, in fairness to Members of the Conference who were not 
members of the General Committee, the latter should give at least twentyfour 
hours' notice of the elections to the Board. 
4. Mr. VEJYANT-RAI\fGRISHT (Thailand) also thought it premature to take 
the item immediately. Delegations should be given more time to consider the 
matter carefully:; not all their members had yet arrived and the item appeared 
towards the end of the Conference's Agenda. 
5. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) strongly supported the views of the preceding 
speakers. Ho thought that the item should, if possible, be left until the 
beginning of the following week. 
6. Mr. RAJAIT (India) felt that the General Committee's recommendation 
called for some explanation by one of its members. The Committee's duty was 
to see that the work of the General Conference was concludeci by a certain 
date. In discharge of that duty it had thought fit, since only three speakers 

GC(II)/OR. 18 
Page 3 


appeared on the list for the present meeting, to recommend that the item 
should he disposed of immediately so that the remainder of the Conference's 
work could proceed smeethly, 


7. Admittedly the difficulties of certain delegations referred to by the 
preceding speakers must be considered, hut it was equally necessary to pay 
due regard to Article VI.C and D of the Statute, The Board as at present 
constituted would cease to exist at the conclusion of the session, and since 
under Rule 11 of its Provisional Rules of Procedure the Board must be so 
organized as to enable it to function continuously, the new Board must be 
ready to take over at once. It was therefore essential to hold the election 
as soon as possible. 
8. The PRTiSIDEITT said ho realized that it might be inconvenient to 
some delegations be elect memberH to the Board of Governors at the present 
meeting. He suggested, therefore, that the proposal by the delogato of 
Brazil that em 23 be taken at the end of the general debate would most 
conveniently meet the vdshes of delegates and the practical requirements of 
the Statute. 
It was so docided, 


EITJIRiOTATION OF THE CLOSING DATE FOR THE GENERAL CONFERENCE (continue** ) 


9. The PRESIDENT announced that the General Committee had decided, 
under Rulo 8 of the Rules of Procedure, to recommend that the second regular 
™ne


session should close on Saturday, 4 October 195$. Committee had emphasised 
that that would be possible only if all delegations made ovory effort 
to dispose of the work of the session expeditiously. He suggested that the 
Gonorel Conference adopt the rocommendation of its General Committee. 


It was so decided. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1957-58 


(GC(II)/39) (continued^) 


10. Mr. McCONE (United States of America) hoped that the work of the 
session would result in policios by which the Agency could progress more 
^ GC(II)/OR.15, paragraph 70. 

& GC(II)/OR.17. 


GC(II)/OR.l8 
Page 4 


rapidly towards its statutory objective of accelerating and enlarging the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. What was said and done at the Conference might well determine 
the future significance of the Agency. 


11. The United States remained firm in its support of the Agency and in its 
conviction that the Agency was one way by which the miraculous inventiveness 
of man shall not be dedicated to his death, but consecrated to his life". 
The United States would do all in its power to maintain an appropriate role 
for the Agency as an organization of primary importance in international cooperation 
in atomic matters. it would both initiate and support programmes 
designed to strengthen and advance the Agency in that position. As time 
went on and experience increased it would, with due regard to its other obligations, 
look to the Agency as the principal medium through which United 
States' international programmes for the peaceful use of atomic energy would 
be implemented and carried forward. 
12. The United States welcomed and wholeheartedly endorsed the statement of 
the delegate of Japan that his Government intended to request the Agency to 
administer, when prepared to do so, the safeguards provided for in the Agreement 
for Co-operation between the United States and Japan-'. The vigour and 
imagination with which Japan was developing its programme indicated the speed 
with which the Agency should move in establishing the safeguards system required 
by Article XII of the Statute. The United States therefore strongly 
supported Japan in its request that the Agency approach that task immediately. 
13. The importance of international co-operation had been demonstrated by the 
Second United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Snergy recently held at Geneva:; the groat wealth of technological material 
presented there provided in itself a basis for specific programmes with which 
the Agency was uniquely qualified to deal. Many matters relating to atomic 
energy could be handled only on an international basis% they included the 
necessary development of standards and regulations for protection against 
radiation, the careful use of technical manpower, and the drafting of an 
* GC(II)/0E.17, paragraphs 1 - 11. 

GC(II)/OR. 18 
Page 5 


international convention on third-party liability. The references to the 
last point in statements by previous speakers amounted, in the view of the 
United States delegation, to an instruction to the Director General to proceed 
with the necessary work immediately. 


14. The General Conference must frankly and openly appraise the problems 
facing the Agency and unite in a constructive effort to resolve them with 
the same energy and devotion as had been displayed at the Conference on the 
Agency's Statute. 
15. The Agency had not fulfilled all hopes, but the United States believed 
that its record to date could fairly be regarded as encouraging. The Report 
of the Board of Governors (GC(II)/39) gave evidence of greater substantive 
accomplishment ~han could justifiably have been expected a year earlier. As 
the Director General had pointed out in his statement at the fourteenth 
meeting—' , the Agency's fellowship programme was already in operation;; procedures 
for disseminating information had been devised, technical consultants 
made available, field missions completed, and a radiation protection manual 
drafted^ the initial organizational difficulties had been overcome, and 
agreements with other international organizations for the pooling of talents 
to promote the benign uses of nuclear energy had been placed before the Conference. 
16. Despite that progress, however, the Agency still faced organizational 
and substantive problems which it must solve in order to achieve its objectives. 
The United States recognized the collective duty it shared with all 
other I embers to help the Agency to do so, and, in particular, the duty it 
shared with other atomically-advanccd Members to provide initiative and 
leadership. It was prepared to make suggestions^ but other Members must do 
the same. 
17. The General Conference was not merely a forum, or oven a meeting to 
consider activities proposed by the Board, but a conference at whioh a broad 
exchange of views could generate fresh ideas inspiring the Board and the 
4/ GC(II)/OR.14, paragraphs 32 - 50. 



GC(II)/OR.l8 


Page 6 


Director General to develop a full range of future activities. Other speakers 
had expressed similar views, and those statements taken together might serve 
as useful guidance to the Board and the Director General. 


18. The United States Government unequivocally supported the budget submitted 
to the General Conference by the Board.-^ It attached paramount importance to 
the funds recommended for Agency fellowships and grants in aid. The need for 
training was universally recognized, and trained men clearly required appropriate 
facilities to apply and develop their knowledge. It also supported the 
provision for a central laboratory; there could be no reasonable doubt of the 
need for permanent laboratory facilities at the Agency's exclusive disposal. 
19. The United States Government had carefully considered other desirable 
activities not included in the budget, and put forward six proposals for newactivities 
or for greater emphasis on activities already in progress or 
planned. 
20. First, the Agency should inaugurate, as a major endeavour, a programme 
of training, research and application in the field of radioisotopes, with 
special emphasis on their use in medicine, biology and agriculture. The 
benefits were immediately available§ there would certainly be further 
advances, but there was no need to await them before applying the medical, 
biological and agricultural uses of radioisotopes to many of the problems of 
the less developed areas and particularly to the alleviation of the crushing 
burden of hunger. With its fellowships, its equipment grants and its mobile 
radioisotope laboratories, the Agency could launch a co-ordinated programme 
for the establishment of radioisotope training and research centres in many 
Member States. He urged that such a programme be energetically pursued, and 
pledged his Government's co-operation with the Agency in jointly sponsoring 
seminars and courses and in continuing to make its own facilities available 
to foreign students. 
21. Secondly, the Agency should press forward with the development of international 
standards and regulations for the safe transport, handling and use of 
radioactive materials and for the disposal of radioactive waste, and with the 
drafting of safety codes on roactor siting and operation and on the protection 
3/ GC(II)/36 and Corr.1. 



GC(II)/OR.l8 
Page 7 


of workers in atomic energy establishments. Other important matters that 
needed early attention by the Agency were material-accounting procedures and 
a convention on third-party liability. The Agency should also be established 
as the central authority for standardisation and calibration. 


22. Thirdly, his Government strongly urged that measures over and above the 
fellowship programme be taken to make the Agency the central co-ordinating 
body for the training of scientists from countries which now stood only on the 
threshold of the atomic ages such training was universally recognized to be 
absolutely essential. 
23. Pourthlyr the Agency should draw on the fund of scientific and technical 
competence that existed throughout the worH but was not being fully used. His 
Government was prepared to explore with the Agency the possibility that the 
United States might assign specific research projects to the Agency, which 
could onter into contracts with existing research centres throughout the world 
for their execution. The United States Government would bear all the contract 
costs, and the results - relating, for instance, to ceramic fuel elements, 
high-temperature metallurgy, human metabolism and the use of radioisotopes in 
agriculture - would be mado availablo through the Agency to all its Members. 
That offer was mado because the Agency's budget did not provide funds for such 
activities and the United States believed that they were urgently needed. He 
hoped that the results would enoourage other Governments to follow a similar 
course. 
24. The fifth proposal concerned the question of nuclear power, which the 
Gonova Conference, and particularly its President's opening speech, had done 
much to place in proper perspective. Nuclear power would undoubtedly become 
a significant factor in world economics, but many problems must be solved 
before its use could become widespread. The technology of nucloar power production 
had been developed, but the cost was in many instances substantially 
greater than that of conventional power. Member States should not be discouraged, 
however; the long-range problems must be tackled by coming to 
immediate grips with nucloar power technology as a whole, and in the end the 
higher cost of nuclear power would no longer be inevitable. A long view, 
however, must be taken, covering not one or even five yearsf plans should be 

GC(II)/OR.18 


Page 8 


on a fifty year basis. The Agency should encourage atomic power development 


with due regard, especially in the timing of projects, to the special needs 


and conditions of the undeveloped areas. Guidance was obviously necessary. 


25.• Another important Agency function was to provide for safe handling and 
accounting of power reactor fuels, and the Director General's suggestion-' 
that all foreign shipments of source materials should he registered with the 
Agency deserved study. The Agency could also render its Members a valuable 
service by making available to them the results of current research and development 
programmes, which, as the Geneva Conference had shown, wore already im~ 
prossive when viewed as a whole. 


26. The United States accordingly proposed that the Agency should undertake, 
as an essential and immediate first stop, an intensive and continuing survey of 
existing reactor types, their costs, the criteria for their introduction into 
now areas, and the means by which it could promote nuclear power production at 
reasonable cost. The General Conference might also request the Board of 
Governors to submit, at the third regular session, a co-ordinated long-range 
programme of assistance to Members in the development or acquisition of nuclear 
power plant, with additional emphasis on the development of smaller plant 
suitable for areas whore the demand for power was limited. 
27. Sixthly, the Agency should continue to develop into a major centre for the 
collection and distribution of scientific information on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, and should encourage Members to make use of those services. It 
should sponsor scientific conferences and symposia with vigour and imagination 
in order that the most effective use might be made of the knowledge gained at 
Geneva and elsewhere. Further conforencos like that just concluded at Geneva 
should be held under the Agencyrs auspices, and it should act as a centre 
through which Members engaged in research on controlled thermonuclear fusion 
would freely exchange technical information and thus extend the constructive 
co-operation they had started at Geneva. The United States Government would 
co-operate fully to that end. 
$1 GC(II)/OR.14, paragraph 49. 


GC(II)/OR.l8 
Page 9 


28. The six United States proposals were based on sober recognition of the 
present state of nuclear science and technology, and on the knowledge that the 
Agency's resources were limited. To propose costly programmes at present 
would impede rather than promote attainment of the Agency's statutory objectives. 
If the Agency's programme, as recommended by the Board, wore carried out and 
further realistic projects of the kind just outlined were accepted, however, 
the Agoncy would make firm and significant progress towards its objectives in 
the coming year. 
29. In his historic address in 1953 President Eisenhower had envisaged the 
Agency as a symbol which would "allow all peoples of all nations to sec that 
... the great Powers of the earth •.. are interested in human aspirations 
first, rather than in building up the armaments of war"-^. In that spirit the 
United States reaffirmed its offer of 5,000 kg of uranium-235 for the Agency's 
use, and would continue to match the offers of all other Members until 1 July 
i960. By such steps, coupled with progress in disarmament, the day when the 
Agency would be the principal custodian of the world's fissionable material 
would be brought closer. If the Agency moved forward wisely, the world would 
be infinitely richer, and the Agency's example of international co-operation 
for a common purpose might lead to the lasting peace sought by all mankind. 
30. 3S£r. El AMABI (Tunisia) expressed satisfaction at the remarkable 
progress made by the Agoncy during its first year of operation. The comments 
he was about to make should not be interpreted as criticisms, they wore intended 
rather to point to activities which wore, or could be, of special 
interest to small countries such as his own. 
31. The Agency should, in the first place, act as a sort of bureau of standards 
- it could, for instance, define methods for the irradiation and utilization of 
isotopes and, in conjunction with other international organizations, recommend 
standard handling techniques and health and safoty measures. 
32. It should also pay close attention to the co-ordination of research programmes, 
taking due account of special experience or skills gained in particular 
fields by various countrios, in order to secure the most rational use of 
United Nations document A/PV. 470,paragraph 122. 



GC(II)/0E.18 


Page 10 


available knowledge and facilities. Tunisia, for example, as an essentially 


agricultural and maritime country, would naturally develop its research primarily 
in plant and marine biology and oceanography, but the results would 
undoubtedly be of general and not merely local interest. 


33. Moreover, the Agency could usefully investigate the economics of small 
reactors. Previous studies had related mainly to large reactors of 100 MW or 
more, which, at least for the time being, could find no place in the smaller 
or less advanced countries^ but those countries formed a majority of the 
Members of the Agency and looked to it for just such specialized assistance 
and technical co-operation in bringing about the free exchange of scientific 
information. 
34. Tunisia proposed, under its six-year plan, to set up a small research 
reactor during the coming six months, and every second year thereafter a power 
reactor for the production of industrial heat for enterprises manufacturing 
commodities required to develop its agriculture. It therefore placed great 
hopes jln co-operation between the Agency's experts and Tunisian technicians in 
investigating the theoretical and practical problems raised by the plan. 
35* His Government also greatly desired the Agency to underwrite the international 
financing of national programmes executed with Agency assistance. Such 
guarantees might often be a decisive factor in persuading banks or other institutions 
that a given project was financially viable. It would be difficult 
to deny that one of the duties of an international organization such as the 
Agency was to grant material aid to under-developed countries for the purpose 
of implementing projects designed to improve and balance their economies in the 
interest of world prosperity and stability - always provided, of course, that 
those countries undertook to discharge honourably the obligations they had incurred, 


36. The Tunisian delegation, in common with many others, believed that the 
Agency should seek to co-ordinate its activities as closely as possible with 
those of the specialized agencies, more particularly the International Labour 
Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization and the 'Yorld Health 
Organization^ in that respect it associated itself with the proposal made at 

GC(II)/OR.18 
Page 11 


a previous meeting by the head of the French delegation.^-* Such co-ordination 
was hound to enhance the prestige and authority of the Agency and so assist it 


to become the instrument which the authors of its Statute had intended it to he. 


37* Tunisia was a small country rich in traditions and culture, hut poor in 
ready economic resources. It counted greatly on the co-operation of its friends, 
both old and new, for the assistance it needed to exploit its latent economic 
and intellectual potentialities and to attain the objectives for which the 
Agency had been created. 


38. Mr. TAMMES (Netherlands) said that at the time of its establishment 
the Agency had been regarded as having three main objectives. They followed 
one from the other, and had been recognised successively. 
39* The first was to spread the benefits of nuclear energy, particularly 
nuclear power, equally over the world, and more especially therefore to the 
less-developed countries. 


40. The second was to prevent the peaceful use of atomic energy from raising 
the world level of radioactivity beyond reasonably safe limits. His delegation, 
among others, had had in mind that an effective system of control of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy might create a climate more favourable to control of 
other uses and to comprehensive disarmament. 
41. The Agency's third main objective was the co-ordination and planning of 
international effort for the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
That had only become fully recognized as a necessary aim through realization 
that a large number of specialized activities within the Agency's field had in 
fact already been started. 
42. Sach of those three objectives was, fundamental to the Agency. Its other 
functions were secondary, and nothing had intervened since its inception to 
change that picture. He would consider each objective in turn in the light of 
present circumstances. 
43. Spectacular direct contributions to development of the use of atomic energy 
were not, of course, to be expected at the present stage. A cautious approach 
was indicated, owing to the very nature of the subject. The Agency had made a 
slow start, but would keep pace with the march of technological events. 
§* GC(II)/OR.16, paragraph 10. 


GC(II)/0E.18 
Page 12 


44. Valuable as the exchanges of information had been at the second Geneva 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Snergy, many experts still felt that 
it was difficult for electricity authorities, planning to build nuclear power 
installations^ to decide what equipment to choose;- the execution of certain 
countries' programmes might consequently be delayed. One of the problems with 
which the Agency \vould need to deal in the next few years was therefore the 
choice of the reactors best suited to particular countries. Fuel costs, the 
size of the reactor, the amount of capital investment required and many other 
factors differed from place to place. It would be helpful if the fact-finding 
teams, whose activities were to be extended under the 1959 programme, wore to 
do preliminary work on the evaluation of different types of reactor. 
45. One of the most important of the Agency's tasks in the near future was 
technical assistance to Member States. In some cases, before a country could 
make full and effective use of atomic power its scientists needed to acquaint 
themselves with the principles of atomic physics and atomic energy in small 
chemical, physical and isotope laboratories. Fact-finding, teams of experts 
were needed to investigate such cases. They in their turn could not do their 
job properly unless they had laboratory facilities of their own. The Agency 
laboratory envisaged in the programme ought therefore not merely to perform 
servicing functions, but also to provide the Agency's scientists with a place 
in which to prepare for their work. 
46. Regarding the second of the Agency's main objectives, his delegation was 
in favour of having a Division of Safeguards. The Agency must prepare for the 
time whon its Llembers would eventually authorize it to perform its safeguarding 
functions. 
47. With regard to the third objective, work on atomic energy had been started 
in a quite uncoordinated manner by institutions within States, by States and by 
various international organizations. The Agency could at least promote coordination 
among international organizations, which were not sovereign States, 
and even formal relationships between thorn should be constantly adaptable to 
changing conditions and needs. Delimitation of their spheres of competence was 
less important than provisions - such as those included in the proposed relationship 
agreements with specialized agencies - far mutual consultation when overlapping 
threatened. In addition to the' conclusion of formal bilateral agreements 

GC(II)/OR.l8 
Page 13 


between international organizations, channels for continuous consultation 
between certain of them had already been opened, pernanent representatives were 
being exchanged, and joint organs had been set up. The decisions of the joint 


organs were bound to affect the decisions of the participating organizations, 
which would thus be welded, so to speak, into a system of autonomous systems. 
The United Nations Administrative Committee on Co-ordination was an outstanding 
example of such an organ. It would be desirable to have, in addition, a 


similar body at the policy-making level. 


48. In its resolution 694 S (XXVl)-^ the Economic and Social Council had pointed 
out that effective co-ordination required, in addition to formal bilateral 
arrangements under the relationship agreements, the development of day-to-day 
working relationships within the framework of general multilateral arrangements 
for co-ordination. His delegation emphatically agreed. It looked forward to 
the achievement of concerted action in the sense of a jointly-conceived and 
united plan aiming at a broad common objective. 
49. Two fields where such concerted action would be valuable were radiation 
hazards and waste disposal. In the first there was as yet no comprehensive 
plan integrating "he activities of various specialized agencies, the United 
Nations, and the Agency5 a unified, jointly-conceived plan was imperative. 
50. The second question had been raised at the United Nations Conference on 
the Law of the Sea in connexion with sea pollution, and at the second Geneva 
Conference, where the Netherlands delegation had drawn attention to the need 
for international control of contamination in Western Europe. The Netherlands, 
owing to its geographical position, was particularly interested in research 
on waste disposal into the sea and rivers. Worldwide co-operation between 
experts was required for the collection and analysis of all available data on 
the v/ay in which radioactive nuclides in water moved into and through mineral 
and biological systems. 
51. The Agency might properly be expected to play an initiating and stimulating 
part in all fields in which it had primary responsibilities. That task would 
be facilitated by the establishment of regular relations with the Economic and 
^/ GC(11)51, Appendix. 



GC(II)/OR.18 
Page 14 


Social Council, to which it should submit annual reports to serve as a basis 
for the Council's annual debate on co-ordination, harmonization and .concerted 
planning. 


52. A principle fundamental to the conception of the Agency was that of 
voluntariness. The Agency had been conceived as one which would operate 
effectively only in so far as its Members were prepared to use it, by providing 
and receiving assistance. Certain Kember States seemed to be less sure that 
they wanted to use it than had originally been expected. Nevertheless, a great 
deal of devoted work had been put into the Agency, and its staff had become a 
force in its own right. A stage would soon be reached when the Agency would 
move forward under its own power. There was no going backs substantial funds 
had been put into the Agency and the only choice was to go forward with all 
available energy. 
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.19 
13 November 1958 

ENGLISH 


General Conference 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETEENTH MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 25 September 1958,at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


11 
General debate and report of the Board of Governors 
for the year 1957-58 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of Czechoslovakia, Burma, 
Bulgaria, Pakistan, Morocco, Ceylon, Argentina, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 1 - 81 


* GC(II)/57. 
N.B. The list of delegations attending the second regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/l7/Rev.3. 

GC(II)/0B.19 


Pago 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1957-58 
(GC(II)/39) (continued) 


1. Mr. WINKLER (Czechoslovakia) stressed the vital importance of 
thoroughly examining the Agency's work and the results achieved since the first 
session of the General Conference, in view of the fact that the Agency was 
called upon to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy throughout the world. 
2. Sinco it had found out how to release the forces concealed in the nucleus 
of the atom, mankind was confronted with a historic choices either to use the 
new form of energy for the further advancement of civilization or to allow it 
to he turned against man himself. It was imperative to take all possihle 
stops to ensure that atomic energy was used exclusively for peaceful purposes. 
To that end, it was necessary to avert for ever the danger of atomic destruction, 
to prevent any misuse of atomic energy for military purposes, and to 
prohibit all nuclear weapons. In accomplishing those tasks, the Agency could 
play a decisive part, as it was not only entitled, but in duty bound to do 
under its Statute. 
3. It was only natural that in the first year of its operation, the Agency 
should havo had to faco the difficulties of any new organization making a start 
in a new field of international co-operation, The task had boon, and continued 
to be, to find the best means of attaining its statutory objectives and of overcoming 
the lack of experience in this as yet unexplored field of activity, 
The initial programme—' had been extremely valuable in formulating the Agency's 
tasks. With regard to methods of work, the Agency had greatly benefited from 
the spirit of conciliation and understanding that had marked its establishment. 
Since the first session of the General Conference an international secretariat 
had been set up, which was able to provide the necessary technical and administrative 
services and to ensure proper administration. The Czechoslovak 
delegation was hopeful that the shortcomings in the equitability of geographical 
distribution among the Secretariat staff would be corrected before long. 
4. Promising initial steps had been taken on some parts of the Agency's 
operational,programme, in particular the training and exchange of scientists 
and experts, the collection and exchange of scientific and technical documentation, 
the setting up of the Agency's library and work with radioisotopes. 
1/ OO.l/l. 



GC(II)/0E.19 
Pago 3 


Those wore only a few of the tasks in the initial programme, however; many of 
them had romainol undone. Unfortunately, despite the express recommendation made 
by the first special session of the General Conference in a resolution adopted 


2, 


on 22 Octohor 1957 ,the tasks which had not been undertaken wore mainly those 
whose accomplishment would have resulted in immediate benefit for the underdeveloped 
countries. The General Conference should therefore give special 
attention to that matter. In future, the decision of the first session of the 
General Conference on priorities should be fully respected and the Agency's work 


should be judged solely on the extent to which it had contributed to the peaceful 
development of atomic energy and brought effective assistance to Member 


countries, particularly in the undor-dovelopcd areas. 


5. Some parts of the programme and budget for 1959—'^ were not free from 
tendencies which failed to take those criteria into due account. Under the 
influence of certain Members represented on the Board of Governors and advanced 
in the technology of atomic energy, elements had been introduced into the 
programme which might completely change the character of the Agency and transform 
it into a centre for fundamental research, which would be alien to the 
spirit of the Statute. If the Agency wore to follow that course, it might be 
led to undertake ambitious projects which would impose an excessive financial 
burden on it for many years. Ordinary caution required, therefore, that the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee should examine the proposed budget 
with care, not only in the light of the figures for 1959, but especially in the 
light of its implications for the future. 
6. To be successful, the Agency must avoid becoming the scene of conflicts 
between political interests. It must become a truly international organization 
based on the noble principle of world-wide co-operation for the benefit of all 
nations, on scientific and technical collaboration and on genuinely unselfish 
effort to assist the less developed areas. It was therefore important that the 
Agency should maintain a spirit of negotiation and mutual understanding, which had 
boon a feature of its establishment and had characterized the work of the Preparatory 
Commission, but unfortunately had not always been preserved during the 
first year of operation. 
2/ GC.1(s)/RESOLUTIONS.. GC.1(S)/EBS/5(C)3. 
3/ GC(II)/36. 



GC(II)/OR.19 


Page 4 


7. Czechoslovakia had, of course, taken an active part in setting up the 
Agency from the very beginning and had endeavoured to help make it an effective 
instrument of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
At the first session of the General Conference, Czechoslovakia, as a country 
with considerable resources of nuclear material and highly developed industries, 
had declared itself willing to give the Agency its full support and the benefit 
of its experience in the peaceful uses of atomic energy—'5 the Czechoslovak 
Government had accordingly decided during the past year to authorize the Central 
Technical Library of the Czechoslovak Republic in Prague to supply the Agency, 
in co-operation with other Czechoslovak libraries, regularly and free of charge, 
with technical and legal publications, films and miorofilms relating to atomic 
energy. The first consignment had been delivered to the Agency in May 1958. 
In July, the Czechoslovak Government had decided to place at the disposal of 
the Agency, for the less developed countries, thirteen fellowships in Prague, 
at the Charles University (Faculty of technical and nuclear physics), the 
Secondary Industrial School of Nuclear Technology and the Institute of Nuclear 
Physics of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, starting in the academic year 
1958/1959j and two fellowships for research training in radiobiology at the 
Biophysical Institute of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences at Brno. 


8. On the occasion of the second regular session of the General Conference, 
the Czechoslovak Government had decided to offer to the Agency the services of 
ten consultants and experts on the utilization of radioisotopes, reactor programmes, 
health measures and the handling of radioactive materials. The 
Czechoslovak Government had also decided to offer to the Agency free of charge, 
and as a voluntary contribution, special measuring apparatus of Czechoslovak manufacture 
to the value of 100,000 crowns. He recalled the keen interest shown by 
many countries and by the Agency itself in the Czechoslovak exhibits of measuring 
apparatus at the Second United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy, held at Geneva. 
9. One of the main tasks of the Agency was to contribute effectively to the 
building of roactors - experimental and research reactors, and ultimately power 
reactors - in order to provide. States suffering from an acute shortage of power 
with a fresh source of onergy to help them step up their economic development 
and raise the living standards of their populations. 
4/ GC. l(S)/0S.10, paragraph 20. 



GC(II)/OR.19 
Pago 5 


10. Czechoslovakia had for years devoted considerable attention to the problem 
of utilizing nuclear processes for electric power production and had taken a 
number of practical stops towards solving it. Taking 1943 as 100, electric 
power production had increased to 252 in 1957, and was absorbing about 20 per 
cent of Czechoslovakia's coal output. Since coal was becoming increasingly 
important as a raw material for the modern chemical industry, it was therefore 
evident why Czechoslovakia was devoting so much attention to building nuclear 
power stations. The first was under construction, and in that connexion 
Czechoslovak scientists and engineers had greatly benefited from the invaluable 
and unselfish assistance of the USSR, 
11. The Czechoslovak Government was following with sympathy the Agency's plans 
for helping those States for whose economic development nuclear energy was 
most essential. As it had demonstrated at the Second Geneva Conference, 
Czechoslovakia was prepared to assist other countries and to share with them 
the experiences and results obtained from its cwn research work. The Czechoslovak 
delegation was pleased to announce that the Czechoslovak Government was 
prepared to offer the Agency natural uranium for its programme of assistance to 
the less developed countries. Details of the offer would be given as soon 
as the needs of Member States for that material were known. In the future., 
Czechoslovakia could supply uranium concentrates and ore. In making that 
offer the Czechoslovak Government was confident that the Agency's activities 
relating to assistance in building reactors would proceed successfully. 
12. It was to be regretted that in that important field very little, if anything, 
had boon done in the first year of the Agency's activities. At the 
first session of the General Conference, the previous year, fissionable materials 
had been offered in large quantities - up to 5,000 kg or more. However, the 
offer*^ was apparently on a commercial basis5 the terms had not been specified 
beyond the point that the price could not be lower than that fixed for the 
domestic market by commercial undertakings. The USSR offer, on the other hand, 
stated that the material would be made available at the lowest international 
prices obtaining at the time of delivery. As the Director General had said in 
his statement at the opening of the present session, some preferential terms must 
be given to the Agency by the offering countries to induce governments to 
6/ 


utilize the channels of true international co-operation^. The Czechoslovak 


5/ QC.l/OH.l, paragraph 35. 
6/ GC(II)/OR.14, paragraph 50. 


GC(II)/OR.19 


Page 6 


delegation trusted that the Director General's appeal would receive favourable 
consideration and that the terms of the offers, in particular of the biggest 
one, v/ould soon ho satisfactorily clarified, so that Memher States interested 
in obtaining fissionable material could submit their requests to the Agency. 
It was also to be hoped that the present session of the General Conference 
would help to solve the economic problem of creating conditions under which the 
loss advanced countries could carry out reactor programmes with the ultimate 
objective of establishing an electric power industry, which was a keystone of 
national economic development and improved standards of living. 


13. It was the Czechoslovak delegation's hope that the activities of the Agency 
would develop in accordance with its Statute and the United Nations Charter. 
The Agency should work in close co-cporation with the United Nations. The 
basis for such co-operation was provided by the relationship agreement with the 
7/ 


United Nati ons— , which should now be brought into force. 


14. The Czechoslovak delegation could not accept the view that the special 
status of the Agency might be an obstacle to close relations with the United 
Nations. On the contrary, the purpose of the provisions governing the Agency's 
relationship with the United Nations General Assembly and Security Council was 
to make the relationship between the Agency and the United Nations even closer 
than that between the United Nations and the specialized agencies. In addition, 
it was essential for the Agency to becono, in the shortest possible time, a 
living and efficient specialized technical organization. Those wore the 
essential conditions for its development. The Agency might take an example 
from the methods of work of the Conference of Experts held recently at Geneva—' 
and from the first two United Nations Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy. Negotiations could bring fruitful results if political controversy 
was loft aside and the parties ah-.wed a genuine desire to contribute, 
through the progress of science and technology, to the improvement of living 
standards. 
15. The Agency would be successful only if all countries wore invited to take 
part in its work on an equal footing. It was significant that the Agency's 
Headquarters were at Vienna, the capital city of a neutral country. 
1/ GC.1/3. 


0/ Conference of exports to study the methods of detecting violations of a 
possible agreement on the suspension of nuclear tests. 


GC(II)/0E.19 
Pago 7 


16. Finally, he hoped that the Agency's work would help to bring nearer the 
day when atomic energy would serve all mankind; the Czechoslovak Government 
was determined to contribute to the achievement of that noble objective. 
17. Mr. NYUNT (Burma) said that he would like to record his Government's 
satisfaction at the first annual report of the Board of Governors, The 
Burmese Government considered that the Board, the Secretariat and in particular 
the Director Gercral had worked well during this first year. 
18. Burma, with a population of about twenty millions, whose per capita 
income and energy consumption wore among the lowest in the world, could be 
considered a typical example of an under-developed country interested in the 
rapid development of atomic energy. In 1955, though short of technical staff, 
the Burmese Government had established the Union of Burma Atomic Energy Centre 
to deal with all matters relating tc atomic energy. That organization had 
spent its first two years in acquainting itself with problems relating to 
nuclear energy and in studying local conditions. In order to formulate a 
definite fuel policy, his Government had boon conducting a series of fuel 
surveys. The total installed electric power capacity in Burma was only about 
160,000 kW, That power was supplied by thermal plants, and 8ofo of all the 
fuel used was wood. It was important to reduce that wasteful consumption. 
Burma was importing coal at the rate of 250,000 tons annually, and the prospects 
of exploiting domestic resources economically did not seem good. The known 
reserves of 90 million barrels of oil would probably be exhausted in 25 years. 
Fortunately, however, Burma had a hydro power potential estimated at 2 -3 
million kW, and the first large-scale hydroelectric project of 240,000 k¥ was 
already under construction. When brought into service it was expected to 
satisfy the increased demand for a fow years to come. It seemed, therefore, 
that nuclear power plants were not an urgent necessity for Burma, though the 
possibility of nuclear power becoming increasingly competitive with hydroelectric 
power must be seriously considered. 
19. The President of the Geneva Conference, Mr, Perrin, had said that, for 
an under-developed country to benefit from the industrial applications of 
nuclear energy, it must first havo reached a certain level of industrial 
development and technical competence. His country's problem, like that of 
many other small under-developed countries, was to plan an atomic energy 
development programme suited to local needs. The Union of Burma Atomic Energy 

QC(II)/0H.19 


Page 8 


Centre had accordingly drawn up a programme comprising two main points, 
first, to continue and intensify the survey of the country's possible supply 
of uranium and thorium ores and, secondly, to establish at once a nuclear 
laboratory equipped to handle radioisotopes for use in research in agriculture, 
medicine, food preservation, industrial processes and protection 
against radiation. The laboratory would also servo as a training centre 
for specialists in reactor technology, 


20. In conclusion he said that his Government had high hopes for the success 
of the Agency's work. His delegation had listened with great interest to 
the comments of fellow delegates, and it hoped that the Agency's work could 
be carried on in an atmosphere of harmony and co-operation. After the very 
short trial period of one year, there wore grounds for hoping that the Agency 
would continue to develop into a truly universal scientific organization, 
unhampered by politics, to which under-developed countries could turn with 
confidence. 
21. Mr. HADZHAKOV (Bulgaria) noted with satisfaction the organizational 
work already done by the Agency - preparation of plans and establishment of 
technical and administrative services - towards the implementation of the initial 
programme adopted at the first session of the General Conference. Among other 
tasks, the Director General and the Board of Governors should devote their 
attention to the exchange of specialists, the training of scientific staff, 
the organization of scientific conferences and seminars, the dissemination of 
technical information and the promotion of scientific research. 
22. One of the most important activities of the Agency was undoubtedly the 
supply of fissionable and source materials and atonic fuels. He recalled that 
the General Conference at its first session had recommended the Board to give 
high priority to those activities which "will givo the maximum possible benefit 
from the peaceful applications of atomic energy in improving the conditions 
and raising the standard of living of the peoples in the under-developed 
areas "-^. 
23. In his view, the Agency's activities so far had not boon sufficiently in 
conformity with the recommendations made by the General Confcrenco at its first 
session. For example, it was clear from paragraph 9 of the Board's Report that 
2/ GC.1(S)/RES0LUTI0ATS, GC.1(s)/RES/5(c)3. 


GC(II)/0H.19 


Page 9 


no substantia,! assistance had been given to any under-developed area in spite 
of the fact that considerable quantities of fissionable materials had been 
placed at the Agency's disposal. It was extremely regrettable that the 
Director General and the Board had not made sufficient effort to take advantage 
of those offers. The Board of Governors was right to stress, in the same 
paragraph, the desirability of working out some guidance on the prices and terms 
upon which fissionable and source materials would be supplied to Member States. 


24. If the Agency could induce the supplying countries to deliver their 
materials at a more favourable price than that prevailing on the world market 
and on conditions precluding all interference in the domostic affaire of States, 
the problem would be easily solved; many States would then request assistance 
from the Agency and its authority would thus be enhanced. In any event, the 
last obstacles would disappear as soon as the supplying countries sincerely 
desired to give effective aid to the countries in need of it. 
25. Bulgaria was benefiting from the valuable and altruistic help of the 
Soviet Union through a bilateral agreement, under which an atomic institute 
and several scientific research laboratories for the preparation and use of 
radioisotopes were being built. Bulgaria also had access to the Joint 
Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna. The assistance provided by the 
Soviet Union was not subject to any conditions which might constitute interference 
in the internal affairs of Bulgaria. 
26. It was thus understandable that Bulgaria could only accept assistance from 
the Agency on clearly-defined and favourable terms. The report of the Board 
of Governors showed that that attitude was shared by others, since so far no 
country, either of the East or the West, had asked for the Agency's help. The 
Director General should give close attention to the matter, for if the Agency 
wore to fail in that respect its existence would no longer be justified. 
27. One of the Director General's initial tasks had been to recruit the 
requisite administrative staff. A larger staff than that recommended in the 
initial programme should not be appointed. A small staff, which would assemble 
the necessary data not by its own research but by using the results obtained in 
other countries, would be in a bettor position to carry out the work of the 
Agency, 

GC(II)/OR.19 
Pago 10 


28. The choice of experts to be sent on mission to under-developed countries 
was particularly delicate, and called for precise guidance from the Board of 
Governors, since the work of such exports would relate not only to technical 
assistance by the Agency, hut also to the question of safeguards designed to 
ensure that the materials supplied would he used for peaceful purposes only, 
29. In 1956, during the discussion of the article in the Statute concerning 
safeguards, the United Kingdom and United States representatives had advocated 
a method of control which would have involved real interference in the 
domestic affairs of recipient countries. The assistance given hy the Soviet 
Union under bilateral agreements, on the other hand, was not subject to any 
control or conditions. 
30. So long as the detailed conditions of technical assistance, and especially 
safeguards, had not been worked out, the Agency would not be in a position to 
provide the services desired. It was significant that not a single gram 
of the 5*000 kilograms^of uranium offered by the United States of America had 
yet been used. 
31. Even the most resolute advocate of safeguards could not seriously believe 
that a country, especially a small country, which had obtained fissionable 
materials from the Agency, would'undertake the manufacture of atomic or thermonuclear 
bombs instead of using the materials received for the advancement of 
science and of civilization. 
32. Ho then made some suggestions for the Agency's programme. The Agency 
should circulate as soon as possible detailed information on the fissionable 
materials, radioisotopes and radioactive standards obtainable from its Member 
States, It should also publish summaries of prices and terns of supply of 
the equipment and products shown at the recent Geneva Conference on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. Further, the question of exchanging books and 
supplying Member States with photocopies of works in the Agency's library 
should be settled. 
33. The Director General and the Board of Governors should endeavour to 
dispol the distrust which still subsisted with regard to certain countries 
and to promote a spirit of real co-operation within the Agency, In that 
respect, examples provided by the second Geneva Conference and by the meetings 
held at Kitzbtfhi and Vienna might well be followed. 

GC(II)/0H.19 
Pago 11 


34. Finally, he thought it would he in conformity with the objectives of the 
Agency for it to appeal to its Members to stop testing atomic and thermonuclear 
weapons, as the Soviet Union had already done. All delegations should 
show their countries' desire to promote the use of atomic energy exclusively 
for peaceful purposes for the greatest good of mankind. 
35> Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) first read the following message from the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan, Mr. Malik Firoz Khan Noons "The inauguration of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency last year was an event of great historical 
significance. During the years following the end of the second World War, 
the groat constructive potentialities of the atom had been amply demonstrated;; 
and it was rightly considered desirable that the nations of the world should 
co-operate in an all-out effort to harness the atom for the good of mankind. 
The Agency thus represents the first practical step towards this co-operative 
effort. Since then it has boon engaged in the necessary ta,sk of organization 
and mobilization of staff and it is now in a position to move towards the 
realization of the objectives set out in its Statute. Its Member States, 
particularly the loss developed countries, are eagerly looking forward tc the 
fulfilment of its promise. Thoy arc convinced that the peaceful atom employed 
in the fields of power generation, agriculture, health and industry can yield 
rich dividends and help materially in raising xhc standard of living of their 
people. On behalf of the people and the Government of Pakistan, I wish all 
success to the Agency in the task ahead erf it". 

36. As a Member of the Board of Governors, Pakistan would leave it to the Conference 
to evaluate the Board's work. Ho wished to say, hovrever, that the 
Board had worked diligently and conscientiously under the enlightened guidance 
of its Chairman, Mr. Y/inklcr, and with the constant assistanco of the Director 
General and the Secretariat. The Board should concern itself predominantly 
with, deciding policy and leave its execution to the executive and administrative 
staff as much as possible. It might not be necessary for the Board to meet as 
frequently as it had done in the past. 
37. Now that the work of organization had boon done, the Agency -could undertake 
the realization of the objectives which, at the time of its establishment, 
had aroused so auch enthusiasm throughout the world. The real tost of whether 
the Agency would be ablo to achieve positive results would come the following 
year, which might, indeed, prove crucial for it. 

GC(II)/0S.19 
Page 12 


38. In regard to selection of staff, while due consideration should ho given 
to the technical competence and integrity of candidates, it was no less 
important that recruitment should he carried out on as wide a geographical 
basis as possible§ that would help to give the Agency a universal character 
and would offer the nationals of the loss developed countries excellent 
training facilities and a wider field of work. 
39' It was gratifying to note that the fellowship and training programme had 
started in a manner that augured woll for the future, that the Agency had 
begun to send teams of experts to various countries and that it had undertaken 
the preparation of a directory of research and power reactors as well as of 
nuclear equipment. That type of work, however, was only a first step towards 
the realization of the greater objectives laid down in the Statute. 

40. He emphasized the ever growing interdependence of the advanced and the 
less developed areas of the world. Doubtless the former wore in a bettor 
position to take full advantage of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, but 
that advantage would remain comparatively restricted if the loss developed 
areas wore not helped to make use of the products of atomic energy. In the 
long run, thereforef it was in the interests of the advanced countries to 
narrow rather than to widen the gulf which separated them from the others. 
41. While the use of radioisotopes could mako a significant contribution to 
the health and well-being of the people, it was in generating power that the 
atom could be most useful. Moreover, it was in that application that the more 
advanced countries wore making their greatest efforts. Power generation was 
in fact essential for developing the resources of an under-developed country 
and for raising the standard of living of its people. TThero the conventional 
sources of energy wore inadequate, impractical or uneconomic, it was necessary 
that they should be supplemented by nuclear power. It had boon hinted that 
one of the lessons of the second Geneva Conference was that the development of 
nuclear power was not likely to be realized in the immediate future. However, 
the conclusions to be drawn from the reports submitted to that Conference and 
from the scientific progress achieved and planned by the more developed 
countries pointed in the opposite direction. Moreover, with the possibility 
of thermonuclear fusion as a source of power lying in the not too distant 
future, every effort should be made to utilize the tremendous reserves of energy 

GC(II)/OR.19 
Pago 13 


which could he released by the fission process, as otherwise the great effort 
made in that direction in the mining of source materials, production of enriched 
fuels, reactor technology, fabrication, etc,, might not be utilized to 


the full extent. 


42. Furthermore, the functions of the Agency in regard to such matters as 
safety and health measures and the disposal of waste products, would have little 
significance if they were restricted, for example, to the use of radioisotopes 
and labelled compounds, and did not extend to the installation of research and 
power reactors, 
43. His Government hoped that in planning its future programme the Agency 
would pay special attention to the assistance in reactor technology leading 
tr 

, the generation <<f nuclear power, which it could give to those less 
developed countries that needed power, but wore short of conventional fuels. 
Similarly, source and fissionable materials should be supplied without interruption, 
so that countries could plan their programmes of economic development 
on a firm basie, 

44. It was to be hoped that the financial resources referred to in Article XIV 
of the Statute would be found adequate. However, as the voluntary contributions 
in cash lad not been very large and other sources of income had not yet 
begun to appear, the materials, equipment and services offered to the Agency 
should be supplied free or at a nominal charge and the less developed countries 
should be able tc obtain them at as low a cost as possible. If those measures 
failed to yield adequate resources for the Agency, perhaps the position would 
have to be reviewed in order to ensure that the operational budget was in 
balance with the administrative budget. 
45. Ho also shared the view that, so far as possible, duplication of work with 
other specialized agencies should be avoided, but that the Agency should be in 
a position to undertake studies and projects within its competence oven though 
other bodies might have boon concerned with them before it had boon set up. 
46. Finally, the Agency must be regarded primarily as a technical organization 
in which political controversies should be eschewed. The tasks before it wero 
heavy, but with the machinery sot up and the prevailing good will it was now in 
a position to go ahead. "To hoped that its progress would be rapid and its 

GC(II)/0E.19 


Page 14 


achievements many so that, in accordance with its Statute, it would make 
atomic energy an instrument of peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world. 


47. Mr. ELFASSI (Morocco) ohserved that the election as President of 
the General Conference of the representative of a country which had previously 
been a colony showed the general wish to put an end to colonialism and the 
desirability of self-determination of peoples. 
48. Mankind could not ignore atomic energy, which could equally well become 
a grave menace or a source of incalculable benefits. The Agency should foster 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The second 
Geneva Conference had once more confirmed that the use of atomic energy was 
practicable. It should not be confined to the great economic Powers, but 
should be used to enable the loss advanced countries to develop, so as to do 
away for over with the poverty that bred unrest. 
49. 'The hopes of millions wero fixed on the Agency, and all men of good will 
must support the various activities on its programmes the supply of radioisotopes, 
materials and specialized equipment; technical assistance to underdeveloped 
countries§ the exchange of information and organization of scientific 
courses. Despite certain understandable delays, the progress made was promising, 
and the programme proposed for 1959 was in accordance with the Agency's 
main objectives. 
50. Morocco was convinced that the General Conference would wish to re-elect 
to the Board of Governors the delegate of the United Arab Republic, who had 
taken such an aotive part in the work of the outgoing Board. The League of 
Arab States had decided on 6 September 1958 to submit his candidature, hoping 
thereby to participate effectively in the direction of the Agency in order to 
help it discharge its responsibilities in the interests of world peace. 
51. Morocco, like the other Arab countries, placed great hopes in the Agency 
and asked for its help in several fields, first and foremost of which was the 
production of nuclear power. A brief roforonco to the power situation in 
Morocco would show the part that atomic energy could and should play in the 
development of a country which was at present loss developed than others. In 
the part of Morocco bounded by the Mediterranean, the Atlantic Ocean and the 
Atlas mountains, an electricity grid provided an annual output of approximately 

GC(II)/0E.19 
Pago 15 


one thousand million kWh. In that area the problem was to develop basic 
industries5 and atomic energy would help if it could be competitive with conventional 
sources of power, 


52. But there wore also semi-desert and completely arid regions in Morocco, 
No doubt the discovery of oil in the Sahara could be expected to add a significr,
nt power potential5 but for the development of the abundant mineral 
resources of those regions and the execution of the irrigation works necessary 
for agriculture, Morocco had only expensive power at its disposal, owing to the 
high cost of transporting fuel. It therefore intended to ask the Agency whether 
it would be possible to install small power reactors in those regions. It was 
not deterred by the high cost. Yfhereas the average cost of electricity per 
kWh was from 3 to 4 French francs, in the arid regions of Morocco it was over 
25 francs. , Thus the installation of reactors there would be an economic 
proposition, particularly as the presence of ores would make it possible to 
establish industries. In that field, the Agency could collaborate with 
UNESCO5 one of whoso major projects was the development of arid zones. 
53. The second field was that of prospecting for radioactive ores which might 
be present in the very varied torrano of Morocco. Although it had a good 
geological service, Morocco would be glad to receive advice and expert missions 
from the Agency, as well as prospecting equipment. Experts sent by the Agency 
could also be of great help in solving the problem of separating uranium from 
the phosphates 01nod from Morocco's extensive deposits. 
54. His country also wished to take advantage of radioisotopes, especially for 
its agriculture, but it wished first to. know more about thoir various applications. 
55^ The Agency's fellowship scheme was orio of the most positive items on its 
initial programme. Qualified candidates from the loss developed countries 
being few, however., the Agency could usefully advise on which subjects and 
training programmes should be given priority. 


56. The most vital form of assistance would appear to be the sending of groups 
of experts to assist the loss developed countries to doter'minc which of their, 
problems atonic energy could help to solve. His delegation was very glad to 
note that extensive provision was made for that form of assistance in the 1959 
programme. 

GC(II)/OR.19 


Pago 16 


57. Since the atomic era had begun, the world had been living under a terrible 
menace and oven the future of the human race was at stake. It was to be hoped 
that, renouncing overweening ambition, mankind would give up nuclear weapons 
and use atomic science to bring about a better future. At a time when the 
leading atomic Powers wore about to stop their ill-omened nuclear tests, it was 
regrettable that other groat Powers should persist in their intention to produce 
thoir own atomic bombs and test them in regions which wished only to live 
in peace. 
10/ 


58. The United States proposal for a convention 011 third-party liability 
should be supported. It was even highly desirable that the Agency should 
solemnly condemn the misuse of atomic energy; there could be no doubt that, 
if some kind of world referendum could be held, the result Yrould confirm that 
view. 
59. Mr. FERNANDO (Ceylon) first observed how regrettable it was that 
controversies such as ho had witnessed at the beginning of the present session 
should occur in a conference whose only concern should be the peaceful use of 
atomic energy. The General Conference was not a platform for airing political 
grievances, comparing ideologies, or indulging in propaganda5 it had met to 
consider how the wonderful source of energy which the atom provided could be 
used to improve living conditions, not only for the people of a particular area, 
but for all mankind. Many less developed countries had sent delegations to the 
Conference because they hoped the Agency would help thorn to benefit from the 
forces concealed in the atom. Ho therefore made a solemn appeal to all Member 
States, and particularly to the Great Powers, not to allow the proceedings of the 
General Conference to be held up or compromised by politics. 
60. He had boon glad to note from the report of the Board of Governors that 
technical assistance for the less developed areas had been an essential part of 
most of the Agency's technical operations during its first year, and that 
measures had already been taken to organize expert missions and factfinding . 
teams. Ceylon would be very happy to have the help of Agency exports in 
drawing up an atomic energy programmo. His delegation also favoured the 
proposal to set up a scientific advisory body. 
61. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency had prepared a draft manual on 
protoction against radiation and convened a panel of experts on the subject. 
10/ GC(II)/0E.l8, paragraph 21. 



GC(II)/0H.19 
'Pago 17 


Undor the terms of its Statute, the Agency was the body competent to draw up 
health and safety codes as a guide for Member States and to ensure that uniform 
standards wore adopted. In that connexion, close co-operation v/as necessary 
with the specialized agencies to avoid duplication^ ho welcomed the steps taken 
to conclude draft agreements with the International Labour Organisation, the 
Pood and Agriculture Organization, the World Health Organization and the United 
Nations Educaxiona.1, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 


62. The fellowship programme was undoubtedly one of the Agency's most important 
activities; in drawing up that programme it must take account of the requirements 
of the less developed countries and their need for technicians. In his 
oral statement—' , the Director General had given the total number of candidates 
selected (l32) and perhaps ho would be able, before the end of the session, to 
show the distribution of fellowships according to countries. He (Mr. Fernando) 
12/ 


supported the suggestion of the United States delegate—' that other measures 
should be taken to make the Agency the central co-ordinating body for training 
of scientific personnel. He also welcomed the United States suggestion that 
the Agency should provide laboratory facilities for Member States, As one of 
the main functions of the Agency was to encourage the use of atomic energy in 
loss developed countries, he hoped that such facilities would be provided in 
the areas which most needed then - i.o. in countries outside Europe. There was 
also a need for further research with a view to reducing the costs of small 
power reactors, which could be carried out only in co-operation with research 
institutes and universities. The Agency should study the possibility of reducing 
costs by using thorium, which was available in large quantities in certain 
countries of South-East Asia, including India and Ceylon. 


63. The Agency should also find out what equipment the less developed countries 
needed and try to supply it. The Great Powers had promised to supply equipment, 
and the Agency might well become a centre for its allocation and distribution. 
64. Mr. LOPEZ (Argentina) recalled that his country had boon a member of 
the Preparatory Commission and of the outgoing Board of Governors5 ho was glad 
that the Agency had successfully completed the first stages of its existence. 
65. It was, of course, necessary to go carefully in opening up new ground as 
the Agency was doing. Ho thought ho should warn the Agency against the 
11/ GC(II)/OR.14, paragraph 3912/ 
GC(II)/03.l8, paragraph 22. 



GC(II)/0E.19 
Page 18 


distinctly political trend sometimes taken by the debates -a trend which, must 
inevitably impair the efficiency of its technical work. If it was to fulfil 
its statutory obligations, the Agency must operate calmly and dispassionately. 


66. The programme for 1959 was realistic and would aid the less developed 
areas. During its first years, the Agency should attach special importance 
to assisting countries in process of development, to onable them to gain the 
fullest advantage from the peaceful uses of atonic energy. Thus the Agency's 
experts should not concentrate on pure research as if it were an end in itself. 
The Agency should be able to advise its Members on their national programmes, 
for the peaceful use of atonic energy, promote the dissemination of technical 
and scientific information, co-ordinate research and draw up programmes for 
international co-operation. 
67. The mission v/hich had gone to the Latin American countries to study their 
training needs had concluded that a centre was necessary in that region—' . 
Argentina had been happy to rocoive the mission, and its report would be carefully 
studied by his Government, 
68. Technical assistance, health and safety, and radioactive waste disposal 
wore the points of the 1959 programme which his delegation wished to stress, 
69. The Agency could play a vital rolo in technical assistance. Duplication 
must be avoided, while ensuring close co-operation with other bodies dealing 
with technical assistance. The Argentine Government would collaborate to the 
best of its ability in that part of the programme. Since 20 January 1958,the 
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission had been operating a small training and 
research reactor, which had been built entirely in Argentina. The experience 
thus acquired was at the disposal of all Member States. Prospecting of uranium 
deposits was continuing in Argentina and the known reserves were considerable. 
Some deposits were already being exploited and limited quantities of ore were 
being concentrated and treated. 
70. The drafting of health and safety codes and work on waste disposal should 
be pursued most vigorously, in order to allay the anxieties which atomic energy 
still aroused in many people. In that connexion, too, Argentina hoped to 
receive the necessary technical assistance from the Agency. 
VbJ GC(II)/INF/19. 


GC(II)/OR.19 
Pago 19 


I1 

- Xfr. SEVCFEITKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
the last fow years had boon marked by enormous progress in nuclear physics and 
technology. That was clear from the papers presented at the second Geneva 
Conference, Tno Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which had been operating 
the first atomic power station for four years, had been able to announce cat the 
Geneva Conference that it was now sotting up a 100,000 kW atomic plant. 
Further developments would follow, such as the building of an ico-breaker, of 
cargo and passenger ships etc. The use of isotopes was increasing, and 
dotailcii studies were being carried out on controlled thermo-nuclear reactions. 
72. For all v,hat activity considerable efforts and resources were needed as 
well as extensive international cc-opcration. It was precisely for that 
purpose that the Agency had been established; but what practical results had it 
achieved since the previous year, The Byelorussian, together with other 
delegations, found that the Agency's activities could not be considered fully 
satisfactory. That was evident from the report of the Board of Governors and 
the statements made by several delegations. The Agency had been mainly concerned 
with questions of organization and administration and had therefore 
rather neglected the provision of practical help to Member States in the peaceful 
use of atomic energy. 
73. A year ago the General Conference had adopted a resolution providing that 
the Board should give high priority to those activities "which will give the 
maximum possible benefit from the peaceful application of atomic energy in improving 
the conditions and raising the standard of living of the peoples of the 
under-dovoloped areas11-*'. Unfortunately, however, it was clear that almost 
nothing had been done in that direction. Furthermore, according to paragraph 
9 of the report of the Board of Governors, there was even some doubt as 
to the value and practicability of constructing power, research and training 
reactors "in the near future outside the atomically more advanced countries". 
Thus, instead of taking concrete steps to popularize the practical advantages 
of building reactors in under-developed countries, the Agency was still procrastinating 
and maintaining a hesitant attitude, which the Byelorussian 
delegation was \mablo to accept. Experience showed how groundless such doubts 
were and made i-; essential that the Agency should help the under-developed 
14/ GC.1/R3S/5. 



GC(II)/0H.19 
Page 20 


countries to work out programmes for the peaceful use of atomic energy and to 
form their own senior scientific staff for the uso of isotopes in industry, 
agriculture, scientific research and medicine. 


74. Another significant fact was that the Agency had not yet put one gramme 
of fissionable material at the disposal of countries needing it. The report 
of the Board of Governors did not mention any requests for such a service. 
In the opinion of the Byelorussian delegation that was most significant5 it 
proved that countries which needed fissionable materials wore trying to procure 
them outside the Agency, But far from providing precise information on how to 
obtain such products at advantageous prices, the Agency had not yet established 
rules for determining the price of the fissionable materials which it could 
make' available. 
75. Paragraph 190 of the report of the Board of Governors mentioned, as an 
objective to be achieved in the near future, the establishment and equipment of 
a laboratory at the Agency itself. Everyone knew, however, what a modern 
laboratory involved and how exponsive were even slightly complex basic equipment 
and scientific and technical apparatus. Hence it was too soon to consider 
chat project, which would divert the Agency's resources from the urgent 
task of assisting the under-developed countries in numerous peaceful uses of 
atomic enorgy. 
76. The report of the Board of Governors showed that the Agoncy had not in 
fact done much towards attaining the objectives mentioned in the Statute, 
namely to "accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world". That was due, among other causes, 
to the fact that certain ,/estorn countries had boon trying to implant the idea 
of supervision in the Agency and to transform it into a supervisory body, 
whereas its main function should be to promote the use of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes. 
77. Atomic scientists, more than anyone else, were convinced of the inexhaustible 
possibilities of a "conic energy, they also know that its use for military 
purposes could result in incalculable calamities and sufferings for mankind. 
Nothing would contribute more to the success of the Agency's work than an end 
to the armaments race, and the conclusion of an agreement banning the manufacture 
of atomic and thormo-nuclear weapons. Particular attention should be 

GC(II)/OR.19 
Page 21 


paid to the initiative taken by the Soviet Union which., by its unilateral 
decision to suspend atonic and thermo-nucloar weapon tests, had taken an 
important practical stop towards bringing the armaments race to an end. 


78. On 31 Farch 1958 the Supremo Soviet of the USSR had appealed to the 
United Kingdom Parliament and the United States Congress to follow its example. 
But the United States and the United Kingdom, far from following the example of 
the Soviet Union, wore continuing the tests, which stimulated the armaments 
race, incroa-sod the risk of atomic war and contributed to the formation of a 
large mass of radioactive substances that were contaminating the air, the land 
and the son., It was well known that the United Nations Scientific Committee 
on the Effects of Atonic Radiation had recently emphasized the danger that 
entailed for present and future generations. 
15/ 


79. The experts who had recently mot in Geneva—^ had expressed the unanimous 
opinion that it was possible to establish a system for supervising the observance 
of an agreement for the universal suspension of nuclear tests. Ho regretted 
that the United States delegate had not said in his statement whether his 
Government intended to heed the appeal of the peoples of the entire world who 
wore demanding the cessation of nuclear tests. His delegation believed that 
if the Agency, with all its prestige and authority, wore to decide in favour 
of banning atonic and thorno-nucloar weapons, such a stop would be welcomed with 
deep satisfaction by the peoples of the wlnlo world. 
80. Eis country attached great importance to applying the achievements of 
atonic science and technology in national economies. Its scientific research 
institutes were engaged in theoretical studies on fundamental physics and 
nuclear reactors, with particular reference to heat exchange in nuclear power 
plants and the process of non-stationary heat transfer in fuel elements. 
Papers on that work had been road at the second Geneva Conference. Among the 
many uses of radioisotopes in industry, mention should be made of studies on 
the mechanism of dehydration of substances, the diffusion of metals during 
plastic deformation, the viscosity of metals treated under pressure, wear of 
punches, quality of lubricants used for hot punching, etc In medicine, radioisotopes 
were used in the diagnosis and treatment of many diseases. They had 
helped biologists to reveal nany interesting phenomena in biosynthesis and 
15/ Conference of exports to study the methods of detecting violations of a 
possible agreement on the suspension of nuclear tests. 



GC(II)/0E.19 
Page 22 


photosynthesis. In agriculture, they had played an important part in the 
study of rational utilization of peat and the host methods of soil fertilization. 


8l. His delegation believed that the present was a particularly suitable time 
for the Agency to demonstrate by its actions that it was capable of giving 
practical assistance in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Y/hat the peoples 
of the world desired was not empty words but positive achievements. 


The meotinff rose at 5.50 P.P. 



INTERNATIONAL 

ATOMIC 
ENERGY AGENCY 

Distr. 
GENERAL 


GC(II)/OR.20 
20 November 1958 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


8.14 at the Neue Hofburg, Vi.nn., 
on Friday, 26 September 1958,at 10.30 a.m. 
President: 
Mr, SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


later, 
Mr. YEMISCIBASI (Turkey) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


11 
General debate and Report of the Board of 1-73 
Governors for the year 1957-58 (continued)% 

Statements by the delegates of the United-
Kingdom, Romania, Canada, Mexico, Albania, 
una, Italy, the Republic of Korea and 
Viet-Nam 


* GC(II)/57. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the second regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/l7/Rev,3. 

GC(II)/OR.20 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE M D REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1957-58 
(GC(II)/39) (continued) 


1. The PRESIDENT observed that various speakers had complained of the 
intrusion of politics into the debates of the General Conference and into the 
Agency's affairs. In view of the political situation in the world and the 
international importance of atomic power, it seemed hardly practicable to 
exclude politics entirely:; hut the success of the General Conference and the 
Agency would be greatly helped if all concerned exercised the maximum of 
political toleration and did what they could to foster international good will. 
2. Sir Edwin PLOWDEN (United Kingdom) said that the Agency could not 
have been expected to achieve a great deal in its first year. In view of its . 
unavoidable early staffing and administrative difficulties, the Secretariat 
was to be congratulated on having drawn up the programme and budget in time 
for the General Conference. 
3. His Government wanted to see the Agency firmly established in its rightful 
place within the United Nations family. Satisfactory relationships would 
have to be worked out between it and other international organizations. The , 
agreements with the specialized agencies—' , being necessarily in general terms, 
would need to be supplemented by continuing consultation to prevent friction 
and duplication. While much could be done by friendly collaboration between 
the respective secretariats, the key to the matter was in the policy of Member 
States and in proper co-ordination within national administrations. The 
United Kingdom regarded the Agency as- the paramount organization dealing with 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
4. In the view of his delegation the Agency had two major functionss 
to provide a channel for international agreement and action on problems of. 
common concern, and to assist the technologically less developed countries. 
5. Matters in which he hoped the Agency would act under the first head were; 
insurance to cover third-party liability in the event of reactor accidents|, 
regulations for the transport of radioactive materials by land, sea and air, 
and for the operation of nuclear-propelled ships$ disposal of radioactive 
l/ GC(II)/46 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1, GC(II)/47, GC(II)/48, GC(II)/49, 
GC(II)/50 and Corr.1. 



GC(II)/OR.20 
page 3 


waste, --.nc. safe handling of radioactive isotopes. Agreement would have to 
be reached on the order of priority of those tasks. 


6. Another need was exchange of information. The two United Nations 
International Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy (the Geneva 
Conferences) had teen most valuable, but his delegation believed that in future 
a more profitable form of gathering would be a specialized conference of more 
modest size dealing with limited aspects of nuclear science and technology. 
It hoped that a scries of such specialized conferences would be held under the 
Agency's auspice8. 
7. v,iih roc~ard to assistance to the less developed countries, special 
survj; s, oither national or regional, would be required to ascertain the nature 
of the assistance needed by particular countries. The proposed regional 
training centre in Latin America might, if it proved successful, set a pattern 
worth following in other parts of the world. His country had provided an 
2/ 


expert to participate in the Latin American survey-7, and would be glad to give 
similar help on future occasions. 


3. The Agency could best help the less developed countries by organizing 
training schemes. It was to be hoped that the proposal to expand the 
fellowship programme, in paragraph 132 of the Board's First Annual Report 
(GC(II)/39),would receive general support. Training schemes ought to be 
linked with aspects of nuclear technology which could be exploited fruitfully 
in the immediate future, such as isotopes. Research directed to the development 
of new uses for isotopes might be undertaken partly by the Agency alone 
and partly in conjunction with national organisations, 
9. The Agency's programme had been criticised for failing to encourage the 
early builoing of small research and power reactors in the less developed 
countries. oome time must, however, elapse before small reactors became an 
economic proposition; the best thing the Agency could do for the less developed 
countries at present was therefore to help to prepare their scientists and 
engineers to op,rate the reactors when the time oame. Another task of 
ircnedi .to importance was to make economic studies of individual countries to 
ascertain -../here nuclear power could profitably be used, or to encourage countries 
to make such studies themselves. 
2/ Report of the IAEA Mission to Latin America (GC(II)/INF/l9). 



GC(II)./OR.20 
page 4 


10. In order to perform its functions the Agency must have both equipment and 
staff. It required a laboratory, which need not be large but should provide 
adoquato facilities for the Agency's technical staff. The need for staff was 
obvious, and although the Agency was not yet working on safeguards, his 
delegation was strongly in favour of the early staffing of the Division of 
Safeguards, in view of the Japanese delegate's statement earlier in the debate—' 
and because safeguards were one of the Agency's statutory responsibilities. 
Since, in addition to its own staff, the Agency would need outside advice, he 
welcomed the decision recently taken by the Board at its ninety-seventh meeting 
to establish a special Scientific Advisory Committee. 
11. The proposed programme for 1959 represented a reasonable and workable 
compromise between divergent views, and his delegation would do everything in 
its power to ensure the programme's success. He hoped that delegations v/ould 
adopt a constructive attitude and support the programme as a whole. It had 
beon conceived as a whole, and deletion of individual items might distort the 
pattern of the Agency's development, destroying the necessary balance between 
its two major functions. The United Kingdom Government wholeheartedly 
supported the Agency and the id.%as for which it stood. 
12. Mr. HIuUTZA (Romania) stressed the importance which his delegation 
attached to the successful operation of the Agency as an instrument for raising 
the living standards of the peoples of the world, protecting their health and 
maintaining and strengthening peace. To assist the Agency as it deserved, 
Romania was contributing to the fellowship programme. It had granted training 
followships at the Faculty of Physics of Bucharest University and in the 
Nuclear Technology Department of Bucharest Polytechnic Institute and followships 
for specialized study at the Romanian Institute of Atomic Physics. In view 
of the steady expansion in Romania of research, of the practical applications 
of nuclear energy and of training, the Romanian Government intended to make a 
still larger contribution towards the A ency's activities in future. 
13. The Atomic Centre of the Academy of the Romanian People's Republic 
'possessed a 2,000 kW reactor for research and isotope production, a 12.5 MeV 
cyclotron and woll-cquippod radiochemical, nuclear spectroscopy, cosmic ray and 


3/ GC(II)/OR.17, paragraphs 9 and 10. 
4_/ GC(II)/36. 



GC(II)/OR.20 
page 5 


other laboratories, most of the electronic apparatus for which had been made 
in Romania. The Soviet Union, under a bilateral agreement, had given the 
country a great deal of help in laying the- material foundations for the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy - on very favourable terms, without any 
preferential or discriminatory conditions* The agreement, which had been 
published, was a model for agreements of that kind. 


14. In addition to research, a great deal of work on the practical,uses of 
radioisotopes was being done in the Academy's scientific institutes, in the 
institutes of Government departments and in some large industrial plants. 
For example, the Ministry of the Oil Industry and Chemistry had had outstanding 
success in core-sa.mpling oilfields with neutrons and radioisotopes, the 
Academy's Institute of Applied Mechanics in the use of isotopes as lubrication 
tracers and the metallurgical industry in the use of gamma rays from cobalt-60 
radioisotopes for fault-detection. Increasing use of radioisotopes was 
being made in institutes of medicine, agricultural research, nutrition and 
other sciences, 
15. After eight months of.activity the Agency already.had certain modest 
achievements to its credit. The fellowship programme, for example, now 
comprised 268 fellowships. Assistance to the less developed countries was 
the Agency's most important task, and those countries needed, above all else, 
trained scientific and technical personnel. The: fellowship and technical 
assistance programme ought accordingly to be implemented in full, and even 
extended. On grounds of economy use should be made in the first place of the 
numerous experts offered by the more advanced Member States, 
16. His delegation was glad to note that more than 40,000 scientific works 
and documents were now in the Agency's possession, and hoped that the 
appropriate Division would manage to make them available to Member States in 
the near future. 
17. Despite its achievements, however, the Agency was not yet fulfilling 
effectively the main tasks prescribed for it by the Statute and recommended by 
the Preparatory Commission in its report^- namely co-ordination, and assistance 
5/ esc.1/1. 



GC(II)/0E,20 


page 6 


to the less developed countries. There was indeed a danger that it might be 
diverted from them to less important activities. Certain proposals had been 
made which would involve it in a programme of large-sc-vLe research, Resources 
were still limited, and big laboratories were not required at the present 
stage of the Agency's activities5 they would have to be built in stages over 
a long period and, despite their heavy cost, would never be able to compare in 
effectiveness with laboratories in the highly developed countries. The less 
developed countries had nothing to gain from the Agency's transformation into 
a research institute, 


18, Besides producing specialists who could handle atomic energy, it was the 
Agency's duty to provide countries with the physical means of improving their 
living standards. Yet., despite the initial high hopes of material betterment 
as a result of the Agency's operations, all it was able to show at present was 
paper offers of fission products. No agreements fir their acceptance or 


delivery had yet been concluded. It was time a common effort was made to 
settle such questions as prices and delivery. Incidentally, countries 
providing products were bound to supply them to the Agency on preferential 
terms* 


19. It was thus surprising - to say the least - that certain Member States 
should be pressing for the early establishment of a Division of Safeguards, 
and one of quite disproportionate size. Perhaps their object was to apply 
the Agency's safeguards to agreements concluded outside the Agency. Just as 
important as the question of establishing the Division was that of selecting, 
its staff. Unless the posts were allocated on a correct geographical basis, 
fears might be aroused in certain quarters, to the detriment of the Agency's 
work, Instead of being an organ for international co-operation, it might 
become an international policing organ, playing a part quite unrelated to its 
task of developing the backward regions of the world. 
20. The Agency could only perform its lofty task by securing the widest 
possible measure of international co-operation and by strictly respecting the. 
provisions and spirit of its Statute, Its primary preoccupation ought to be, 
as various delegates had urged, to secure widespread and varied utilization of 
atomic energy„ 

GC(II)/OR.2O 
page 7 


21. It ought therefore to take the necessary steps to make good the existing 
shortage of atomic scientists and technicians in the world; to become a body 
co-ordinating the exchange of scientific information and experience between all 
countries§ to promote oo-operation between national research institutes with 
a view to expediting the application of new discoveries§ to collect and 
circulate general information on a variety of health and safety questions! to 
enter into still closer relations with other international organizations so as 
to forward projects of common interest^ and to give special attention to the 
economic aspects of the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, and particularly 
to the economics of power reactors. The United Nations regional economic 
ccariiooions oould give it valuable help in those matters. 
22. Romania would continue to support the Agency and would do everything 
possible to ensure that it worked for co-operation between all countries, for 
progress and for peace. 
23. Mr. WERSHQF (Canada) said that the development of the peaceful uses 
of atonic energy had been almost exclusively a national endeavour until 
President Eisenhower had proposed at the United Nations General Assembly in 
December 1953 that an international organization should be established within 
the United Nations family for that purpose-% That proposal had been designed 
as part of an imaginative effort to axpand the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
for the benefit particularly of the poorer countries which could not develop 
their own atomic energy programmes without assistance. It had also aimed at 
providing a channel for international consultation and effort, Canada had 
participated fully in the discussions which had led to the adoption of the 
Statute and the establishment of the Agency, and had actively tried to promote 
the Agency's development, because it wished to foster the rapid growth of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and believed that the Agency would make a 
valuable contribution to that end, 
24. As many previous speakers had pointed out, the Agency was still very 
young but offered almost Infinite promise, given a patient determination to 
bring it to strong and productive maturity. 
6/ See United Nations document A/PV.470, paragraphs 79 - 126, 


GC(II)/OR,20 
page 8


That promise of a greater contribution from atomic energy to the peace, health 
and prosperity of all nations would only he fulfilled, as the second Geneva 
Conference had confirmed, through the unremitting devotion and industry that 
every lofty aim demanded. The Agency's first year had been a year of hesitant 
first steps hut also of progress. It was encouraging to review the record 
of past achievement in the Board's Annual Report and the plans for 1959 and 
subsequent years, in that report and in the Programme and Budget. 


25. The Board of Governors had already taken most of the basic policy 
decisions on which the day-to-day administration of the Agency depended, and 
in the coming months aimed to complete further work which would have the effect 
of making the Agency's activities more productive and balanced. In a few 
months the Director General had recruited an able staff of scientists and 
administrators and arranged satisfactory working premises for them5 at the 
same time effective work on some of the most important parts of the Agency's 
programme had begun. Relationship agreements were being concluded with other 
international organizations5 the Director General was participating in the 
United Nations Administrative Committee on Co-ordinations and the United 
7/ 
Nations Economic and Social Council had adopted an important resolution-'-' which 
had helped to olarify the Agency's predominant position in regard to atomic 
energy. 


26. Some delegations might have expected even greater progress to be made 
in carrying out the programme recommended by the Preparatory Commissions but 
experience had shown that any such expectations had been somewhat unrealistic 
and had not taken account of the initial difficulties of such an intricate 
and ambitious enterprise. The recruitment of competent technical staff had, 
for example, taken far longer than the Board had at first expected. The key 
personnel that the Agency needed had all held responsible positions in the 
atomic energy programmes of their own countries, and it was not surprising 
that the scientific staff of the Agency had not begun to take shape until 
early 1958. It was a measure of that staff's ability and enthusiasm that it 
had been able to carry out so much of the Agency's programme in such a short 
time. 
7/ Resolution 694 E (XXVT) . 



GC(II)/OR,20 
page 9 


27. Thua, taking a realistic view, the Canadian Government was generallysatisfied 
with, the situation set forth in the Report of the Board of Governors. 
About some aspects of the situation, however, it had misgivings. 
28. Ono of those aspects was recruitment. Article VII.D of the Statute 
provided that the paramount consideration in the recruitment of staff was the 
need to secure employees of the highest standard of efficiency, technical 
competence and integrity^ only after that paramount consideration had been 
satisfied should due regard he paid to Members' contributions and the importance 
of recruiting on the widest possible geographical basis. Paragraphs 8l to 84 
of the Report of the Board of Governors indicated that the Director General 
had made a great effort to achieve a reasonable balance between those 
requirements, Some delegations believed that the principle of equitable 
geographical distribution should be given even greater emphasis. The 
Canadian delegation respected the right of any delegation to hold that view, 
but could not share it, because it conflicted with the paramount consideration 
laid down in the Statute, because it made the task of recruitment unnecessarily 
difficult and because the scientific competence and efficiency of the Agency 
Y/ould suffer if it prevailed, 


29. That statement should not be construed as a reflection on the Secretariat. 
The Agency must be congratulated on so quickly gathering together such a 
competent body of international civil servants| but the Director General's 
future success in expanding the Secretariat would depend largely on the 
support he could expect from Member Governments, first in making available 
the services of some of their best scientists, inconvenient though that might 
be, and secondly, in accepting the Director General's judgment when he decided 
that the. technical qualifications of one candidate outweighed the geographical 
qualifications of another. 
30. Another fact which had disappointed the Canadian Government .was the 
failure to attain the first session's modest estimate of $250,000 for voluntary 
contributions for fellowships in 1958-4 It hoped that the initial difficulties 
of Governments in providing for the Agency in their budgets would soon be 
overcome, and felt very strongly that the fellowship programme, one of the 
Agency's fundamental activities, must be given adequate financial support in 
order that it might serve the needs of the under developed countries. 
8/ GC.I(S)/RES/6. 



GC(II)/OR,20 
page 10 


31. The Canadian Government was also concerned about a trend in the fellowship 
programme's development. It was beyond dispute that type I fellowships, 
financed by the Agency out of voluntary contributions to the General Fund, 
gave the Agency and the fellows the greatest freedom to select the most suitable 
place, conditions and programme of study. The Canadian delegation fully 
realized the value of type II fellowships, granted by Governments in their own 
institutes and at their own expense, and appreciated the generosity of those 
Governments that offered them;; it believed, however, that such fellowships 
should be additional to the programme of type I fellowships, and was therefore 
disturbed that some Governments were offering type II fellowships instead of 
monetary contributions to the General Fund. That tendency was bound to 
reduce and distort the fellowship programme as envisaged by the Preparatory 
Commission and the first session of the General Conference, and other Members 
might feel impelled to follow it. 
32. The Canadian delegation believed that, in addition to continuing the 
multilateral activities on which its attention had so far quite properly 
been concentrated, the Agency could also act as an intermediary in the conclusion 
of bilateral arrangements for technical assistance between Members. After 
assisting a less developed country, at its request, to determine its needs, 
the Agency might then put it in touch with a technically advanced country 
which was prepared to assist it in carrying out its projects by providing 
information, facilities or financial assistance. Provision was made for that 
case in Article XI of the Statute, and for analogous services relating to 
health, safety and safeguards in Article XII. 
33. It was also important to draw attention to a fundamental statutory duty 
concerning which the Board had not yet acted effectively, the Agency's duty 
under Article II to ensure that assistance provided by it or at its request, 
or under its supervision or control, should not be used to further any 
military purpose. To discharge that duty was admittedly a complex and 
difficult task but it was also an important one and the Canadian Government 
was therefore gratified to note in paragraph 30 of its Report that the Board 
intended to come to grips with it in the near future. The statement by the 
delegate from Japan that his Government intended to ask the Agency to implement 
the safeguard provisions of the bilateral agreement between Japan and the 
United States had been most satisfactory. 

GC(II)/0E.20 
page 11 


34* To look to the future, the proposed Programme and Budget for 1959, which, 
would be discussed mere fully under item 12, was ambitious - some might say 
over-ambitious. Nevertheless, the enterprise in which the Agency's Members 
were engaged called not only for realistic analysis but also for daring and 
vision. The promise offered by the Agency was a challenge to the scientific 
staff, to the Agency as a whole and to all its Members individually. 
Obviously nothing would be accomplished, and all brave words and plans would 
prove vain, unless all Governments were prepared to provide the necessary 
financial support.. All who wished the Agency to succeed must therefore have 
heard with special pleasure at the eighteenth meeting the generous declaration 
of support by the delegate from the United States^, The Agency's future 
would be assured if all Governments followed that example, 


35" He repeated the assurances of support given by the Government of Canada 


10/ 


at the first session—', Subject to parliamentary approval, the Canadian 


Government intended to contribute its share to the proposed operational budget 


for 19591 It had also joined in sponsoring a proposal—' to convene a 


pledging committee of the whole General Conference at which pledges of 


voluntary financial contributions to the General Fund could be made. He 


sincerely hoped that the pledging committee would meet before the end of the 


second sessions if so, he expected to announce to it the details of the 


Canadian contribution. The degree of success achieved in securing enough 


voluntary contributions to cover the operational part of the budget would be 


a measure of the desire of its Members to give the Agency an active and 


significant role in promoting the use of atomic energy for the benefit of 


oiankind, Canada would continue to do its utmost towards that end. The 
promise had been givenj its fulfilment lay in the hands of Member Governments. 
36, Mr. ORTIZ TIRADO (Mexico) said that the United Nations General 


12/ 


Assembly could feel satisfied that its resolution of 4 December 1954 had 
given rise to such promising developments. The Geneva Conferences had brought 
scientists together from all over the world to examine ways in which atomic 
energy could be developed for the greater benefit of humanity, and those 


9/ GC(II)/OR.l8, paragraphs 10 - 29. 
10/ GC.I(3)/OR.O, para^apha 12 - 23. 
11/ GC(II)/54. 
12/ General Assembly resolution 8l0(lX). 



GC(II)/OR,20 
page 12 


conferences had been an unprecedented success. Now the International Atomic 
Energy Agency was holding the second regular session of its General Conference5 
international co-operation - as the Preparatory Commission had foreseen had 
prepared the way for the fruitful application of atomic energy and would 
enable countries, so far as their resources allowed, to provide their peoples 
with its inumerable benefits. Everything could not he done at once, hut that 
was immaterial 00 long as the road ahead was clear5 it could he cleared if 
each nation co-operated conscientiously to the extent of its resources, and 
if due attention were paid to the rights and needs of each country, 


37. Ho had listened with great interest to what the Director General had 
said—' ahout work done to date and the proposals for the coming year. The 
Director General had mentioned the possibility of an international agreement 
to register with the Agency all foreign shipments of source materials. Any 
such register, in accordance with Article XII of the Statute, could refer only 
to materials provided hy the Agency itself for a project or arrangement 
agreed upon with a Member State or a group of Member States§ it could not 
include source materials produced hy a Member State or acquired by it otherwise 
than in connexion with such a project or arrangement. That point had been made 
perfectly clear at the Statute Conference in Now York and had been the subject 
of specific statements made by various delegations. His own country was 
profoundly pacifist by tradition, and that fact was itself the best moral 
and political guarantee that any atomic material or equipment Mexico might 
possess or obtain v/ould never be used for warlike purposes, 
38. Although technical assistance was essential to the proper development of 
atomic energy, great and small countries alike could contribute their share 
to the common fund of scientific and technical knowledge. That had been 
clearly realized by the Preparatory Commission, the guiding principles of 
whoso report vrere faithfully reflected in the Board's Annual Report to the 
Conference and the Agency's report to the General Assembly-—". It was scarcely 
possible to deal with all the achievements which the Board was reporting to the 
General Conference. He would refer only to technioal assistance, which for 
13/ GC(II)/OR,14, paragraphs 32-50. 
14/ GC(II)/40 and Corr.1. 



GC(II)/OR,20 
page 13 


most countries was absolutely essential if the hopes they had placed in the 
Agency were to he realized. That fact had been fully recognized by the Board 
in Chapter IV, section B, of the Report, dealing with the exchange of 


scientists and experts, the fellowship programme and the ways in which those 


schemos were being carried out. 


39* It was even more encouraging to find that the Agency, without troubling 
about spheres of competence, had fully recognized the work of the United 
Nations, which had set up the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and 
had made its own contributions to the development of atomic energy in 
connexion with such grave problems as safety and protection against radiations. 


40. Of particular interest was the Agency's reactor programme and its work 
on technical supplies and services, contained in the Board's Report, Chapter IV 
sections F and G. Experimental and power reactors would help to provide 
countries with new sources of energy, enabling them to raise their standards 
of living, and the Agency's work in that regard would undoubtedly one day 
represent the major part of its activities. That stage should be prepared 
for by an unhurried assimilation of the necessary technical knowledge, and 
by the training of technicians who would be responsible for the operation of 
the oquipment which was so useful but potentially so dangerous. Long-term 
planning was required, and the co-operation of all. 
41. Thb Mexican National Atomic Energy Commission dealt mainly with resoarch, 
training in nuclear and related sciences, prospecting,and the mining of 
source materials. Under an extensive fellowship programme Mexican scientists 
and technicians were being sent to various countries to specialize. Courses 
in the handling of radioisotopes and other radiation sources had also been 
started. Theoretical and experimental nuclear physics had been included in 
the programmes of Mexican research centres for several years. The Commission 
had sot up training centres for experts in related subjects such as electronics 
and uranium chemistry. It was carrying out a vast programme of prospecting, 
and deposits so far discovered wore very promising. 
42. In the Agency his country saw a great hope, not only for Mexico but for 
the whole world. 

GC(II)/OR.20 . , , 
page 14 


43. Mr. SAMSURI (Albania) said that the establishment of the Agency had 
been welcomed throughout the world as an important step in the progress of 
mankind, which hoped for ever greater benefits from the continually expanding 
applications of nuclear energy, In pursuing its peaceful objectives the Agency 
must continue to encourage international co-operation for the benefit of the 
peoples -of the world. Its activities should be based on broad international 
co-operation achieved through better understanding, the relaxation of international 
tension and world peace. ' 
44* The successes achieved in the application of nuclear energy indicated its 
tremendous possibilities for improving the living standards of all peoples, 
but the Agency would not be making its full contribution towards that end unless , 
all countries of the world were included among its Members. The Agency 
should promote research on atomic energy and its application everywhere, in 
accordance with the principle of universality, which underlay all international 
organizations. Membership in the Agency should be open to all countries 
unconditionally^ but some were still excluded, such as China, of- which the 
only legal representative was the Central People's Government of the People's 
Republic of China. The Agency should bring to an end the abnormal situation 
whereby not all countries wishing to become Members were admitted, for it 
prevented the Agency from fulfilling its objectives.. The contribution that 
might be made by scientists in those countries should not be disregarded. 
Unless all countries of the world had equal rights, the Agency's basic 
objectives would be unattainable. 


45. Those objectives, which were laid down in Article II of the Statute, 
should be kept continually in mind by the Agency, especially as the threat of 
atomic warfare still hung over the world and weapons of mass destruction were 
still being produced and tested. If the example of the Soviet Union were 
followed by other States which still continued weapon tests, and if both the 
testing and the production of such weapons were stopped as a first step 
towards full disarmament, the Agency would have much greater scope for its 
activities. The Agency was required by its Statute to adopt health and safety 
regulations and to contribute to the reduction of radiation hazards^ it 
should therefore heed the call of all peoples-for the prohibition of nuclear 
and thormonuclear weapons. 

GC(II)/OR.20 
page 15 


46. Thirteen years before, Albania had boen a backward country, but since the 
establishment of the Albanian People's Republic it had achieved great successes 
in all fields, due largely to the generous assistance of the Soviet Union and 
of the other peoples' democracies, with whose help its industry and agriculture 
had been developed and the large-scale use of electric power had been 
introduced. Its scientific talent had been organized and many scientists had 
been trained. As a member of the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, it 
had received valxxable assistance from other countries, and many of its 
scientists had been sent to those countries for advanced training. 
47. The energy requirements of the world were constantly growing, but could 
be not through the immense potentialities of nuclear energy. Many countries 
remained backward for lack of energy resources, but the gap could be bridged 
by the rational Li.se of nuclear energy in industry and agriculture to improve 
living standards, The Agency's programme should be so conceived as to give 
as much assistance as possible to the under-developed countries, not only by 
training scientists and technicians but also by taking into account the vital . 
needs of those countries for industrialization and improvements in agrioulture, 
so as to enable them to catch up with the more advanced countries. 
48. ilr. V7M (China) expressed his delegation's agreement with the 
statement made earlier in the debate by the delegate of the Union of South 
15/ 


Africa-*", to which he wished to add only four general observations of his own. 


49. First, he associated himself with the delegate of Ceylon—'in stressing 
the importance of giving the highest priority to the training of technicians 
and experts. The field was vast and the need great, but until the demand 
for a sufficient number of technicians and experts in the under-developed 
countries had been rapidly and effectively met, their development programmes 
could never advance beyond the stage of paper planning. 
.50. Secondly, the possibility of training more technicians and specialists 
depended on the willingness of all Member States to do their utmost to contribute 
generously to the General Fund. His Government would do its best with 
Its small financial resources, though its contribution might be rather modest. 


15/ GC(II)/OR.l6, paragraphs 13 - 2316/ 
GC(II)/OR.19, paragraph 62. 



GC(II)/OR,20 


page 16 


51. Thirdly, the Agency's relations with specialized agencies whose activities 
extended to the peaceful uses of atomic energy should he marked Toy loyal 
co-operation rather than by any attempt to claim primacy in activities already 
competently undertaken by those agencies. 
52, Fourthly, in order not to overload the budget with excessively high 


appropriations for technical staff, the best consultants should wherever 


feasible be called in for limited periods to serve on study missions which the 


Agency sent abroad. 


53. In Taiwan a start had rightly been made on the utilization of radioisotopes 
in medical research and treatment. A radioisotope laboratory had 
been operating at the University Hospital since 1957 ,and a series of experiments 
for the study of endemic goitre by means of iodine-131 had yielded 
interesting results. Irradiation of rice to produce gone mutations had been 
carried on as part of agricultural research since 1950, but "tne results were 
still too inconclusive to be of real scientific interest. 
54* The annual rate of increase in the production of power from conventional 
sources had been remarkably rapid in recent years owing to the high tempo of 
industrialization. A time would soon come when those sources would be 
insufficient to meet demand. By then, perhaps as early as 1966, nuclear 
energy might become commercially competitive and nuclear power plants might have 
to be introduced into the economy and made its principal source of power. 


With that possibility in mind it was planned to establish in early 1959 a 


swimming-pool type reactor for training personnel and studying the best means 
of obtaining cheap nuclear power for industrial and other purposes. 


55* Although its atomic energy plans were modest at present, Taiwan would 
soon be requiring the help and co-operation of the Agency on an increasing 
scale to ensure that they were wisely carried out and that firm and solid 
foundations were laid with a view to the rapid utilization of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes in the near future. 


56. Mr. FOCACCIA (Italy) expressed his delegation's approval of the 
content of the Board's report. In spite of many difficulties important results 
had been achieved in a short space of time. 

GC(II)/OR.20 
page 17 


57. In addition to the programme presented by the Board, the Agency should 
undertake work on radioisotope and reactor research, the establishment of 
health and safety standards, economic problems, the exchange of experts and 
technicians and problems raised by the fellowship programme. His Government 
had loarned with satisfaction that under the fellowship programme many atomic 
scientists and research workers in the under-developed countries would be able 
to benefit from the experience and laboratory facilities of the more advanced 
oountriesj it had therefore decided to renew its contribution to that programme 
in 1959. It also proposed to offer equipment for the research on radioisotopes 
that was to be undertaken in the laboratories which the Agency intended 
to sot up, 
58. It night be advisable to consider two objectives in connexion with the 
Agency's programmes the adoption of adequate health and safety measures and 
the dotailed study of the economic problems of nuclear energy. With regard 
to the first he noted with satisfaction that the Agency had already drawn up 
a draft manual of practices for safe handling of radioisotopes and hoped that 
similar work would be undertaken on health and safety standards for the 
transport and handling of fuels and the disposal of radioactive materials. 
It was particularly important for Italy, with its peculiar geographical 
configuration, that the discharge of such materials into the sea should be 
regulated and that certain tolerances should not be exceeded in internal 
waters, as a result of the anticipated increase in the number of nuclear 
installations, Italy had no regulations on health and safety standards as 
yot, but was anxious to collaborate with as many countries as possible in 
establishing such standards, 


59. The second objeotive comprised studies and projects which might assist 
Ilember States in evaluating the advantages and disadvantages of using nuclear 
energy as compared with conventional energy. Italy had a growing need for 
energy and was therefore very interested in the economic aspects of the 
problem. It should also be borne in mind that the cost of conventional fuel 
was relatively high and that a large part of the country's hydro-electric 
resources had already been exploited to the economic limit. Together with 
the International Bank for Reconstruction and. Development the Italian 
Government had carried out a study known as the ENSI project (Southern Italy 
Nuclear Energy Project), certain results of which had been announced at the 

GC(II)/OR,20 
page 13 


second Geneva Conference. That study had shown that a nuclear electric power 
station with a capacity of 150 MW could he built in Southern Italy, as the cost 
of the power obtained would be only slightly higher than that of power from a 
conventional modern thermal plant. In time, however, nuclear'fuel and 
installation costs were likely to fall, so that nuclear energy could be expected 
to compete with conventional energy. 


60. He had just learned that the National Electro-Nuclear Society, which was 
carrying out the work, had announced that the first Italian nuclear power 
station would be of the boiling-water, enriched-uranium type, Italy would be 
happy to put the experience of those who had worked on the ENSI project at the 
disposal of the Agency for similar studies to determine the economic 
suitability of different types of installation for the interested countries. 
61. Finally he expressed the hope that the Agency would organize conferences 
and meetings of nuclear energy specialists, for the exchange of technical and 
scientific information, and conveyed his Government's sincerest wishes for the 
speediest possible performance of the basic task laid down in Article II of 
the Statute, namely "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world." 
Mr. Yemiscibasi (Turkey) took the Chair. 


62. Mr. SOHM (Republic of Korea) said that his country had made considerable 
progress in laying the foundations for the practical application of atomic 
energy and had recently set up a National Committee on Atomic Energy to 
organize research, training and the development of technical facilities. It . 
also planned to set up nuclear research installations and an isotope laboratory, 
63. Korea's major long-term interests v/ero in atomic power production and the 
application of radioisotopes to medical science, agriculture and fisheries5 
it therefore attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme for the acceleration of projects in those fields. 
64. The Korean delegation wished to express its satisfaction with the 
Report of the Board of Governors and considered that the Agency's activities 
during its first year had been as effective as could reasonably be expected. 
65. Some of the main points of the initial programme deserved comment, with 
a view to drawing the attention of delegates to certain tendencies which might 
be significant for the future development of the Agency. 

GC(II)/OR.20 
page 19 


66, In view of the wide authority and responsibility it enjoyed, the Board of 
17/ 

Governors should, as the delegate of South Africa had already suggested—1' , 
concentrate primarily on its functions as a technical body. The Korean 
delegation considered that the Board should avoid lengthy political debates 
a_.d that its members should devote themselves to the common interests of all . 
Mentor States or at least the interests of those in the area they represented. 


67, The working relations which the Agency was required by its Statute to 
establish with other international bodies such as the specialized agencies and 
regional intergovernmental organizations should be confined to bodies which 
genuinely .subscribed to the principles and purposes of the United Hat ions. 


68, The Korean delegation also believed that in developing its technical 
assistance activities in favour of the under-developed countries, the Agency 
should bear four points in mind. First, it snould continue its efforts to 
"rromotc the fellowship programme and that programme should be mainly devoted 
to agisting under-developed countries to help themselves in enlarging their 
tochnicai knowledge in the field of nuclear science. Secondly, it should 
increase the technical assistance to be provided under its own projects and 
at the same time make all possible use of the existing international 
machinery for the provision and financing of suci assistance, placing greater 
emphasis on voluntary contributions by Llomber States. Thirdly, in view of 
the acute need for increased power capacity in undcr-dovoloped countries, it 
should provide all posoiole advice and assistance on the major aspects of 
reactor projects, including the possibility of assistance in obtaining source 
materials and outside loans for building power reactors. Fourthly, existing 
regional training facilities should be utilized as fully as possible for the 
training of nuclear specialists, but the Agency should not hesitate to plan 
now regional facilities whore existing facilities proved inadequate, 


63, In conclusion, the Korean delegation supported the view of previous 
speakers that the Members of the Agency, whatever their economic status, were 
in fact associated for the purpose of furthering the peaceful applications of 
atonic energy5 it hoped that the continued co-operation of the most 
advanced countries would result in a further expansion of the technical 
assistance programme and so in an important step towards the achievement of the 
Agency's objectives. 

VjJ GC(II)/OR.l6, paragraphs 16 - 17. 


GC(II)/QR.20 


page 20 


70, Mr. BUU-HOI (Viet-Nam) expressed his great pleasure at the marks of 
esteem and confidence bestowed on the countries of Asia and Africa by the 
General Conference through its election of many delegates from those regions 
to hold important offices. His satisfaction would have been more complete if 
the credentials of the delegation of China had not been unjustly called in 
question at the beginning of the Conference, for he believed that however much 
the area controlled by the Government of the Republic of China might have been 
reduced by the fortunes of war, that government nevertheless spoke in the name 
of a free nation which, moreover, enjoyed the allegiance of a considerable 
number of scientists and technicians prominent in the nuclear sciences at 
homo and abroad. That fact alone, independently of all conceivable political 
considerations, could not but command the greatest respect for the delegation 
sent by the Republic of China and necessitated the continued presence of its 
members at the Agency's conferences. 


71* The consideration given to under—developed countries during the 


Conference had also been evident in the wish expressed by several speakers 


that one of the Agency's major activities should be the provision of rapid 


and realistic aid to those countries, in such a way that the masses of their 


people, and not merely the elite, could learn something of the means by which 
atomic energy could be applied to serve the peaceful progress of mankind. 
With the same aim in view the President of the Republic of Viet-Nam had 
recently created an Office of Atomic Energy to further the cultural and 


technical interests of the nation. With a view to the attainment of that 


objective, which was certainly shared by many other less developed countries, 


the delegation of Viet-Nam appealed for the help of the Agency and of all its 


individual Members. 


72. His delegation hoped particularly that the realistic six-point programme 
i PI 

outlined by the United States delegate—'would receive the unanimous approval 
of the Conference, since that programme would provide a rapid means.of 
attaining the objectives of the Agency in under-developed countries. In 
particular it would enable the scientists and technicians whom the Agency 
sent abroad for training in nuclear sciences to continue their research in 
their own countries, serving there as living evidence of the continuing 
fruitfulness of international co-operation under the Agency's auspices. 


18/ GC(II)/OR.l8, paragraphs 19-27. 



GC(II)/OR,20 
page 21 


73. It would be naive to assume that implementation of that programme would 
npt place a considerable burden on the Agency's budget, For the purpose of 
deciding who was to bear the additional expense, the world could perhaps be 
devidod into three categories of nations; first, the great scientific nations 
which had been able to achieve national power by harnessing and utilizing 
atomic energy, for example Canada, France, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, the United Kingdom and the. United States of America! secondly, 
nations such as Argentina, Australia, Italy, Japan, Sweden and Switzerland 
which were on the threshold of the industrial use of atomic energy^ finally, 
the under-developed countries such as Viet-Nam in which no fissionable 
material was being handled except for research purposes. It would not be 
fair if the States in the last category did not pay a token contribution^ 
but ho Y/as sure that the rest of the necessary funds would be generously 
supplied by the nations in the first two categories, possibly in proportion 
tc the degree of world power they had attained through the use of atomic 
energy. 


The meeting rose at 12,50 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.21 
26 November 1958 

ENGLISH 


General Conference 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETINC 


Held at the Neue Hofburg,Vienna, 
on Friday, 26 September 1958, at 2.50 p.m. 


President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


11 General debate and Report of the Board of 


1-94 


Governors for the year 1957-58 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of New-
Zealand, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics; Belgium, Indonesia, Greece, 
Australia, United Arab Republic, India 
and Austria 

23 Election of Members to the Board of 


95 - 102 


Governors 


17 Measures to obtain voluntary contribu


103 - 105 


tions to the General Fund, including the 


calling of a pledging conference 


* GC(II)/57. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the second regular session of 
the General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/l7/Rev,3. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
Page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD'OP GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1957/58 
(GC(II)/39) (continued) 


1, Mr, HAMILTON (New Zealand) said he would first describe the development 
of nuclear science in New Zealand. For the past ten years, experts in 
that country had been using isotopes in their research works they had 
developed the technique of radio-carbon dating to provide an absolute chronology 
for geologists and archaeologists etc. 3 they were using tritium as a 
tracer for underground water movements in the country's thermal areas| and 
they had made wide use of stable isotope ratios in the study of various 
natural processes. New Zealand was also planning a modest programme of 
expansion in nuclear science, and the Government had approved the establishment 
of an Institute of Nuclear Science equipped with a 3-MeV van de Graaff 
accelerator and a small research reactor. New Zealand possessed adequate, 
sources of energy for the immediate future and it was not expected that nuclear 
power would be required for some years. Its research programme did not therefore 
touch on reactor design and technology but aimed at the application of 
nuclear techniques to assist research in industry and agriculture and to 
provide facilities for research for the universities. 


2. After recalling his Government's attitude with regard to the Agency-^, 
he made some comments on the Agency's activities, which had been suggested to. 
him by the Report of the Board of Governors (GC(II)/39). I*1 "the first place, 
there was no need to be surprised by the lack of spectacular progress. The 
Agency's initial period had necessarily been devoted to recruiting staff and 
preparing the groundwork for its future operations. Secondly, the major role 
for which the Agency had been established was to supply fissionable and source 
materials. Nevertheless, although such materials had already been put at the 
Agency's disposal by the more advanced countries, it had received no request 
2/ 
until that announced by the Japanese delegate during the current debate^. 
It could therefore be concluded that knowledge of nuclear technology was not 
yet sufficiently widespread in the under-developed countries to create a 
demand for fissionable and source materials. The Agency was therefore 
rightly placing greater emphasis on the training of experts. His delegation 


l/ GC.1(S)/OR.9, paragraphs 61-65. 
2j GC(II)/OR.17, paragraph 6. 


GC(II)/OR.21 
page 3 


appreciated the eagerness of those Members of the Agency who wished to draw 
immediate benefits from a new source of energy,, but it must be borne in mind 
that the use of new techniques required a period of sound preparation. 

3. The report gave the impression that the Agency was spreading its activities 
over a field so wide that there was a danger of its limited resources 
being dissipated without any real progress being achieved. It should avail 
itself of the experience gained by other international organizations in their 
initial years. In that respect, co-ordination on the national level could be 
important. The Agency should, at least in the initial stages, concentrate 
its efforts not on problems which could be solved at the national level, but 
on selected nuclear energy fields in which work at the international level 
could most fruitfully be performed. By its success in carrying out those 
limited tasks, the Agency would consolidate its position and ensure that it 
retained the confidence of all its Members. Only in that way would it be 
able to proceed to the major tasks which still lay ahead. 
4. Several of the tasks that the Agency might undertake had been discussed 
during the Second United Nations International Conference on the Poaceful Uses 
of Atomic Energy, recently held at Geneva (the second Geneva Conference). 
One was the problem of disposing of radioactive wastes with particular 
reference to dumping in the deep ocean trenches. Contrary to the conclusions 
given in the paper presented by Dr. Krobs of the Soviet Union at the abovementioned 
Conforence, New Zealand research based on carbon-14 in the Tonga 
Deep suggested that those waters had not been in exchange with the atmosphere 
for hundreds of years. Those ocean deeps fell outside any national jurisdiction 
and the Agency could play a vital role in fostering and promoting an 
international agreement on the disposal of radioactive wastes. His delegation 
welcomed the action of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the 
Sea in recognizing the urgency of that problem. 
5. The second Geneva Conference had also oxamincd the question of nuclear 
propulsion for ships. The feasibility of that means of propulsion had been 
amply demonstrated. However, it had to be borne in mind that after a certain 
period of operation the reactors in such ships would contain large amounts of 
highly radioactive fission products, which in the event of collision or shipwreck 
might contaminate largo areas. In spite of the advances in navigational 

GC(II)/0E.21 


page 4 


aids, such accidents were still possible,, therefore a general agreement on the 
safeguards to he adopted in respect of nuclear-propelled ships would be desirable. 
Consideration of that question by the Agency would have to be closely 
co-ordinated with the work of other international organizations also concerned 
with various aspects of the problem. He was pleased to note that steps in that 
direction had already been taken. 


6. One of the activities of the Agency was directed to the wider use of radioisotopes 
in agriculture, medicine and industry, and to assisting Lleaber States 
in installing laboratories, etc. In that respect, he wished to emphasize that 
a certain degree of caution was necessary. Experience had shown that certain 
of the possibilities at first envisaged for using isotopes had been unduly 
optimistic, and that isotopes in agriculture were useful mainly in unravelling 
complex problems in animal and plant physiology and bio-chemistry. It was 
essential that general research in a country should have already attained a 
fairly advanced level of development before isotopes oould be of maximum use. 
In most fields, radioisotopes were not a panacea and could not replace longestablished 
methods. It would be regrettable if the Agency, in its eagerness 
to foster the use of isotopes, adopted too optimistic an attitude. 
7- Finally, he stressed how necessary it was for the Agency to have the full 
confidence of scientists from all countries if it wished to fulfil the hopes it 
had aroused. As the delegate from the Union of South Africa had pointed out-^, 

it had been clear from informal discussions at Geneva that scientists tended to 
regard the Agency principally as a political body which did not warrant their 
serious interest. To remedy that state of affairs, it was indispensable for 


the Agency to secure the participation of scientists in all phases of its 


activity. The appointment of an advisory committee of eminent scientists was 


only a preliminary step. The Board of Governors itself should be so composed 


that the scientific implications of its decisions were fully understood by all 


its members. 


8. Mr. 5MELYAN0V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pointed outthat 
the second session of the General Conference followed closely upon two other 
important meetings, the second Geneva Conference, from 1 to 13 September, and 
3/ GC(II)/0E.l6, paragraph 22. 



GC(II)/OR.21 
page 5 


the conference of experts on atomic questions ("Second Pugwash Conference") 
held at Kitzbiihel from 14 to 21 September. The Geneva conference had shown the 
immense possibilities which atomic energy could offer to the world if used for 
peaceful purposes. The Kitzbiihel conference had emphasized the dangers of 
using atomic energy for military purposes. Both had demonstrated the passionate 
desire of scientists to work together, a desire so strong that it would break 
down all barriers erected in the path of international co-operation. 


9. The second session of the Agency's General Conference differed from those 
two conferences in that it3 task was to work out a programme for practical 
action designed to hasten and increase the contribution that atomic energy 
could make to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. In that connexion, 
he recalled the support which the USSR had given from the outset to 
the establishment of an international atomic energy agency^ defining its attitude 
in unequivocal terms, it had declared its readiness to provide assistance 
in all fields connected with the use of atomic energy for peace and progress. 
At the first Geneva Conference, held in 1955, his delegation had presented his 
country's programme for mutual assistance and collaboration with other countries 
in the atomic field. 
10. That programme, which provided inter alia for the establishment of scientific 
research centres in several countries, was already partly completed. It 
was worth mentioning that the assistance given by the USSR was open to all, and 
free of any political, economic or other conditions. Nine States had already 
concluded bilateral agreements which had enabled them to take advantage of that 
offer, and the USSR was prepared to extend the benefits of its help to all 
other States who wished to take advantage of it. In addition to the establishment 
of research centres, the Soviet Union had offered its assistanoe to other 
countries in prospecting for uranium ore and processing it, and in the fabrication 
of fuel elements for experimental or power reactors. 
11. As it attached great importance to the training of specialized key personnel, 
the Soviet Union had welcomed more than 14 500 foreign students to its educational 
establishments, where two million pupils wero following courses in 
physics, chemistry and scientific technology. A hundred places had been 
reserved for students in higher educational establishments, and fifty fellowships 
had been granted to follows from the under-developed countries which wore 

GC(II)/OR.21 


page 6 


Members of the Agency. In addition, the Government of the USSR had agreed to 
accept fifty experts from States Members of the Agency in 1958/593 for periods 
of from 3 to 6 months, for training or advanced study in Soviet scientific 
research establishments. Finally, to assist countries in putting their national 
programmes into effect, the Soviet Government had placed at the disposal of the 
Agency thirty highly qualified specialists in the various branches of science 
and technology. 


12. From that brief account of the part the USSR was playing in the efforts 
that were being made to put nuclear energy to scientific use, he would pass to 
consideration of the practical achievements of the Agency. In his view, the 
initial programme drawn up by the Preparatory Commission-^ had remained at the 
planning stage. He expressed his regrets, and in support of his view drew 
attention, inter alia, to the lively criticisms formulated by Mr. Randers at 
th) Kitabuhel conference. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, one of the 
Agency's main activities should be assistance to the under-developed countries, 
and concrete results in that field could have been obtained by the Agency even 
in its first year of existence, had it not let slip all the opportunities which 
had arisen. The experts who had been made available had been badly employed, 
aud insufficient thought had been given to the question how real assistance 
could be given to the under-developod countries. 
5/ 


13. The programme for 1959 covered only a small part of the initial programme 
drawn up by the Preparatory Commission, as far as the scientific activities of 
the Agency and its assistance to the under-developed countries were concerned. 
The insignificant results so far obtained were oxplained by the fact that 
cortain founder Members of the Agency had had no intention of making it an 
effective instrument, Thus, after promising to put 5 000 kg- of uranium-235 
at the Agencyrs disposal, the United States had so far not delivered any, and 
the torms of delivery had not yot been defined. It oven seemed likely that the 
price would be slightly above the prices quoted on the international market, and 
in those circumstances it was clear that countries wishing to acquire uranium-235 
would prefer to apply directly to the producing countries. For that reason the 
fj • GCl/l. 
$] GC(II)/36 and Corr. 1. 


GC(II)/OR.21 
page 7 


Agency had not been able, and would not be able, to fulfil its functions as a 
distributing body for fissionable materials. The Government of the USSR, in 
its desire to come to the assistance of the less-developed countries, had 
announced its intention of supplying uranium at lowest world prices. In 


supplying uranium through the Agency, it was not seeking to make a commercial 
profit. 


14. The Agency had not so far supplied a single gramme of uranium-235,a*id no 
programme existed for the use of fissionable materials put at its disposal. 
Meanwhile, the less-developed countries were expecting from the Agency, not 
paper decisions and a swollen administrative budget, but real assistance. That 
was not to say that the Agency had done nothing during the first year of its 
activity;, but it had begun its studies in a haphazard fashion, concentrating 
on such topics as strontium-90 and the tritium content of water. It should 
have attacked problems of wide interest, particularly the industrial use of 
radioisotopes, the training of its Member States' key technical personnel, 
study of the conditions for the development of atomic energy and the design of 
reactors which were economically sound. Instead it had limited itself to the 
study of secondary problems, accompanied by loud boating of the big drum. 
15. The sole result of its self-advertisement was to obscure the fact that the 
enemies of peace were continuing to stockpile fissionable materials and make 
experiments for warlike purposes. Meanwhile, however, the USSR had set an 
example by unilaterally renouncing nuclear weapons tests, unlike the United 
States which was continuing them. What the Agency should do was first to 
"demobilize" the atom, to take it "out of uniform". It was necessary to banish 
for ever the menace that radioactive waste (strontium-90 and caesium-237) hold 
over humanity, which was living in terror and uncertainty over the fate both of 
the present and of future generations. That was all well brought out by the. 
conclusions of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic 
Radiation—' . 
16. The foregoing conclusions, like those of the experts who had met at Geneva 
to s+udy moans of detecting nuclear explosions, showed that there was no moral 
or technical obstacle to the final cessation of nuclear test explosions. As 
long as scientific research was devoted to military ends, othor activities 
would remain in the background. It was therefore essential for the Agency to 
6/ United Nations Document A/3838, paragraphs 54-62. 


GC(II)/OR. 21 
page 8 


re-establish an atmosphere of confidence by guiding the raw materials of nuclear 
energy towards peaceful usesj the laboratories would then re-open their doors 
and scientists would work for peace. 


17. Certain Members of the Agency had raised the question of safeguards, which 
it had been desired to perfect even before the Agency had begun to operate. 
That would be making the Agency a supervisory body rather than one specializing 
in assistance, and dividing members into "countries exercising supervision" and 
"countries subject to supervision" rather than seeking beneficial co-ordination 
of efforts. The USSR delegation could not support that view of the Agency's 
functions. It considered that in accordance with Article IIT.B of the Statute 
the Agency should "conduct its activities in accordance with the purposes and 
principles of the United Nations to promote peace and international co-operation. 
That was the course pursued by the USSR, which exercised no supervision over 
countries benefiting from its assistance. 
18. He supported that part of the programme which provided that the Agency 
should send to the under-developed countries groups of experts to study the 
conditions under which atomic energy could contribute to their development. 
The USSR had placed thirty of its scientists at the Agency's disposal. He 
stressed the need to assist the under-developed countries in drawing up their 
programmes and in choosing the most useful spheres of actionj even a country 
considered to be under-developed might have highly gifted specialists with whom 
the Agency's own experts could establish fruitful collaboration. In regard to 
the training of its Member States' key personnel, the Agency had not made full 
use of all the possibilities open to it, and the Board of Governors in particular 
had under-estimated the importance of fellowships. 


19. He also emphasized the role the Agency could play in the exchange of scientific 
and technical information. It should arrange a series of scientific and 
technical conferences in order to draw practical conclusions from the groat mass 
of material that had been submitted to the second Geneva Conference. Close cooperation 
in that work between the Agency and the United Nations was essential, 
and he hoped that the General Conference would stress the need for it, 
20. Ho had heard with satisfaction the delegate of Now Zealand urge that as 
many ominent atomic scientists as possible should be brought into the Agoncy's 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 9 


work. The representatives of India and the USSR had proposed in the Preparatory-
Commission the establishment of an advisory committee of eminent scientists, and 
he was glad that the Board of Governors, albeit after long hesitation, had 
eventually decided to set one up. In conclusion he again expressed his conviction 
that the Agency must do all in its power for peace and co-operation 
between all peoples. 


21. Mr. TffiRSRA (Belgium) said that admittedly the Agency had not as yet 
gained sufficient experience for firm conclusions to be drawn but that his delegation, 
believing in the Agency's future, approved the Report of the Board of 
Governors. 
22. Paragraph 8 of the report stated thats "The major role for which the 
Agency was established is to supply fissionable and source materials and to help 
ensure continuing fuel supplies for atomic energy programmes." Fortunately, if 
was now known that there was a superabundance of uranium and thorium in the 
world, and that the distribution of sourco materials had ceased to be vitally 
important except for safety precautions. . 
23. He also shared the view expressed by several speakers about the effect on 
the Agency's development of progress in the construction of nuclear reactors 
for supplying electric power in countries still industrially undeveloped. It 
was now realized that high-power r.oactors would be the first to compote with 
conventional sources of energy. It was therefore necessary to make efforts, in 
which the Agency should participate, to reduce the power level at which the 
production of power became competitive. 
24. The Agency should seek to play a more intogral part in the United Nations 
system. For example, it should interest itself, should occasion arise, in the 
technical activities of the Scientific Committee on the Hffects of Atomic 
Radiation - which he hoped would continue to function - and in whatever system 
for supervising nuclear weapons tests was devised by the Conference of Experts 
which had met in. Geneva. As the dologate from France had said,-*-* it might 
perhaps be necessary to draw closer the bonds between the Agency and the United 
Nations. In general, the Agency should join with the other international 
2/ GC(II)/OR.16, paragraph 11. 



GC(II)/CR.21 


page 10 


organizations in an efficient relationship based on mutual confidence in which 


its statutory competence would be maintained. 


25. If the Agency was to help Member States, they in their turn must support 
it. Belgium had decided to put at the disposal of the Agency seven Type II 
fellowships for study, training and research, each of ten months' duration. 
They would cost $20 000 and Belgium would be responsible for travel and laboratory 
costs;; it would also pay each of the seven fellows a monthly allowance of 
10 COO Belgian francs. The fellows would be able to work either in the laboratories 
of one of the six nuclear centres of the Belgian universities or at the 
National Nuclear Research Centre at Moll., in particular, they would be able to 
help in the construction of two reactors. 
£6. Further, private Belgian companies were prepared to accept foreign trainees 
on Type I fellowships and were ready to put experts and research material in 
several spheres of nuclear engineering at the disposal of Member States. 


IJ. Finally, subject to a prior agreement with the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) and in conformity with Article IX of the Statute, options 
could be given each year on large quantities of uranium metal or oxide of 
nuclear purity including even fabricated fuel elements for reactors. 

28. Belgium had faith in the Agency's future and in the distinguished men at 
its head and, being persuaded that it had been called to perform great tasks, 
gave it its complete confidence. 
29. Mr. SIWABESSY (Indonesia) recalled that Indonesia had participated in 
the work of the Preparatory Commission and had had the honour of serving on the 
first Board of Governors, it was therefore aware both of the noble objectives 
set forth in the Statute and of the difficulties which had inevitably faced the 
Agency at the beginning of its life. However, those difficulties had to be 
overcome. Atomic energy which, 3ince its discovery, had been considered primarily 
from the point of view of military application, as a result of political conflicts 
which were dividing the world, was now to be considered within the Agency 
in an entirely new light. The Agency had thus been endowed with a great moral 
importance and should servo as a guide and inspiration to all peoples of the 
world. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 11 


30. It was important that the ideals embodied in the Agency should he implemented 
so as to benefit all the peoples of the world, especially those countries 
which were less well developed and which had high hopes from atomic energy. 
The Agency, which was only embarking on its activities, had aroused certain 
criticism, and constructive suggestions had been made in the course of discussion. 
Nevertheless, the Report of the Board of Governors had, in general, 
been approved by the Conference, a fact which Indonesia warmly welcomed. 
31. Without dwelling on all the points dealt with in the report, he would draw 
attention to certain aspeota of the Agency's activities and stress Indonesia's 
interest in it. It was indisputable that those countries which were highly 
dovelopod from an economic point of view were in a better position than the 
less developed countries to benefit from the advantages of atomic energy. It 
was for that reason that so much importance attached to the resolution adopted 
by the General Conference at its first session inviting the Board to give high 
priority to those activities which would givo the maximum possible benefit from 
the peaceful applications of atomic energy in improving the conditions and 
raising the standard of living of the peoples of the under-devoloped areas—' . 
32. In the opinion of the Indonesian delegation, the most urgent requirements 
of the under-developod countries were for programmes of training in the following 
spheres, 
(1) 
Radiation, including health and safety problems, methods of 
measurements, etc.5 
(2) Radiochemistry, for oxample the study of nuclear fuels such 
as uranium, thorium and.plutonium and the chemistry of radioisotopes 
used in botany, biology and medicine, including 
veterinary medicine% 
(3) Biophysical and bioohemical aspects of radiation;; and 
(4) 
The commonest applications of radioisotopes in medicine, 
biology, otc. 
Further, the Indonesian delegation recommended that reactors having a flux of 


8/ 0C.l(s)/KBS/5. 



GC(II)/OR.21 
page 12 


All 9 
10 to 10 neutrons per cm /sec should be sot up in the under-developed 
countries to train specialists in nuclear science and technology. 


33- Indonesia had already gone some way towards bringing such training programmes 
into being. Bilateral agreements would permit it in the near future 


to obtain help in accelerating the process. That did not, however, exclude the 
possibility of obtaining help from the Agency in the form, for example, of 
fellowships, teaching staff, equipment and also fissionable materials. The 
Agency could, in particular, play a big role in the supply of fissionable 
materials, on condition that it offered moro favourable conditions than those 
existing under bilateral agreements. 


34. At present Indonesia was engaged in constructing a reactor for the Faculty 
of Science at Bandung and a radiation laboratory which would be situated at 
Djakarta and which would serve as a reception and dispensing centre for radioisotopes. 
Another radiation laboratory was to be set up at DjogdJakarta, to 
deal mainly with the applications of cobalt-60 in agriculture. 
35* With those projects in mind, Indonesia had already sent people abroad for 
training to obtain the necessary skill. It was grateful that the Agency had 
already granted it a few fellowships and was hoping to recoive, within the next 
five years, more fellowships to meet the growing demands for scientific manpower. 


36. In the recruitment of the Agency's staff, while priority should certainly 
be given to technical qualifications, the principle of geographical distribution 
should be applied as much as possible. 
37. His delegation was happy to observe that the Agency was becoming increasingly 
universal in character as a result of the accession of new Fembers. That universality 
was a guarantee of effective work, and also accorded with the principle 
contained in Article II of the Statute, which his country had always warmly 
supported. 
38. In conclusion, he wished to point to the important role which publicity 
should play in the Agency. The problem was to dispel the fears of a largo part 
of the world's population, for whom the word "atom" was too often linked with 
the idea of destruction and calamity wrought by nuclear weapons. Well-planned 
publicity, to bring the Agency's aims and objectives to the knowledge of the 
public at large, would contribute a great deal towards that end. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 13 


39. Mr. VENARDIS (Greece) said that, by continually sending people to the 
United States, the United Kingdom, France, Canada, Yugoslavia and other countries 
for training, his country had now established a nucleus of experts and 
technicians capable of operating the reactor which was duo to go into service 
on 1 January 1959" 
40. The reactor, constructed with the valuable assistance of the United States, 
had been called "Lemocritus" in honour of the ancient philosopher who had first 
conceived the idea of the atom, to which he had given that name. The reactor 
vra.s situated in the outskirts of Athens, and plans had already been made to 
build a group of chemical, physical, geological, biological and medical laboratories 
around it. 
41. A large quantity of apparatus and equipment would be required if the 
laboratories wore to operate satisfactorily, and much of that equipment was 
still lacking. His country had therefore welcomed with special satisfaction 
the passages in the Report of the Board of Governors dealing with technical 
assistance to be offered by the Agency to its Members. It also welcomed the 
establishment of the fellowship programme, and proposed to appeal for the 
Agency's assistance in those two fields. 
42. Greece deeply regretted that none of its nationals occupied any post in 
the Agency's Secretariat. That was certainly not a deliberate omission, and 
his country hoped that it would be made good in the course of 1959* 
43° His delegation wished to congratulate the Agency on the work accomplished 
during the past year, and hoped that the coming year would bring still bettor 
results. 


44. Sir Leslie MARTIN (Australia) expressed his pleasure at the fact that 
his country had been closely associated with the various stages of the Agency's 
development. Australia had been a member of the group of States which had met 
in Washington in 1955 and 1956 to draft the Agency's Statute. It had then been 
represented on the Preparatory Commission and the first Board of Governors, and 
had been designated as a Member of the second Board of Governors. 
45* The programme which the Board had drawn up for 1959 was as a whole well 
conceived, and should provide a solid basis for fruitful development of the 



GC(II)/OR.-21 


page 14 


Agency's work in years to oome. His Government took the view that-, rather than 
engage in too ambitious a programme, the Agency should concentrate on certain 
important activities of an international character which could not be conducted 
more efficiently or economically by national scientific institutions or by 
existing international organizations. 


46. There were a number of specific tasks which would justify the Agency's 
existence and assure its future, if it could carry them out successfully. In 
particular, radiation hazards, which were inevitable in all uses of nuclear 
energy, raised an important problem, the urgency of which was generally recognized, 
and the Agency should co-ordinate its activities in that field with 
those of other organizations. Eesearch on safety measures should be developed 
to the utmost5 it called for painstaking work in laboratories all over the 
world and statistical analysis a.t the international level of the results obtained. 
That was one task for which the Agency was particularly well- suited. 
47* It should also play an active role in the organization of international 


scientific conferences, a role which it could now take over from the United 
Nations. His country doubted whether it was advisable to convene any more 
large conferences, such as that which had recently been held in Geneva. The 
Agency could, however, promote contacts among experts and among persons dealing 
at government level with problems relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 


48. To attain those objectives, the Agency should establish close and harmonious 
relations with organizations whose work embraced atomic energy and 
related fields. Its main task would be co-ordination. The Board of Governors 
had approved the texts of agreements between the Agency and a number of 
specialized agencies; those agreements would form the basis of practical cooperation 
to ensure a rational distribution of work between the various agencies 
and a wise use of available resources. 
49. The Agency should pay particular attention to the requirements of underdeveloped 
countries. For many countries the most pressing need was the training 
of experts, technicians and engineers, without whom no economic development 
programme could succeed. That was a task in which his country could help. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 15 


50. Australia possessed coal reserves far outstripping its own requirements; 
but unevenly distributed; some areas were very far from the coalfields. Power 
reactors were therefore among the priority projects on the Australian Atomic 
"Energy Commission's programme. A relatively small-power reactor was now being 
developed which could serve small isolated communities. It was a gas-cooled 
high-temperature reactor which cccmed likely to be able to supply electric 
power economically in 5 - 10 MIV stations and also in larger stations, between 
50 and 100 MW. Research undertaken in Australia was accordingly of value also 
to its neighbours in South-East Asia and the Pacific. 
51. Research on the use of radioisotopes in industry, agriculture and medioine 
was particularly useful to the small countries. Since the first session of the 
Agency's General Conference, the Australian Atomic Energy Commission had set up 
at Lucas Heights, near Sydney, an atomic research institute which included a 
10-MW reactor on the model of the British DIDO reactor. It would be used for 
research as part of the atomic power programme and for the production of radioisotopes. 
52. Research on nuclear-produced oleotricity was costly and often slow to give 
results. As had 'Deer, shown at the second Geneva Conference, the cost price of 
electricity produced from the atom could not compete with that of electricity 
from conventional sources, at least in many parts of the world. Radioisotopes, 
on the other hand, offered immediate benefits for public health and the 
material well-being of peoples. During the coming year Australia would begin 
to produce radioisotopes and would be happy to co-operate with the other States 
Members of the Agency in promoting applications of radioisotopes throughout the 
world. 
53. Speakers as eminent as Sir John Cockcroft and Mr. Perrin had pointed out 
at Geneva that, unless a largo number of technicians were available, miracles 
could not be expected from electricity of nuclear origin in the less-developed 
countries. The Australian Atomic Snorgy Commission and the universities were 
setting up at Lucas Heights the Australian Nuclear Science and Engineering 
Institute, which would train specialists in all branches of nuclear technology; 
its work would be complemented by that of the atomic science faculties of the 
universities. The research teams had at their disposal four electrostatic 

GC(II)/OR.21 


page 16 


generators, two electron-synchrotrons and a variable-energy cyclotron (2-12 
million volts). A 10 000 million volt proton accelerator was being built and 


the Government had just approved the purchase of a 10 million volt tandem 
generator. Schools for nuclear chemistry and nuclear metallurgy were being 
built. 


54- Australia's extensive scientific research programme enabled it to assist 


less-developed countries. It could offer training facilities in nuclear science 


and technology in Australian universities to graduates from Member States, ten 
to twelve of whom would from 1959 onwards be able to use the special equipment 
at Lucas Heights for training and research purposes. Under the Colombo Plan, 
Australia had already trained exports in various specialized fields connected 
with atomic energy. Colombo Plan countries could ask for other training faci


lities for their nationals, subject to the normal annual allocation under the 
Plan. Further details would be communicated to the Agency. Australia also 
hoped to be able to provide scientists and experts for Agency projects and, 
through the Agency, to supply radioisotopes for use in countries of the area 
to which it belonged. 


55. The Agency's fellowship and technical assistance programmes would be among 
the most useful of its activities. It should also profit from the resources of 
the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and Australia 
accordingly approved the Board's recommendation that the Agency should partici9/ 


pate in that programme—' . 


56. Australia approved, as a whole, the remainder of the programme proposed 
for 1959 by the Board of Governors5 its only reservation concerned the proposed 
construction of the Agency's own laboratories if those wore to be at all large. 
For the moment the Agency should preferably make use of suitable existing 
scientific institutes. With that reservation, Australia accepted the Annual 
Report of the Board of Governors;, it hoped that the General Conference would 
also approve it and that the Board would carry out the programme proposed for 
the following year. 
2/ GC(II)/44. 


GC(II)/OR.21 
page 17 


57. LIr. E.1DAYAT (United Arab Republic) said he did not wish to speak in 
detail of what had been done in his own country since the first session of the 
General Conference. He would merely state that the Cairo Atomic Energy Institute, 
with the help of United Arab scientists had been able to carry on its 
work, thanks to the unfailing support it had received at the instance of the 
President of the United Arab Republic. Prospecting by the geological service 
and the raw materials section of the Atomic Energy Institute had led to the 
discovery of considerable quantities of uranium and thorium. A plant for processing 
monazite from black sands which was being built near Rosetta would 
shortly be producing thorium. 
58. The United Arab Republic had concluded an agreement for co-operation with 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics under which the USSR Government had 
delivered to the United Arab Republic a 2 000 KW research reactor which would 
shortly go into operation; the agreement also provided for the building of a 
nuclear physics Laboratory, at present under construction. It should be 
stressed that the agreement provided the basis for an entirely free bilateral 
co-operation between two sovereign States. 
59. The United Arab Republic also had a national radioisotope production centre 
with branches throughout the country. Those activities and the training programme, 
while satisfying the country's present needs, represented the point of 
departure for more ambitious plans. The United Arab Republic had at the same 
time asked the Agency to help in establishing a regional radioisotope production 
centre in Cairo\ the Government intended to receive trainees from friendly 
countries in its nuclear laboratories. 
60. His country would continue to support the work of the Agency and to defend 
the interests of the less-developed countries. That support, coming from a 
small country, even if the contribution which accompanied it was only symbolic, 
was proof of the interest that the United Arab Republic took in the Agency's 
activities. His delegation had instructions to pledge a contribution to the 
operational part of the budget. 
61. The United Arab Republic was ready to support the Agency so far as its 
resources allowed, but it also hoped to benefit from the Agency's assistance. 
It had been the first country to present candidates for Agency fellowships. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 18 


It had already asked the Agency to help in various ways, in connexion with the 
extraction of uranium from phosphates, for example, and in the production of 
heavy water as a by-product from the fertilizer factory under construction near 
Aswan. Like all Middle Hast countries, the United Arab Republic was keenly 
interested in the building of small reactors which might transform arid zones 
into fertile land and bring prosperity to areas which were at present derelict, 


62. All the questions already raised at the General Conference by previous 
speakers were of vital interest to his delegation, and in view of their importance 
and their possible repercussions it intended to have them studied fully 
and objectively by appropriate bodies. Many of the problems involved were 
dynamic and not easy to deal with. The delegation of the United Arab Republic 
and the Governor from that country would accordingly give its views in detail 
at a later stage. 
63. It was very satisfactory that the Agency had the support of the United 
States of America, the Soviet Union and other countries, great and small. He 
hoped the Agency and its Secretariat would work for the well-being of all 
mankind, and thanked the Austrian Government for its generous hospitality to 
the Conference. 
64. Sir. BHABHA (India) recalled that the first session of the General 
Conference in 1957 had coincided with the launching of the first artificial 
satellite. The present session was meeting immediately after the second 
Geneva Conference, during which an enormous mass of scientific information had 
been exchanged - an exchange which would undoubtedly contribute immensely to 
the peaceful development of atomic energy. The first Gonova Conference in 1955 
had released from secrecy the phenomenon of fission, opening the way to a 
rapid and widespread development of atomic energy. That was reflected in the 
still wider scale of the second Geneva Conference where it was fusion that had 
been freed from secrecy$ thus, scientists of all countries could now make a 
united effort to find a solution to the extremely difficult problem of fusion 
and so provide mankind with an inexhaustible source of power. 
65. During its first year the Agency had sot up its internal administration 
and concluded the Headquarters Agreement with the Austrian Government. It must 
henceforward devote itself increasingly to achieving the specific objectives 
laid down in its Statute. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 19 


66. Considering the various tasks awaiting the Agency's attention, it was 
immediately evident that certain aspects of the peaceful application of atomic 
energy were essentially international in character. Thus, the international 
transport of radioisotopes and radioactive materials, the disposal of radioactive 
effluents and waste, in the air, in rivers or in the high seas, and the 
entry of nuclear-propelled ships into ports raised international health and 
safety problems which could only be dealt with by international co-operation. 
67. India was therefore happy to note that the Agency had convened a committee 
of experts to frame a draft manual of practices for the safe handling of radioactive 
isotopes5 it was clearly desirable that the practices followed by the 
various countries should be embodied in an internationally accepted code. The 
manual would be of enormous assistance to many countries, and India had readily 
agreed to be represented on the Committee, since that task was a very important 
part of the Agency's functions. 
68. There were several other' problems of that nature, such as the disposal of 
wastes arising from a constantly growing atomic energy industry. As a first 
step in arriving at generally accepted practices, the Agency might convene 
experts to formulate the areas of agreement and the areas in which they felt 
further study was necessary. Such a task could best be done by an ad hoc 
panel of experts rather than by the Agency's permanent staff, because what was 
required was not only the drawing up of a code of safe practices but also its 
acceptance by alL countries. 
69. Nov/ that the remarkable achievements of the United States atomic submarines 
were known and a paper had been road at the second Geneva Conference on the 
potentialities of the Soviet atomic ice-breaker and other projects for the use 
of atomic energy for marine propulsion were under way, it seemed none too early 
to start thinking about the health and safety standards with which such vessels 
should comply. Since no progress could be made without the willing consent of 
the countries concerned, the Agency should confine itself to convening a 
meeting of their experts. The problem had also many political implications 
and the Agency would have to keep in very close touch with the United Nations 
while dealing with it. 



GC (II)/OR.21 
page 20 


70. One of the functions mentioned in the Agency's Statute was to foster the 
exchange of scientific and technical information and to encourage the exchange 
and training of scientists and experts. However, many countries did not at 
present have an atomic energy programme. They should therefore he equipped 
with the means to initiate such a programme hy visits from fact-finding teams 
and by their participation in the fellowship programme side hy side with 
existing bilateral and multilateral arrangements, By 31 August there had been 
247 applications under the Agency's fellowship programme, which clearly indicated 
the importance which training had in the eyes of many countries. However, 
every care would have to he taken to integrate that international training with 
the development of atomic energy programmes in the countries seeking such 
fellowships. If the facilities made available by the countries offering assistance 
were to he fruitfully utilized, the trainees would have to return to 
their own countries so that the latter could benefit from their skills. 
71. In connexion with the training programme, the Agency should use whatever 
facilities might be available in different parts of the world. For instance, 
India had made available to the World Health Organization (TOO) at its request 
the facilities of the Atomic Energy Establishment at Trombay for a training 
course in Health Physics to be held in November 195^ f°r scientists in South 
and South-East Asia. The Agency might well emulate that example, as it was 
clearly more economical, and indeed better for several other reasons, to 
arrange training courses in the areas concerned rather than transport large 
numbers of scientists thousands of milei. India was also prepared to make 
the facilities at Trombay available to the Agency for the training of scientific 
personnel from the countries of that rast region. 
72. In the highly industrialized countries, savings of several hundreds of 
millions of dollars had been made possible by utilizing radioisotopes in 
industry. In the less industrialized countries, more emphasis might have to 
be given to agricultural applications, and regional research based upon regional 
radioisotope laboratories might well yield valuable results. There would, of 
course, have to be the closest co-operation with other international organizations 
working in that field, such as the Pood and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO), WHO and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO), India could not support the view that the use of isotopes in 



GC(II)/OR.21 
page 21 


agriculture or biology should be the exclusive responsibility of the Ager^. 
He recalled moreover what was already being done in that field at the national 
level. 


73. The exchange of scientific information, the exchange of exports and the 
training of scientific personnel were important functions, but they were hardly 
sufficient to justify an international agency of the Agency's size. However, 
it had originally been intended that the Agency should discharge more important 
functions, more particularly functions relating to the generation of electric 
power from nuclear energy. 
74. It was often said that atomic power would find its immediate application 
in the highly industrialized countries and that the industrially less developed 
countries would have to wait some time before they could make use of it. That 
generalization was based on insufficient study. India had an industrial 
potential which was not small, but considered itself an industrially underdeveloped 
country in the sense that production per head of population was small 
and the average standard of living of the people therefore low. The role of 
nuclear power in India had been very carefully studied and the conclusion had 
been reached that it would be competitive in most parts of India at present; 
for that reason it had boon decided to include a minimum of 250 JP.7 of installed 
nuclear capacity in the power programme for the period ending March 1966. It 
was probable that that figure would be doubled and possibly even quadrupled. 
The present installed capacity of the Bombay grid was over 500 KW and was 
expected to reach nearly 800 M7 by 19&3 when the hydro-electric and thermal 
stations now under construction were finished. A study of the load curve for 
the grid showed a load factor of over 69 per cent. Moreover, because of the 
cost of long-distance transport of coal, the cost of thermal power por kWh was 
about Rsc 0. 04 or 9 mills. . Those figures indicated clearly that a nuclear 
power station of 150 or even 250 IvIW could be installed and could without difficulty 
be operated at a high load factor. There wore moreover few places, even 
in highly industrialized areas, where such favourable conditions for bho 
operation of a nuclear power plant could be found. 


75* I"t was possible that conditions in other loss industrialized areas differod 
from those in India, but ho felt that a thorough study of the energy problems of 
those areas was required. The vast area of Southorn Asia and the Far East 



GC(II)/OR.21 


page 22 


(excluding China), with a population of 775 millions, had the poorest energyresources 
of any large area in the world. The statistics available to the 
United Nations showed that the maximum economically feasible production of 
energy in the area would be about 2.3 Mlh per annum per head of population; a 
figure which Yra.s only 50 per cent above the present average for the area and 
which represented one-eighth of the annual per capita energy consumption in 
Western Europe. That clearly showed that the inevitable industrialization of 
that vast area would only be possible on the basis either of large-scale imports 
of conventional fuel or, more probably, on the basis of atomic energy. After 
all, the problem facing the less industrialized areas was not that of the high 
cost of power but rather that of thoro being practically no power at all, unless 
atomic energy were utilized. For all those areas, at least in the immediato 
future, small 20-MW power stations would prove very useful even if the power 
produced by those stations was more expensive than that produced by large 
stations. Moreover it had to be remembered that the areas in question were, 
in any case, used to high—cost power. 


76. The Agency could play an important part in studying the economic aspects 
of nuclear energy in those areas; it would serve not only their interests but 
also those of the industrially advanced countries by determining the type of 
power station which could profitably be used in loss advanced areas. By mutual 
co-operation the Agency could thus enhance the contribution which atomic energy 
could make to the prosperity of the under-doveloped, as well as of the industrialized, 
countries. 
77. The most casual perusal of the Statute revealed that technical assistance 
was regarded as only one of the Agency's functions. If the Agency were to grow 
to its full stature it would have to be prepared to assist in matters connected 
with disarmament to the extent it was called on to do so by the United Nations, 
That was an area where the main policy could only be formulated and agreed on 
by countries within the comity of the United Nations and it was as the atomic 
arm of the United Nations that the Agency's greatest potentialities remained 
to be realized, thus the Agency would have to work in the closest collaboration 
with the United Nations. The Relationship Agreement with the United Nations 
referred to the Agency as "under the aegis of the United Nations"—'. That 
10/ Article I. 



GC(II)/OR.21 
page 23 


phrase, which had been repeatedly used at the Washington negotiations and at 
the Conference on the Statute, clearly showed that it was the Agency's function 
in that respect to supplement and not to supersede existing United Nations 
institutions in the atomic energy field. 


78. It had sometimes been suggested that the Agency should take over the 
entire responsibility within the United Nations family for the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. That was not desirable because the experience gained in 
those matters by various United Nations bodies should not be overlooked. It 
was not necessary for the Agency to carry out tasks which other bodies wore 
already dealing with, but it should prepare itself to deal with work which 
none of those other organs did or could do. 
79. The Indian delegation had noted with satisfaction that the Board of 
Governors had recently decided to set up a Scientific Advisory Committee of 
seven members to advise the Board and the Director General. It regretted, 
however, the rejection of the Indian proposal that the Advisory Committee to 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations should be used for that purpose. 
The Relationship Agreement between the Agency and the United Nations, which 
had been ratified by both organizations, provided for such oo-operation. 
Would rejection of the Indian proposal imply that the Agency was going back on 
its agreement, That would be very unfortunate. All States Members of the 
Agency must do thoir utmost to bring about the closest possible co-operation 
between the United Nations and the Agency. It was clear that the United 
Nations was the primary organization in the field of international co-operation 
and that the other members of the United Nations family had an important but 
more limited role to play in their own specialized field. The Agency should 
avoid all delusions of grandeur and recognize its true role in relation to the 
United Nations. The Indian delegation hoped the Agency would be entrusted 
with important tasks in the field of atomic cnorgy by the United Nations, even 
though that might oventually require an amendment of its Statute. 
80. Mr* THIRRI1G (Austria) said that the Agency's activities in its first 
year had been mainly devoted to the administrative build-up of the organization. 
The Austrian delegation was certain that those preparations would load in the 
years to come to the achievement of the noble objoctives laid down in the 
Agency's Statute. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 24 


81. Reviewing Austrian accomplishments in the field of atomic energy, he 
stated that the Osterreichische Studiengesellschaft fur Atomonergie was establishing 
a nuclear research centre with a 5 000 kW reactor south-east of 
Vienna. Another research reactor would he available to the Austrian universities. 
82. Research in the field of radioactivity had been taking place in Austria 
ever since the discovery of radium sixty years before, and it had been the 
Austrian Academy of Sciences which at that time had provided the Curies with 
several tons of uranium ores, from which they had been able to oxtract radium. 
The Vienna Radium Institute founded in 1910 had then been the world's only 
institute devoted solely to nuclear research/ a fey/ years later, the Nobel 
prize winner Hevosy had made the basic experiments showing how radioactive 
daughter elements of radium could be used as tracers. Research at the Austrian 
Radium Institute still continued. 
83. Austria was also planning the construction of a pilot power plant for the 
Osterroichischo Vorbundgosollsohaft. Although Austrian hydroelectric potential 
was considerable, there was a need for thermal power plant as well5 from i960 
onwards, therefore, there would probably be substantial investment in power 
reactors. Because his country had no particularly urgent need for nuclear 
power, it would be reasonable and economical to await further progress in 
reactor technology before starting construction of a nucloar power station. 
84. It was in a different sector of the Agency's activity that his country 
could best play an active part. He proposed to give a brief account of the 
matter, but more detailed proposals would be made at a later stage. 
85. After referring to the debt science owed to the Hobel prize winners Fermi, 
Compton and their collaborators, who had started the first chain reaction in 
Chicago in December 1942, he stressed the importance of producing not only 
technicians capable of constructing and operating a reactor, but also the kind 
of physicists who, starting from speculations about the state of matter in the 
interior of the stars, had developed the theory of plasma physics upon which 
all efforts to achieve thermonuclear reactions were based. 
86. It was therefore not only necessary to train good nuclear engineers but 
also to create conditions in which geniuses like Bohr and Fermi could develop. 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 25 


Gifted young men needed advanced training in theoretical physics and particularly 
qualified teachers. The famous school of Professor Sommerfeld in 
Munich, which had produced so many Nobel prize winners, was a notable example, 


87. Austria had also been the scene of other important scientific workj for 
example, the first estimates of the size of atoms and molecules had been made 
by Loschmidt nearly a century previously and, later on, fundamental studios had 
been undertaken by Boltzmann and other Austrian physicists. The difficult 
economic situation since the end of the First World War had, however, proved to 
be a serious obstacle to Vienna and its University in attempting to maintain 
the University's position in the field of theoretical physics. 
88. With improving conditions and in mutual co-operation with the Agency, 
however, the city might become an international centre of advanced theoretical 
physics to the benefit of all ZIombor States. 
89. The conclusion of agreements with the specialized agencies and the establishment 
of relations with regional inter-governmental organizations strengthened 
the position of the Agency as the co-ordinating body in atomic matters. 
That question demanded special attention in order to avoid duplication of 
effort. 
90. The elaboration of rules and regulations on health and safety in handling 
radioisotopes and their inclusion in a manual was a very important task. It 
was to be hoped that such manuals would also be issued on the transport of 
radioactive materials. Lastly, the introduction of uniform terminology must 
be considered within the Agency's competence. 
91. It appeared that the Agency's fellowship programme had made a good start 
as well as the programme of technical assistance to under-developed areas. 
Co-ordination of that assistance with the corresponding United Nations programmes 
ought to be discussed in the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee. 
92. The Agency's intention to create regional training centres was to be 
welcomed, and it was encouraging to note that the 1959 budget provided for the 
construction of a laboratory at the Agency's headquarters. Austria would do 
everything possible to facilitate the carrying out of the latter project. The 
installations which his country was at present erecting would lend themselves 
admirably to co-operation in that field. 

GC(II)/OR.21 


page 26 


93. The programme for exchange of scientists should he extended. The 
Austrian universities were very interested in such exchanges, and plans for 
creating an advanced school of theoretical physics in Vienna depended largely 
upon the possibility of securing regular visits by professors from abroad. 
94. He was in agreement with the opinion expressed by other speakers that the 
Agency should be entrusted with the organization of international scientific 
conferences and symposia in the field in which, within the family of the United 
Nations, it was primarily responsible. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE 30ARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(II)/38, GC(II)/59) 


95. The PRESIDENT reminded the General Conference that it had to elect 
five Members to the Board of Governors, in accordance with the Report by the 
General Committee (GC(II)/59). 
96. Mr. BEN-DOR t,Israel) speaking on a point of order, asked the President 
what were the precise responsibilities of a State elected to the Board of 
Governors as representative of a particular area. He recalled that one of the 
speakers at the current session had stated that his country would welcome 
trainees from friendly countries in its nuclear laboratories, and he doubted 
whether, in view of that significant reservation, the State in question could 
properly represent the geographic area of which it was a member. Israel, on 
the other hand, had started courses at the Weizmann Institute which were open 
to nationals of all other countries without any discrimination. 
97" The PRESIDENT recalled, in reply to the Israeli delegate's question, 
that there had already been discussions on that question during the Conference 
on the Statute in New York. Article VI of the Statute defined the eight areas 
from which the Members of the Board were chosen, but it did not specify their 
duties and obligations. He rc-grettod that he himself could not answer the 
question of the Israeli delegate, though another delegate who had taken part in 
the drafting of the Statute might perhaps be able to give the information 
asked for. 


At the request of the President, Mr. Grue (Denmark) and Mr. Eleftheriades 
(Greece) acted as toilers 



GC(II)/OR.21 
page 27 


98. The PRESIDENT first invited the General Conference to elect a Member 
for Western Europe, 
A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows.' 
Number of ballot papers: 60 
Invalid ballots; None 
Number of valid ballots; 60 
Absteni ;ionss None 
Number of members voting" 60 
Required majority; 31 
Number of votes obtained: 
Netherlands 60 

The Netherlands was unanimously elected to membership of the Board of 
Governors. 


99. The PRESIDENT then invited the General Conference to elect a Member 
for Africa and the Kiddle East. 
A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows; 
Number of ballot papers; 62 
Invalid ballots; 6 
Number of valid ballots; 56 
Abstentions; None 
Number of members voting- 56" 
Required majority; 29 
Number of votes obtaineds 


United Arab Republic 48 
Tunisia 6 
Iran 1 
Israel 1 


Having obtained the required majority, the United Arab Republic was elected 
to membership of the Board of Governors. 


100. The PRESIDENT next invited the General Conference to elect a Member 
for South-East Asia and the Pacific, 

GC(II)/OR.21 
page 28 


A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows; 
Number of ballot papers; 62 
Invalid ballots; None 
Number of valid ballotss 62 
Abstentions; None 
Number of members votings 62 
Required majority; 32 
Number of votes obtained; 
Indonesia 33 
Thailand 29 

Having obtained the required majority, Indonesia was elected to membership 
of the Board of Governors. 


101. The PRESIDENT finally invited the General Conference to fill the two 
elective places which remained vacant. 
A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows; 
Number of ballot papers; 62 
Invalid ballots; 2 
Number of valid ballots: 60 
Abstentions; None 
Number of members voting; 60 
Required majority; 31 
Number of votes obtained; 


Venezuela 54 
Peru 37 
Thailand 14 
Mexico 7 
Czechoslovakia 1 
Israel 1 
Italy 1 
Sweden 1 
Vatican City 1 
Yugoslavia 1 



GC(II)/OR.21 
page 29 


Having obtained the required majority, Venezuela and Peru were elected to 
membership of the Board of Governors. 


102. The PRESIDENT congratulated the elected Members and said that he felt 
sure that they would discharge their responsibilities well during the next two 
years. 
BEASUinS TO OBTAIN VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO TIE! GENERAL FUND, INCLUDING THE 
CALLING OF A PLEDGING C0NF2T3NC.3 (GC(II)/54) 


103. L'lr. McCOKH (United States of America) presented to the General Conference 
the joint draft resolution submitted by Brazil, Canada, Japan, Norway, 
the United Arab Republic and the United States of America (GC(II)/54) providing 
that during its second regular session the General Conference should conveno a 
special committee of the whole Conference, under the chairmanship of the 
President of the Conference, where pledges of voluntary financial contributions 
to the General Fund to meet the expenses of the operational part of the Agency' 
budget for 1959 would be announced. 
104. He trusted that the draft resolution would be adopted unanimously and that 
all Member States would make generous contributions to the General Fund. The 
decision to convene a special committee would not in any way prejudge the 
question of the acceptance of voluntary contributions to the General Fund, nor 
was there any reason why Member States should not offer contributions after the 
special committee had completed its work. 
105. I-2r. FURUTJCHI (Japan) endorsed the United States delegate's remarks. 
Voluntary contributions were very important, for during the initial phase they 
would be the only means of financing the Agency's operational programme. 
The joint draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.22 
26 November 1958 
ENGLISH 
General Conference 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Wednesday, 1 October 1958, at 3.20 p.m. 

President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 

agenda-" 


21 
Second report to the United Nations General 1 -6 
Assembly (1957-58) 

20 
Rules on the consultative status of non-7 -8 
governmental organizations with the Agency 

19 
Relations with regional intergovernmental 9 -10 
organizations 

18 
Relations with specialized agencies 11 -24 

16 
Rules regarding the acceptance of voluntary 25 -26 
contributions to the General Fund 

22 
Arrangements for a possible report to the 27 - 28 
Economic and Social Council of the United 
Nations before the third regular session of 
the General Conference 

24 
Election of members of the Agency's staff 29 - 30 
pension committee 

26 
Month in which regular sessions of the General 31 
Conference shall be convened 

27 
Opening date of the third regular session 32 

GC(II)/57. 

N.B. 
The list of delegations attsnding the second regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/17/Rev.3. 

GC(II)/OR.22 


page 2 


SECOND REPORT TO THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL.ASSEMBLY (1957-58) (GC(II)/40 and 

Corr.1 and 2) 


1. The PRESIDENT asked the Conference to consider the second report by 
the Agency to the General Assembly of the United Nations covering the period from 
1 November 1957 to 30 June 1958 (GC(II)/40 and Corr.1 and 2). 
.2. Mr. de ALBA (Mexico) drew the attention of the Conference to paragraph 
84 of the report, which mentioned the participation of two representatives of the 
Organization of American States (OAS) in the working group's survey in Latin 
America. He said that it was not two representatives of OAS who were concerned, 
but two representatives of the Pan American Union, .and the text of the report 
should be corrected accordingly. 


3. With reference to paragraph 94, he wirshed to stress the great importance 
that Mexico attached to the Agency's scientific Y/ork, especially to the problem 
of safeguards and the use of radioisotopes. His Government was at present 
drawing up laws and regulations covering those problems and hoped to make extensive 
use of the manual which the agency was preparing. It would be advantageous 
if the competent bodies of other Member States did likewise and consulted 
the Agency whenever they had to prepare national legislation on the use of 
nuclear energy. 
4- Jith regard to the draft resolution on the cover page of the report, he was 
perfectly willing to vote for the first paragraph. On the other hand, the 


second paragraph seemed to be contradictory to the provisions of the Statute and 
the Rules of Procedure. In his opinion the report should deal with the period 


from 1 July to 30 June of the following year, which would make it unnecessary to 


expand the preface of the report as recommended by the Board of Governors. 


Consequently his delegation was not in a position to support that paragraph and 
he therefore asked th ,t the two paragraphs of the draft resolution be put to the 
vote separately. 


5. The PRESIDENT, in replying to the Mexican delegate, said that his 
request would be granted. He pointed cut that the second paragraph of the draft 
resolution also allowed the Board of Governors to make such editorial changes in 
the text as might be necess^,ry. 

GC(II)/OR,22 
page 3 

6. 
He put the draft resolution to the vote paragraph by paragraph. 
Paragraph 1 was adopted unanimously. 
Par .graph 2 was adopted hy 36 votos to 3, with 7 abstentions. 
The draft resolution wis adopted by 54 votes to none, with 1 abstention. 
RULES ON TILS CONSULT AT I VE ^Tr.TUS OF N0N-GOTERIJME1JTAL ORGANIZATIONS IITE THE 
AGENCY (GC(II)/61) 

7. Mr. ZAMPETTI (Italy) Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on it^m 20 of the agenda (GC(II)/6l). 
fi. The PRESIDENT put the draft resolution in paragraph 2 of the Committee's 
report to the vcte. 

The 
draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 

RELATIONS /ITH REGIONAL INTER-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (GC(II)/62) 

9. Mr. ZAMPETTI (Italy), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on item 19 of the agenda (GC(II)/62). 
10. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution in paragraph 3 of 
the 
Committee's report. 
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously 

RELATIONS :ITE SPECIALIZED AGENCIES (GC(II)/63) 

11. Mr. ZAMPETTI (Italy), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on item 18 of the agenda (GC(II)/63). 
12. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution in paragraph 3 of 
the Committee's report. 
The 
draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 

13. Mr. SOLLI (Norway), explaining his delegation's vote, said that the 
competent Norwegian authorities had not had time to present their comments on 
the draft agreements in the short period which had elapsed since they were 
communicated to Member States. The Norwegian delegation's vote in favour of the 
resolution did not therefore commit it to vote in the same way when the agreements 
came before the competent organs of the specialized agencies for their approval. 

GC(II)/OR.22 
page 4 


14. Mr. HAMILTON (Nov/ Zealand) welcomed the rapid conclusion of the agreements 
which had just been approved, and thanked all representatives of the 
organizations concerned who had contributed to that end. 
15. The Now Zealand delegation had votud in favour of the resolution because it 
considered that the agreements provided a framework in which practical measures 
should be worked out, allowing the interested organizations tc maintain veryclose 
co-operation. As far as possible they should avoid overlaps and take 
concerted action in matters of common interest. 
16. Naturally it had been a difficult task from the very beginning to establish 
fields of competence, but he recalled that the Economic and Social Council in 
resolution 694 E (XXVl)-^ had drawn the attention of the specialized agencies 
and the Agency to the fact that effective co-ordination required not only formal 
bilateral arrangements, but also the praotical development of day-to-day working 
relationships. 
17. It was to be hoped that the secretariats would succeed in establishing such 
day-to-day working relationships, and that in accordance with the same Economic 
and Social Council resolution the Agenoy would bear in mind the special 
responsibilities of the specialized agencies in relation to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy in their respective fields of competence. 
18. In conclusion, he expressed his conviction that an era of close day-to-day 
co-operation had begun for the greatest benefit of the whole of humanity. 
19. The PRESIDENT drew the attention of the Conference to the Committee's 
recommendation in paragraph 2 of its report that the Director General, in agreement 
with the Directors General of the specialized agencies, should be authorized 
to make whatever purely formal modifications might prove necessary to the texts 
of the agreements. 
The recommendation of the Committee was approved. 

l/ Reproduced in document GC(II)/51, Appendix. 


GC(II)/OR.22 
page 5 

20. The DIRECTOR GlIEJRAL stressed that the negotiations between the 
representatives of the specialized agencies concerned and the Agency had taken 
place in an atmosphere of cordiality and co-operation, unm.arred by rivalry. It 
was obvious, however, that those igr cements provided only a foundation - on which 
in time, with experience and co-operation, a whole system could be built. The 
Secretariat of the Agency would work unreservedly for the realization of that 
common objective. The field of atomics was so big that it offered many 
possibilities for practical .activity; the most important thing was to avoid unnecessary 
duplication \nd expenditure. 
21. Mr. SHiCff (F-od and Agriculture Organization of th; United Nations (FAO)), 
on behalf of the Director General of FAO, expressed his satisfaction that it had 
been possible to draw up in such a short period a draft agreement governing 
2/ 

relations between the Agency and FAO-7 . He was convinced that close collaboration 
between the Agency and FAO would yield good results. 

22. Mr. DOBSON ('..Vcrld Health Organization (WHO)) expressed his pleasure 
that the General Conference had unanimously approved the draft agreement governing 
relations between the Agency and WHO-' . That agreement, which was to be examined 
by the World Health Assembly during its next session, merely confirmed officially 
the close collaboration which already existed between the two organizations. 
23. Mr. SEIliRSEN (international Labour Organisation (lLO)) welcomed the 
fact that the General Conference had unanimously approved the draft agreement 
governing relations between the Agency and ILO-^ . The agreement would be submitted 
for approval to thu Governing Body of the International Labour Office at 
its meeting in November. 
24. The PflKSIDjUKT thanked the representatives of FAO, WHO, and ILO for 
their statements. 
2/ GC(II)/47. 
3/ 0C(ll)/48. 
4/ GC(II)/46 and :idd.l and Add. l/Corr. 1. 



GC(II)/OR.22 
page 6 

RULES REGARDING THE ACCEPTANCE OF VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND 
(GC(II)/64) 

25. Mr. ZAMPETTI (Italy), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report en item 16 of the agenda (GC(II)/64). 
26. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
paragraph 2 of the Committee's report. 
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR A POJSIELE REPORT TO THE ECONOMIC AITO SOCIAL COUNCIL OF THE 
UNIT-ID NATIONS BSFORE THE THIRD REGULAR SESSION OF THE GENiBAL CONFERENCE 
(GC(II)/65) 

27. Mr. ZAMPETTI (Italy), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on item 22 of the agenda (GC(II)/65). 
28. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
paragraph 2 of the Committee's report. 
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE AGENCY'S ST 'J,, PENSION COMMITTEE (GC(II)/60) 

29. The PRESIDENT recalled thvfc an agreement had been made for the entry 
of the Agency into the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, with effect from 
1 October 1958* In his memorandum (GC(II)/60), the'Director General proposed 
that the General Conference should elect two members and one alternate member 
of the Staff Pension Committee which the Agency would have to set up under the 
Fund's Regulations, He accordingly invited nominations. 
30. Mr. SOLE (Union of South Africa) proposed Mr. Barton (Canada) and Mr. 
Rajan (India) as members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee and Mr. Polaczek 
(Austria) as alternate member. 
Mr. Barton (Canada) and Mr. Rajan (India) wore elected members of the 
Agency's Staff Pension Committee and Mr. Polaczek (Austria) was elected 
alternate member. 


GC(II)/OR.22 
page 7 

IJCITTH III ;iIICH UGUL/JR bJTioIONS OF THE G]^%;R;.L COHFjiRilTCi] SHALL B.u CONVAlFJiD 

31. The PRJSIDJLMT pointed cut that Rule 1 of the Rules of Procedure for 
the General Conference w.,.s not yet complete because the month in v/hich the 
regular session of the Conference should normally take place each year had not 
yet been fixed. In resolution GC.1(s)/RES/l5, adopted at the previous session, 
the General Conference had noted th>/& a decision would hrve to be taken :'t a 
subsequent session to fix the month in v/hich the regular annual session of the 
General Conference should normally be convened, thus completing the text of 
Rulu 1. At its fifth meeting^/ the General Committee had considered it 
der.irable that the G.-ncral Conference should adept, at the present session, a 
decision '.vhich v/culd m ke it possible to complete Rule 1. Having examined 
various suggestions, the General Committej had decided to propose convening the 
regular annu 1 rjoscsion of the General Conference in Sept ember. Before putting 
the proposal to the vote, he wished tc point out that a member of the Austrian 
delegation './he hxl been present at th vt General Committee's meeting had stated 
th .t if the rogul'r annual session of the General C nference took place during 
the second half of 'September, accomnod ,ticn of delegates would present no problem. 
The proposal of the Gener .1 Committee v/as adopted. 

OPUTIHG IL.Ti OF TH.'f THIRD RJGUL'il JASSIGN 

32. The PRESIDENT placed before the General Conference the General 
Committee's proposal that the morning of Tuesday, 22 September 1959, should be 
fixed as the opening date of the third regular soesion of the General Conference-'. 
The proposal of the General Committee v/is adopted. 

The meeting rose at 4*35 p.m. 


$/ GC(II)/G-H/OR.5. 
6/ Ibid. , paragraph 19. 


INTERNATIONAL 


ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY 

Distr. 
GENERAL 


GC(II)/OR.23 
26 November 1958 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 2 October 1958,at 4.30 p.m. 


President: 
Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


12 Programme, Budget and Working Capital Fund 1-7 
for 1959 


* GC(II)/57. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the second regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/17/Rev.3. 

GC(II)/OR.23 
page 2 


PHOGRAIZS, rr3CJ, APD 7/OKKING UAPITAL FUND FOR 1959 (GC(II)/66, GC(II)/67) 


1. Mr. CVRLJE (Yugoslavia), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, submitted the Committee's report on item 12 (GC(II)/66), and 
drew attention to the two draft resolutions in the Annex. 
2. The PRESIDENT said that draft resolution A on budgetary appropriations 
for the expenses of the Agency in 1959 was divided into two parts, part I 
dealing with the Agency's administrative expenses for 1959, and part II with 
other expenses. 
On request, separate votes were taken on draft resolution A, part I, 
paragraph 1, items 3 (Special missions - $200,000) and 13 (Scientific supplies 
and equipment - $50,000). 


Item 3 was approved by 36 votes to 13, with 5 abstentions. 


Item 13 was approved by 44 votes to 10, with 2 abstentions. 


Draft resolution A part I, was adopted by 59 votes to none, with 
1 abstention. 


3. The PRESIDENT said that, in the light of the voting on part I, 
paragraph 1, item 3 of draft resolution A, the Czechoslovak delegation had 
withdrawn its amendment (GC(II)/67) to part II of the draft resolution. 
On request, a separate vote was taken on the figure of $400,000 (The 
operating Fund, Part I (For Agency projects)) in draft resolution A, part II, 
paragraph 1. 


The figure of $4°0,000 was adopted by 40 votes to 11, with 6 abstentions. 


Draft resolution A, part II, was adopted by 58 votes to none, with 
1 abstention. 


4. Mr. MIKHAILOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said in 
explanation of his vote that his delegation had already clearly defined its 
position. The Soviet Government attached the greatest importance to the 
Agency's scientific activities, and considered that the appropriation for 
setting up laboratories was much too lowj the Soviet delegation had therefore 
voted'against the figure proposed for the Operating Fund, Part I, to show 
that, in its opinion, the Agency had been given insufficient funds. 

GC(II)/OR.23 
page 3 


5. Mr. SIMANE (Czechoslovakia) said that his delegation was not against 
the Agency's setting up its ov/n laboratories hut had already pointed out that 
the necessary conditions, which were laid down in Article III of the Statute 
and in the Agency's initial programme,--' were not fulfilled. He had therefore 
voted against the figure proposed for the Operating Fund, Part I. In the 
opinion of the Czechoslovak Government, the Agency's most important function 
was to help Member States, That explained his Government's great interest 
in special missions, on which, in his opinion, most of the budget should he 
spent. 


6. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the whole of draft resolution A 
(Budgetary Appropriations for the Expenses of the Agency in 1959). 
Draft resolution A was adopted by 57 votes to none, with 2 abstentions. 


7. The PRESIDENT put to the vote draft resolution B (Use of the Working 
Capital Fund in 1959). 
Draft resolution B was adopted unanimously. 


The meeting rose at 5 p.m. 


l/ GC,l/l, paragraph 104. 



INTERNATIONAL 

Distr. 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY GENERAL 
GC(II)/OR.24 
26 Novernber 1958 
ENGLISH 

General Conference 

SECOND REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Saturday, 4 October 1958, at 11 a.m. 
President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


9 Report of the Credentials Committee (continued) 1 
25 Appointment of external auditors 2-5 
12 Programme, Budget and Working Capital 


Fund for 1959 (continued) 
13 Use of the Working Capital Fund in 1958 
14 Scale of Members' contributions 6-15 
15 Possible participation of the Agency in 


the United Nations Expanded Programme 
of Technical Assistance 


17 
Measures to obtain voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund, including the calling 
of a pledging conference (continued) 16 - 20 


30 Closing of the session 
21 - 41 
29 Minute of silent prayer or meditation 


* GC(II)/57. 
N.B. 
The lis t of delegations attending the second regular session of 
the General Conference was issued as document GC(II)/INF/17/Rev.3„ 

GC(II)/OR.24 


page 2 


REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(II)/68) (continued^) 


1. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan), Chairman of the Credentials Committee, 
presented the Committee's second report (GC(II)/68)„ 
The second report of the Credentials Committee was approved unariimousjLv_. 


APPOINTMENT OF EXTERNAL AUDITORS (GC(II)/45) 


2. The PRESIDENT drew attention to a note by the Director General 
(GC(II)/45) oil Regulation 12.01 of the Financial Regulations of the Agency 
concerning the appointment of external auditors to be responsible for auditing 
the Agency's accounts. He asked for nominations for the three external auditors 
required under that regulation. 
3. Mac.. NYUNT (Burma) proposed that the Audi tors-General of the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Norway and Yugoslavia be appointed external auditors for 
the Agency. 
4. Ilr. LOPEZ (Argentina) seconded that proposal. 
The proposa1_was unanimously adopted. 


5. The PRESIDENT pointed out that under the provisions of Regulation 
12.01 of the Financial Regulations the three auditors were to be appointed for 
terms of one yccr, two years and three years respectively. He proposed that a 
decision on the term to be served by each auditor should be taken by drawing 
lots, the first nominee drawn to be appointed for one year, the second for two 
years and tlio third for three years. 
It__v7as__so_ agreed. 


It was deoijied_by_ drawing lots that the Audi tor-General of Norway should 
serve a term of one year, the Auditor-General of Yugoslavia two years and the 
Auditor- General of ...the FederaI Republic of Germany three years. 


PROGRAMME, BUDGET AND "70RKING CAPITAL FUND FOR 1959 (continued^); USE OF THE 
70RKING CAPITAL FUND IN 1958§ SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONSj POSSIBLE. 
PARTICIPATION OF THE AGENCY IN THE UNITED NATIONS EXPANDED PROGRAMME OF TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE (GC(II)/69) 


6. The PRESIDENT suggested that those four items should be considered 
together, as the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee had dealt with them 
1/ GC(II)/OR.15, paragraphs I6-69. 
2/ GC(II)/OR.23. 



GC(II)/OR.24 
page 3 

all in one report, which v.ras before the Conference as docunent GC(II)/69. 

It_was so asj__l. 

7. Ilr. CVRLJB (Yugoslavia), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical 
and Budget Committee, presented the Committee's second report and drew attention 
to the draft rDsolutions contained in Annexes I, II, III and IV. 
8. There being no comments on the report, the PRESISUNT put to the 
vote the draft resolutions contained in the annexes thereto. 
Draft resolution A in Annex I_, on assistance to less devGloj^cLj,°H£JLSil£, 
was adopted unanimously. 

Draft ros_olution__B in Annex I, on the programme of the Agency in the 
organization of scientific conferences and symposia in JL9.59,. was adopted by 
51_Jotes^ to none, vith. 1 abstention. 

Draft ro3_o_lujfci_on___C in^jknnejx I, on utilization by jfche_ .Agericy__of__he_ 
Sjeryices and experience of existing research centres_and of othejr_ jsourcejs 
o_f__infojrj7i.,.ti_on and on training of specialists in the use _of isotopes in 
a_£ri^cul_ture_ and medicine,^ was adopted unanimou_s_ly_. 

The___draft re_s_olutiqn_jL_n Annex: II, on the use of the 7/orking Capital Fund 
in_192.8j_ w<-"^ adopted^janajiif-^josly^. 

Draf t res olution A in Annex I.n_^__on__thj3_ f ina_l _s c a 1 e_ of_ _c o njtributions for 

ras

1.959.) 1,' adopted by 56 votes to nonej with 1 abstention. 

Draft rosolution B in Annex III, on the provisional _scale_ of c_ontribut ions 
for 1959, was adq_ote_dJby 5_3 votes to none, with 4 abstentions. 

Draft rosolution C in Annex III, the recommendation _o_n_ future scales of 
assessment, wa_s adopted by 55 votes Jbo_ nojaej _wi_th_ l__aJbst_en_t_ion. 

The draft resolution in Annex IV, on possible participation of the 
Agency i_n thp. _TJnijfc_d_.i__ijOns_^,j,.a.nAeA J'FS>£F^3Ja.erSf. Technical Assistance, 
was adopted by _,8 votes to none, with 1 abstention. 

9. The DIRECTOR GENERAL expressed his great satisfaction that the 
Conference had taken a decision which would be so important for the future 
planning of the Agency's technical assistance activities. Participation in 

GC(II)/OR.24 
page 4 


the United nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance (EPTA) would 
provide new and continuing financial support for those activities. Furthermore, 
by participating in EPTA, better co-ordination with Lhe technical assistance 
programmes of the specialized agencies could be achieved, and that was an aim 
which must be kept in mind if the resources made available by Member States 
were to be used in the most economical and productive way. The Conference's 
decision would strengthen the Agency's ties with the United lations and the 
other members of the United Nations family. 


10. The extent of the Agency's participation in EPTA "would depend on the use 
which Member States made of the new opportunity. Plans for the provision of 
assistance under EPTA in 1959 had already been drawn up,and the Agency would 
only be able to obtain funds from EPTA for 1959 if special arrangements could 
be made. The Technical Assistance Board (TAB) had decided to earmark $200 000 
provisionally for that purpose. 
11. Operations in i960 would be prepared on the basis of project requests 
submitted by Governments. In March 1959 TAB would inform Governments of the 
target programmes for their countries and. they would have approximately three 
•lonths in which to draw up, with the help of Resident Representatives, details 
of the assistance required. Requests for assistance would be forwarded to the 
Agency, which would give advice on their technical aspects in the light of the 
need.s of the requesting countries and of their national pro, rammesj the requests 
would then be submitted to TAB in July 1959. It was therefore of the utmost 
importance, if full use as to be made of the new resources open to the Agency 
for technical assistance, that its Member States should give immediate 
consideration to the question whether they wished to submit requests for 
projects to the Agency. 
12. Hr. DOLLINGER (Representative of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations) welcomed the decision taken by the General Conference that the 
Agency should seek to participate in EPTA. Such participrtion would be for 
the common good of the Agency and the other organizations participating in 
the programme. 
13. TAB had provisionally set aside a reserve of $200 000 to provide the basis 
for the Agency's programme in 1959. In addition, the Executive Chairman of 

GC(II)/OR.24 
page 5 


TAB was prepared to use his authority to draw on the Contingency Fund to meet 
urgent needs of Members of the Agency for additional projects in 1959° Further 
funds which might be available as a result of possible increases in contributions 
to EPTA would be used inter alia for projects relating to the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. 


14. As the General Conference hrd taken its decision now, there would be time 
enough for the Economic and Social Council at its October meeting to amend the 
basic legislation of EPTA so as to include the Agency among participating 
organizations, and for the Technical Assistance Committee to authorize in 
November allocations of funds to the Agency. The effective participation of 
the Agency in EPTA would thus commence at the earliest possible date. 
15. The PRESIDENT thanked Mr. Dollinger for the information he had given. 
MEASURES TO OBTAIN VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND, INCLUDING THE 
CALLING OF A PLEDGING CONFERENCE (GC(II)/70, GC(II)/7l) (continuedi/) 


16. The PRESIDENT announced that, since the preparation of the report 
of the Special Committee on Pledges of Voluntary Contributions to the General 
Fund (GC(II)/70), two further notifications of pledges by Member States had 
been received. The Principality of Monaco had announced that it would 
contribute £l 000 to the General Fund in 1959, and the delegate of Yugoslavia 
had informed hira that the Yugoslav Government pledged a contribution equivalent 
to $3 000. He felt sure he was carrying out the wishes of the General 
Conference in thanking the delegates concerned and asking them to convey the 
Agency's appreciation to their Governments. 
17. lir, FERNANDO (Ceylon), Rapporteur of the Special Committee on Pledges 
of Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund, presented the Special Committee's 
report. He hoped the General Conference would adopt the joint draft resolution 
(GC(II)/71). 
18. Mr. JOLLES (Secretary of the General Conference) pointed out that 
in the report of the Special Committee TAB rates had been used to calculate 
the approximate US $ equivalents of the contributions pledged. The figures 
3/ GC(II)/OR,2l, paragraphs 103-105



GC(II)/OR.24 


page 6 


would have to be corrected by conversion at official rates of exchange and 
there would, be some minor alterations; corrected figures would be incorporated 
in a revised version of the Committee's report-^. 


The joint draft rej£lu_ti_o_n was_ adopted unanimously. 


19. Mr, BUU-HOI (Viet-Nam) announced that his Government had decided 
to pledge a contribution of 1 000 000 transferable French francs to the 
General Fund, 
20. The PRESIDENT asked the delegate of Viet-Nam to convey the thanks 
of the Conference to his Government; the pledge just made would be included 
in the revised version of the Special Committee's report. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION; MINUTE OF SILENT PRAYER OR MEDITATION 


21. Mr. CORPION CAULA (Cuba), speaking on behalf of the Latin American 
countries and the United States of America, thanked the President for the way 
in which he had conducted'the Conference. Pie wished, in addition, to pay a 
special tribute to the exceptional organizing powers of the Director General 
and the Secretary of the General Conference, and to express his gratitude to 
the Austrian Government for its hospitality. 
22. Mr. 1BLCZECK (Federal Republic of Germany) congratulated the 
President and the Chairmen of the various Committees and thanked the Austrian 
Government and the City of Vienna for their hospitality. It was particularly 
encouraging to note that most decisions had been reached unanimously and, if 
there had been disagreement, it had been logical rather than ideological. 
23. Mr. FERNANDO (Ceylon) said he had very readily agreed to speak on 
behalf of the countries of the British Commonwealth of Nations, because it 
afforded him an opportunity of expressing his great appreciation of the 
President's work. Few delegations had believed that the work of the 
Conference could be concluded in the two weeks allotted to it. 
24. He wished to associate himself with previous speakers in thanking the 
Director General and the Secretariat for their splendid work; it was very 
easy to overlook all that had to be done overnight during a conference in 
order to have everything ready for each day's meetings. Ee thought the 
4/ Subsequently issued as documen tGC(II)/70/R ev.l. 



GC(II)/OR.24 
page 7 


second session would be remembered for its spirit of toleration and good-will, 
which had made it possible to compromise on questions that had been keenly 
debated, such as Laboratories for the Agency and the allocation of certain 
items as between administrative and operational expenditure. 


25. He thought it would not be out of place to stress the rights of the 
General Conference, which must be generously interpreted. The Conference 
was entitled not only to lay down policy for the guidance of the Board of 
Governors, but also to make any alterations it thought fit in the programme 
and budget. 
26. The extent to which the Agency succeeded in assisting under-developed 
countries would be one of the criteria by which its future success would be 
measured. 
27. He wished to be associated with previous speakers in complimenting the 
Chairmen of the Committees on their work and in thanking the Government of 
Austria for its hospitality, 
28. ,:r. SOLLI (Ho rway), speaking on behalf of Denmark, Finland, 
Iceland, Sweden and his own country, paid a tribute to the President, the 
officers of the Conference, the Director General and his able staff, and 
expressed his gratitude to the Austrian Government and the City of Vienna. 
29. ,.,r. JE2EK (Czechoslovakia), speaking on behalf of the delegations 
of Albania, Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Hungary, 
Poland, Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and his own country, joined previous speakers in expressing 
gratitude to the President for his work and his wise handling of the discussions. 
The President'3 election had been particularly weloome to him in view of the 
friendly relations between Indonesia and Czechoslovakia. It was a pleasure 
to thank the Chairmen of the Committees, the Director General and his staff, 
and the Austrian Government. 
3°. Mr. NAKICENOVIC (Yugoslavia) said his delegation was gratified 
at the results of the Conference; the fact that almost all the resolutions 


had been adopted unanimously was an indication of the readiness of Member 


States to co-operate. In thanking the President, the Director General and 


the Secretariat, he wished to assure the Agency of Yugoslavia's continuing 


support. 



GC(II)/OR.24 
page 8 


31. Mr. DAYIES (World Met eorological Organization) said he was grateful 
to the President for allowing him to address the Conference on behalf of the 
United Nations specialized agencies. Apart from the general interest the 
specialized agencies took in the work of the Conference, a number of them had 
been directly conoerned with one items the approval of relationship agreements. 
The speed with which those agreements had been concluded would help to assure 
Governments that overlapping would be avoided, especially in the work of atomic 
energy specialists, of whom there were so few. 
32. Ilr. ADBEL (Sudan) congratulated the President on behalf of the 
Arab States Mid paid a tribute to the Board of Governors, the CfcMr>ncr,of -i,hc 
Committees, the Director General and the staff. The Arab countries had full 
confidence in the ability of the Agency and the Board of Governors to achieve 
the objectives set out in the Statute. 
33. Mr. FURUUCEI (Japan), speaking on behalf of delegations from the 
Far East, South-East Asia and the Pacific, said he wholeheartedly endorsed the 
congratulations and thanks of previous speakers. He also expressed special 
gratitude to the Government of Austria. 
34. Ifr. HAYHBRLE (Austria) congratulated the President and officers of 
the Conference on the brilliant manner in which they had conducted its meetings, 
and paid a tribute to the work of the Director General and the Secretariat. 
35. He wished to express the sincere thanks of the Austrian Government to 
the President and the delegates for the kind remarks made about his country. 
The Austrian Government was only too happy to contribute its share to the work 
of the Agency, and hoped that its relations with the Agency would continue in 
the same spirit of cordial co-operation. 
36. The PRESIDENT thanked speakers for their tributes, but pointed out 
thr.t the success of the Conference was largely duo to the untiring efforts of 
the officers of the Committees and of the Secretariat. The work had also been 
greatly facilitated by the co-operation of the Austrian Government and the 
admirable facilities it had provided. 
37. He also thanked the municipal authorities for their hospitality, the 
representatives of the press and other public information services for their 
efforts to disseminate news of the work being done, and the representatives 

GC(II)/OR.24 
pa go 9 


of the United Nations and the specialized agencies for attending the 
Conference. He welcomed the co-operation which had been manifested between 
the Agency and other United ITations bodies and the relationship agreements 
which had been concluded with them. 


38. The Conference had accomplished all that could be expected during a 
short session; it had fully discussed and approved the programme and budget 
for 1959 and, though certain controversial issues had not been fully settled, 
it had been able to reach a compromise in each case. 
39^ The Agency's task was to unite all Governments in an effort to encourage 
the constructive use of atomic energy for the general good, in a new era of 
international co-operation, and such a task could only be accomplished in a 
spirit of give-and-take and political toleration. Indeed, developments in 
nuclear physics were so important that they could not be divorced from politics, 
and the present Conference was unique in bringing together both scientists 
and politicians for a common purpose. Great advantage might be derived from 
their joining forces to mould the future of the world and influence the 
political philosophy that should inspire the application of atomic discoveries. 
Considered in that light the Conference had surely not failed to make a 
valuable contribution towards international amity, which augured well for 
future progress, gradual though it must be. 


40. He invited the Conference to observe one minute's silence fcr prayer 
or meditation. 
All present rose end stood in siJLjen_ce_ for one minute. 


41. The PRE] SI DEN T then declared closed the second regular session of 
the General Conference. 

