INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(III)/OR.25 
4 December 1959 

ENGLISH 


General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1959, at 11.15 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. SUDJARWO (Indonesia) 


President: 
Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 
1 Opening of the session 1-2 
Address by the Temporary President 3-8 
2 Election of the President 9 -36" 
3 Appointment of the Credentials Committee 37 - 39 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 40 - 43 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 44 - 46 


* GC(III)/88/Rev.2. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2. 

GC(III)/0E.25 
page 2 


0',FATBfG OF THE SESSION 


1, The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the third regular session of the 
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency open and invited 
the delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 


2. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
ADDRESS BY THE TEMPORARY PRESIDENT 


3„ The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT extended a welcome to all delegates and 
observers who had assembled for the third regular session of the General 
Conference. In the early years of the Agency's growth the regular annual 
sessions of the General Conference were extremely important and were concerned 
with much more thar the mere routine business of approving reports and draft 
resolutions submitted by the Board of Governors and-the Director General. The 
Board and the Secretariat had both done their utmost during the preceding year 
to implement in the best possible way the decisions and recommendations adopted 
at oh- second regular session, and the Conference owed them its gratitude and 
appreciation. However, it also had its own special task of ensuring that the 
agency developed in the right direction, and at the right speed, interpreting 
correctly its noble purposes as embodied in the Statute. Under Article V "of 
the Statute the General Conference was authorized to take the guiding decisions 
not only for the activities of the Board and the Secretariat; but also for the 
policy governing the development and growth of the Agency as a whole. That 
was nor an easy task. People all over the world had placed great hopes in the 
Agencyj and many Member States - especially those from the less developed areas 
of the world - were impatient to obtain benefits from it as soon as humanly 
possible, Those sentiments wore not only prompted by the immediate needs of 
the countries concerned, but also by the belief that the foundation of the 
Agency should be a turning-point in the history ol the utilization of atomic 
energy - a turning av:ay from destructive to constructive uses. 


4. However, the Agency's Statute, cautiously drawn up by practical politicians 
did not directly aim at replacing the military uses of atomic' energy by its 
peaceful-uses-.— Unfortunately, outside the Agency's control,-military develop~ 
m-^r.t still wont on, giving rise to a tragic situation in which the Agency was 

GO(III)/OR.25 
page 3 


starting to build up a better life and civilization for all peoples of the 
world, while surrounded by an unceasing production of nuclear weapons, already


sufficient to obliterate human life many times over. It v<,as that deadly 


challenge which gave the Agency its greatest significance, that of bringing 


about the change from the military to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


5. It was therefore imperative for the Agency to face its task in a revolutionary 
spirit, without which it could never adequately meet the rightful expectations 
of its Member States. Although great ideas had been invested in the 
foundation of the Agency, in terms of financial support it had started very 
modestly. In order to bring about the cherished idea of giving peoples 
throughout the world the greatest benefit from the atomic revolution, an amount 
of about US $6.5 million had been earmarked for 1959. That sum represented 
only a very tiny fraction of the amount the peoples of the world had to pay for 
the armaments race, estimated at about US 1300 million a day. 
6. It was not sufficient to work only for the life and the development of 
the Agency, its ideals must be fought for as well. The problem,^in its 
essence, was not merely a matter of technique or money, but of the mind of man 
himself. Should the atom be harnessed for peace or for war, That was the 
crucial choice with which mankind was faced. The Agency's Conference, led by 
scientists and politicians alike, could show the world a way out of its dilemma, 
by creating conditions which would bring about the right choice, the only choice 
possible, namely peace. 
7. Fortunately, the Conference was meeting in a better international climate 
than in the previous year. International tensions seomed to be relaxing 
somewhat, and that should be beneficial to the Agency's work. There seemed 
to be a new prospect for the conclusion of an agreement to ban nuclear weapon 
tests1 that would release money, materials, equipment and technical skill 
which could be utilized for the peaceful purposes of the atomic age. Great 
disarmament proposals were being put forward. Those crucial questions must be 
dealt with in a spirit of determination for peace. They could be the prelude 
to a new and great era, the real era 'of peace, bringing benefit not only to the 
Agency but to the whole of mankind. 
8. In conclusion, he wished his follow delegates success in the deliberations 
of the Conference, and hoped they would keop constantly in mind the Agency's 

GC(III)/OR.25 
page 4 


great task. He felt sure that his successor to the post of President of the 
General Conference would provide inspiring guidance in achieving the common 
goals of peace and prosperity, 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


9. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, citing Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, 
invited nominations for the office of President of the General Conference. 
10. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) nominated Mr. Furuuchi, head of the Japanese 
delegation, who had been a Governor since 1957 and had been Vice-Chairman of 
the Board of Governors during its first year. His personal qualities were 
well-known and admired, and ho had consistently sought to further the wellbeing 
and success of the Agency, making notable contributions during the difficult 
initial period of its existence.• His talents and experience made him an 
eminently suitable candidate. 
11. His support for Mr. Furuuchi was not based on personal reasons alone. , 
Japan had been the first country to receive the full shock of an atomic 
explosion, and had since made a remarkable recovery, technically and economically, 
winning the admiration of the world. As the Agency was dedicated to 
extending the peaceful uses of atomic energy, it was fitting that a representative 
of Japan should be called upon to preside over the Agency's Conference, 
thus demonstrating to the world that all efforts should henceforth be directed 
towards harnessing the atom for the good of mankind. 
12. The good relations between the Governments of Japan and Pakistan, and the ' 
help which Japan had given his country in the reconstruction of its economy, 
made him particularly happy to propose Mr. Furuuchi. It would be very 
gratifying to see a representative of an Asian country once more selected for 
the honour of presidency. 
13. Mr. FOSTER (United Statos of America) seconded the nomination, 
pointing out that Japan had been one of the staunchest supporters of the Agency 
and had consistently demonstrated its faith in the Agency's future. Japan was 
the first Member State to request Agency assistance in supplying nuclear 
materials and to accept Agency safeguards against the diversion of materials to 
military purposes. .Mr. Furuuchi's personal qualifications were well-known. 

GO(III)/OR.25 
page 5 


He had served both his country and the Agency ably and well, and was thoroughly 
familiar with the Agency's programme and work. The United States delegation 
was confident that ho would preside over the meetings with fairness and ability. 


14. In supporting the nomination of Mr. Puruuchi, the United States delegation 
was also recognizing the important role which Japan had consistently played in 
the Agency's early formative years. Japan had made an outstanding contribution 
towards helping to establish the Agency on a sound basis. For those reasons, 
he felt sure that Member States would be happy to elect the delogate of Japan 
as President of the third regular session of the General Conference. 
15. Mr. NOVIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said he felt 
obliged to comment'on the nomination made by the two preceding speakers. At 
that moment,, discussions wore being held between the Heads of Government of the 
Soviet Union and the United States of America in ah attempt to lessen tension 
between the East and the West. Those discussions had been hailed as the 
beginning of a "thaw" and the dawn of a new era. The Soviet delegation therefore 
regretted that the General Conference was beginning its labours with 
practices which recalled the period when the cold war was at its height and was 
sorry to note that the initiative in doing so lay with the United States 
delegation. 
16. A few months previously the East European countries had proposed 
Mr. Nadjakov of Bulgaria for the presidency' of the third regular session. A . 
representative of the West had been chosen for the first regular session and 
a representative of the Arab-Asian countries for the second. The countries 
of Eastern Europe had supported both those nominations and had hoped that 
similar respect would be shown to the Bulgarian candidate. Until a week before 
no objections had been raised and no other candidate had been mentioned. Just 
before the Conference had opened, however, the United States mission to the 
Agency had begun to exert prossuro in order to have the representative of Japan 
elected President of the Conference. N"o objection to the candidature of 
Mr. Nadjakov had been expressed, and all attempts to negotiate with the United 
States delegation had been fruitless. The introduction of the Japanese 
candidature, which placed Member States before a fait accompli, was a sign that 
the United States delegation was still pursuing the old bankrupt policy of 

GC(III)/0H.25 
page 6 


negotiating from a "position of strength":; it was a denial of the principle of 
co-operation about which the United States delegation liked to speak. It 
could hardly be said that the countries of the Asian region were claiming the 
post of President of the Conference. 


17. The East European countries wished to nominate Mr, Nadjakov, a well-known 
atomic physicist, Director of the Institute of Physics of the Bulgarian 
Academy of Sciences and Vice-President of his country's Board for the Utilization 
of Atomic Energy for Peaceful Purposes. He had been head of the Bulgarian 
delegation at the first and second United Nations International Conferences on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy and head of the Bulgarian delegation at the 
previous regular and special sessions of the Agency's General Conference, as 
well as at the present session. 
18. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT pointed out that, although it was not usual 
to have more than a single candidature for the presidency of an international 
conference, and although he himself regretted that there was more than one on 
the present occasion, the second nomination was perfectly in order. There was, 
however, no rule which stated that the presidency of the Conference should be 
allotted to representatives of different geographical areas in succeeding years. 
19. Mr. do ERICE (Spain) said that ho wished first of all to congratulate 
the Temporary President on the way in which ho had guided the proceedings of 
the General Conference at its previous session. 
20. He was conscious of the considerable merits of both the candidates who had 
been nominated but, in the interests of that spirit of harmonious co-operation 
to which the delegate of the Soviet Union had himself referred, ho supported 
the delegate of Pakistan's nomination of Mr. Puruuchi. 
21. The delegate of the Soviet Union had urged the principle of equitable 
geographical distribution in support of his nomination. Reference to Rule 34 
of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference made it clear, however, 
that equitable geographical distribution was a consideration which only concerned 
the election of the Vice-Presidents. That was in accordance with procedure in 
other international organizations - the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), for example, and the United Nations itself, 
where two Latin American candidates had been elected Presidents of two almost 
successive General Assemblies. 

GC(III)/OR.25 
page 7-


22. His delegation supported the Japanese candidature for,-three reasons. 
Firstly,, Mr, Furuuchi had been assoclated.with the work of the Agency since its 
inception, and thus knew all there was to know about the machinery of the 
Conference. The organization of the -Conference and its debates was more 
important in electing- a President than the principle of fair geographical distribution. 
Secondly, it was extremely fitting that a representative of Japan 
should be elected, in view of the fact that Japan had been the first country to 
suffer the effects of an atomic explosion. Thirdly, previous Presidents of 
the Conference and .Chairmen of the Board of Governors had been diplomats, and 
it xvould be well to preserve that tradition. 
23. Mr. M"5LLER-C0HRAD (Poland) said that his delegation supported the 
nomination of Mr. Nadjakov. The candidature had been put forward through 
diplomatic channels a long,time previously, and reflected the principle of 
equitable geographical distribution. 
24. The delegate of Spain had pointed out that the presidency of the Conference 
had previously been occupied by diplomats, which was surely all the more reason 
for now electing an eminent scientist, especially in view of the fact that 
international relations were improving. The election of Mr, Nadjakov would 
have a symbolic value for the Conference. 
25. His delegation had not forgotten Hiroshima, and did not oppose the election 
of a representative of Japan on principle. However, there was little ground 
for believing that the election of Mr, Furuuchi would be of much value in 
avoiding future Hiroshimas, since it would be the result of a political 
manoeuvre. 


26. At a time when the cold war was abating, it would be woll if the Conference 
gave an example of international co-operation "which had not so far been forthcoming 
from any other international organization. . He therefore appealed to 
the delegate of Pakistan to withdraw his nomination so that the Conference 
could unanimously elect a single nominee. 
27. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, in the absence of further comments, invited 
the Conference to take a vote by secret ballot, and asked Mr, Bittencourt 
(Brazil) and Mr. Barton (Canada) to act as tollers. 

GC(III)/OR.25 
page 8 


28. The result of the vote was as followss 
Number of ballot paperss 61 


Invalid ballots, 7 


Number of valid ballots; 54 


Number of abstentionss None 


Number of members votings 54 


Required majority, 28 


Number of votes obtained, 


Mr. Furuuchi (Japan) 39 
Mr. Nadjakov (Bulgaria) 15 


29. Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Puruuchi (Japan) was elected 
President of the General Conference for its third regular session. 
30. Mr. Furuuchi (Japan) took the chair. 
31. The PRESIDENT expressed the gratitude of all to the head of the 
Indonesian delegation for having been good enough to act as Temporary President 
of the Conference, and to the Austrian Government for its hospitality. Ho had 
been deeply touched by the honour which the Conference had done to his country 
and himself by electing him President, and was particularly grateful for the 
kind words addressed to him by the delegate of Pakistan. He undertook to do 
all in his power to contribute to the success of the session. 
32. It was clear that all nations must co-operate as closely as possible if 
the basic statutory objective of the Agency to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world was to be fulfilled. In particular, problems such as nuclear radiation, 
environmental contamination and waste disposal called for a concerted effort by 
all nations and, whore appropriate, international regulations. 
33. After certain initial difficulties, inevitable in any now organization, 
the Agency could look back with a reasonable measure of satisfaction on the 
solid progress achieved during the past year. The Agency's technical assistance 
activities had been substantially expanded. It was becoming a world reference 
centre on atomic energy questions and, in that connexion, it was encouraging to 
note that the Head of the Central Atomic Energy Utilization Board of the Soviet 
Union and the Chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission had 

GO(III)/OR.25 
page 9 


recently reaffirmed that their countries would make every effort to pass on to 
the Agency all useful information on the peaceful applications of atomic energy 
developed by them and help it to disseminate that information to all Member 
States. 


34. The major part of the Agency's activities had been devoted to the application 
of radioisotopes and other radiation sources in industry, agriculture 
and medicine and to the use of nuclear energy for the generation of electricity. 
Special attention should be drawn to the Agency's attempts to increase the 
possibility of utilizing nuclear power in the less developed areas of the world. 
The Agency had also made considerable progress during the year under review in 
connexion with regulatory functions. In particular,, valuable work had been 
done by expert panels on civil liability, the safe transportation of radioactive 
materials,, and waste disposal, 
35. If the Agency were to fulfil its tasks and responsibilities under the 
Statute, it was particularly important that Member States should co-operate by 
making voluntary contributions to the General Fund. The Agency could not meet 
the less developed countries' growing need for technical assistance and guidance 
unless it were equipped with adequate financial resources. The Conference 
would be called upon to approve the Programme and Budget for 1960 which the 
Board of Governors,, after careful examination, had decided to recommend for 
its approval.—' 
36. Although there were considerable scientific, technical and economic 
obstacles to the development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, the benefits 
which all nations would receive if those obstacles were overcome would be 
even greater. He therefore believed that the Conference should reaffirm its 
confidence in the future of the Agency and in its ability to meet the challenge 
before it, and should once again pledge ail possible support. In that way it 
would help to ensure that present and future generations enjoyed the fullest 
benefits obtainable from nuclear energy. 
1/ GO(III)/75. 



GC(III)/OR.25 
page 10 


APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 


37. TJio PRESIDENT proposed that the Credentials Committee should be 
appointed immediately in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, and 
should consist of the following Member States% Ceylon, Czechoslovakia, Iran, 
Italy, Peru, Philippines, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United 
States of America and Venezuela, 
38. The proposal was adopted. 
39. The meeting was suspended at 12.30 p.m. and resumed at 12,50 P'1". . 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 


40. The PRESIDENT, drawing attention to Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, 
invited delegates to submit nominations for the election of the eight Vice-
Presidents. 
/|1. Mr. CEDERWALL (Sweden) nominated the following Member States s 
Bulgaria,, France, Greece, India, Mexico, Pakistan, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics and the United States of America, 


42, Mr. RAGGATT (Australia) seconded the nominations. 


43. The Member States referred to wore declared elected to the eight Vice-
Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


44. The PRESIDENT said that, to comply with Rule 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure, the General Conference had to elect four additional members to the 
General Committee. He invited nominations in accordance with that rule, 
45' Mr. do ERICE (Spain) nominated Brazil, Canada, New Zealand and the 


United Kingdom. 


46. The Member States referred to'wore declared elected to the General 
Committee and the Committee itself duly appointed in compliance with the 
provisions of Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
Distr. 
GENERAL 

ATOMIC 
ENERGY AGENCY 

GC(III)/OR.26 
4 December 1939 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1959, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: 
Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 

CONTENTS 


Item of the 

Paragraphs 

agenda* 

Adoption of the agenda and allocation 1 --4 
of items to Committees 

7 The closing date for the session 
5 --6 

9 Statement by the Director General 
7 -- 35 

Statement by the representative of the 36 -- 44 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 

10 
General debate and report of the Board of 45 - 95 
Governors for the year 1958-59 


Statements by the delegates of 
Czechoslovakia, the Union of South Africa 
and the United Kingdom 


GC(III)/88/Rev.2, 


N.B, The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2. 



GC(III)/0E.26' 
page 2 


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AID ALLOCATION OF ITEMS TO COMMITTEES (GC(III)/86) 


1. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to consider the report 
submitted by the General Committee (GC(III)/86). He drew attention to paragraphs 
2 and 3 concerning the inclusion of a new item entitled "The principles 
to govern the provision of technical assistance by the Agency", and to paragraph 
4 Aft which the General Committee recommended that the seven-day waiting 
period should not apply to that item,. He asked for comments on the Committee's 
report itself (GC(III)/86, paragraphs 1 - 6) as well as on Annex II, containing 
the agenda and the proposed allocation of items to the organs of the General 
Conference. 
2. The General Committee's report and Annex II were adopted. 
3* The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution on the establishment 
of a committee for pledges of voluntary contributions to the General Fund 
contained in Annex III to the General Committee's report. 


4. The draft resolution was adopted by 42 votes to none, with 3 abstentions. 
THE CLOSING DATE FOR THE SESSION 


5. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee, after examining the 
General Conference's programme of work, had recommended that the closing date 
of the session should be Saturday 3 October, or Friday 2 October if the work 
was completed that day. 
6. The General Committee's recommendation was adopted. 
STATEMENT BT THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


7- The DIRECTOR GENERAL, after welcoming the President, the delegates 


and all those participating in the General Conference, said that while the 


intergovernmental meetings and discussions at present in progress might well 


decide the fate of mankind, it was not inconceivable that the debates of the 


General Conference might also have an impact on future events. 


8. The Agency had followed with the greatest interest the negotiations which 
had taken place in Geneva concerning the cessation of nuclear military test 
explosions. Although all nuclear energy activities not exclusively directed 

GC(III)/OR.26 
page 3 


towards peaceful aims were clearly outside the Agency's terms of reference, 
any military atomic developments would obviously have repercussions that would 
be felt by the Agency too. The progress achieved during those negotiations 
was therefore encouraging. The Agency had also noted that agreement had been 
reached on the selection of Vienna as the probable site for the prospective 
control organ or commission which would supervise the execution of the measures 
at present being discussed,, That decision indicated a desire on the part of 
the negotiating Powers to take full advantage of the Agency's scientific staff 
and facilities. The Agency would ,relcome collaboration with the proposed organ. 


9. Ho was pleased to report that the Agency's relationship with the Government 
of Austria continued to be perfectly satisfactory in all respects. Its 
relationship with the United Nations and the specialized agencies was close 
and constructive, and henceforth, it had a secure place in the United Nations 
family. Machinery for co-ordinating the work of the Agency with that of the 
United Nations and the specialized agencies had been established and very soon 
similar arrangements for co-operation could be made with regional intergovernmental 
organizations interested in atomic energy. 
10. As far as recruitment of staff was concerned, 37 countries were represented 
in the Secretariat by at least one national. Geographical distribution took 
into account the financial support given by countries to the Agency's work, 
The large majority, if not the entirety, of the staff were competent, enthusiastic 
and energetic. 
11. He welcomed the establishment and initial work of the United Nations 
Special Fund, with which the Agency maintained excellent working relations. 
A number of the Agency's projects, for example the establishment of regional 
training centres and the pre-investment phases of power projects, fitted within 
the criteria established by the Special Fund. No Government had yet submitted 
atomic energy requests to the Fund, but there were indications that some Member 
States wore seriously considering doing so. 
12. With regard to technical assistance, the Agency was now a fully-fledged 
member of the United Nations Technical Assistance Board. The General Conference 
would have an opportunity in the course of the session to review the 
policies followed in granting such assistance. 

GC(III)/OR,26 
page 4 


13. The Agency had so far sent, or was planning to send, approximately 
50 exports to a score of countries. Many more requests had been received,, 
which would he evaluated and placed before the Board as speedily as possible 
Several countries had been granted equipment in connexion with projects for 
which experts had been made available. Approximately 600 students from 42 
countries had been selected by the Agency for training at advanced centres of 
instruction and research in several Member States. Following the -report' on 
the possible establishment of one or more regional training centres in Latin 
l/ 
America—', the Agency had undertaken studies on the need to establish radioisotope 
training centres in Africa and the Middle East. The question was at 
present under consideration by the Director General and the Board of Governors. 


14. Host of the requests by Member States for technical assistance had been 
made after they had been visited by Agency officials. Three missions had 
visited a number of countries in the Par East and Latin America, and another 
team was scheduled to visit some Eastern Mediterranean and Middle Bast countries 
during the autumn. Smaller teams had been sent to Greece, Pakistan, Morocco, 
Tunisia and the United Arab Republic, They had all been extremely well received 
and had been able to inform the scientists and officials of the countries visited 
about the kinds of technical assistance the Agency was in a position to offer. 
The Agency's Headquarters in Vienna had become a repository of information on 
atomic developments in many parts of the world. Such a body of information 
was essential for the effective execution of all the Agency's functions, and 
there was no doubt that the technical assistance missions had given very satisfactory 
results and that the funds used for the purpose constituted a sound 
investment. 
15. One of the difficulties which the Agency's technical assistance programme 
encountered was the scarcity of experts. The atomic Powers were reluctant to 
rolcaso their key personnel, and scientists and technicians hesitated to leave 
interesting work and ample facilities in their own countries for work abroad 
under conditions which might sometimes be arduous and lacking in the opportunities 
they needed in order to kocp in contact' with the rapid developments in 
their respective branches of science. Ho nevertheless strongly hoped that 
1/ OC(ll)/39, paragraphs 133-135. 



GC(III)/0E.26 
page 5 


Governments and institutions would recognize that it was in the long-term 
interest of all that knowledge of the science,, technology and economics of 
peaceful nuclear uses should he spread widely throughout the world. It was 
essential not to overlook the dangerous possibility of atomic energy contributing 
to a widening of the gap between the advanced and the less developed 
areas of the world rather than helping to fill it. He therefore urged all 
Iloribor Governments to do everything possible to make experts available to the 
Agency and to render their work abroad and their resettlement at home as easy 
and attractive as possible. 


16. The Agency's scientific and technical information programme was well under 
way. The first Agency publications had appeared and had been favourably 
received. The seminars and conferences it had held had provided scientists 
with the opportunity of discussing the results of their research. In that 
connexion, the Agency had benefited greatly from the second United Nations 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy (the second 
Geneva conference) by learning from scientists themselves of their preference 
for small specialized scientific meetings. 


17. The necessary arrangements for starting the construction of the laboratory 
had been completed. He hoped that by the time of the next session many scientists 
would already be using the laboratory, which would not only be of uso to 
the Agency in its current activities, but would also become a fruitful training 
ground for many countries and would be made available to other international 
organizations and Member States which lacked the Agency's specific facilities. 
I80 In connexion with the laboratory, ho wished to express his gratitude to 
2/ 
the United States Government for its generous financial contribution-' without 
which it would have been impossible to proceed so rapidly with the implementation 
of the decision taken by the General Conference at its second session.—' 
Ho also wished to thank the Austrian atomic energy authorities for the cooperative 
attituv thoy had shown in connexion with the project. He was convinced 
that that co-operation would grow stronger and that it would be of groat 
benefit to all concerned. 


2/ GO(III)/73, paragraph 30. 
3/ GC(II)/EES/25, chapter B, paragraph 3° 



GC(III)/OR.26 
page 6 


19. International interest in atomic energy could be divided into three general 
fields of activity, atomic assistance, atomic security and atomic safety. 
Ho had already briefly discussed atomic assistances training and provision of 
experts, information, equipment and materials. It might, however, ho askod 
•whether an international effort in that field alone justified the activity of 
a soparate agency. Nevertheless, there were other atomic needs on an international 
basis which provided as great, if not greater, justification for the 
existence of an independent international organization such as the Agencys 
atomic safety and atomic security. 
20. Turning first to the question of safety, he recalled that the application 
of atomic energy, even for peaceful purposes, gave rise to a number of problems 
which, by their very nature, transcended national boundaries and could only be 
solvod by international action. That fact had been highlighted by the second 
Geneva conference at which it had been pointed out that the Agency, with its 
large and diversified staff and its ability to draw on the experience of the 
most advanced countries, was admirably suited to meet that challenge. It was 
also clear that the wider the geographical basis for international standards 
and regulations the greater was their usefulness. 
21. There-were two main categories of safety problems which required international 
action. In the first category came the risks which were inhoront in 
the transport of radioactive substances from one country to another and the 
disposal of radioactive waste into the sea or into international waterways. 
The logical method of dealing with those problems was to conclude international 
conventions or.agreements, and in that connexion it was the task of the Agency 
to point the way. . Throe Agency panels of exports wore at present studying 
problems of that kind. One of them was dealing with the disposal of radioactive 
substances into the sea and the other two were dealing with transport 
problems. The increasing number of reactors of all types, both for research 
and for pov/er production, raised peculiar safety problems, and the Agency was 
at present preparing a Manual of Safe Operation of Research Reactors. In 
addition, it was intended that panels and symposia should be arranged to study 
the urgent problems of radiological protection. 

GC(III)/0E.26 
page 7 


22. To the same category belonged the problem of civil and State responsibility 
for nuclear hazards. Work would soon be completed on a draft convention on 
civil liability, and it was to be hoped that in the near future an international 
convention would result,, Similar study would very shortly be devoted to the 
unsolved problems of State responsibility for reactors. The accomplishment 
of those tasks would mean the removal of serious barriers to the early development 
of atomic power. 
23. The second category of safety problems covered those hazards which, although 
not truly world problems, wore common to many countries; it also covered the 
need for standardization and uniformity. As an example, it could be mentioned 
that the Agency had already published a Manual on the Safe Handling of Radioisotopes. 
That manual, which had been widely distributed, had undoubtedly 
contributed to a harmonization of standard practices. 
24. As to atomic security the Secretariat had drafted principles which would 
make it possible to determine the extent and scope of the criteria and procedures 
for the application of safeguards against diversion of fissionable 
material. Detailed regulations for the application of those principles had 
also ~beQn prepared. The question of safeguards was particularly complicated 
and oven controversial, both in its political and in its technical aspects. 
But the Board had made notable progress in its consideration of the Secretariat 
drafts, and there were prospects of a set of guiding principles being adopted 
in the very near future. 
25. The purpose of a safeguards system - which was to provide a reasonable 
assurance that Agency assistance would not be used to further military purposes .•was 
sufficiently desirable to earn the unhesitating support of all Governments. 
It would cause no difficulty to countries v/hieh had only peaceful intentions, 
and it would only cause trouble to countries which intended to cheat. The 
question did arise, however, whether it was not asking too much of the countries 
needing external assistance for their peaceful atomic programmes to subject 
themselves to international safeguards and inspection, whilst those countries 
which were fortunate enough not to require outside assistance still refused to 
submit their own programmes to some degree of control and inspection. Tic 
therefore proposed and urgently requested that the atomic "have" countries 

GC(III)/0E.26 
pe.go 8 


should demonstrate to the atomic "have not" countries that inspection and safeguards 
wore not an excessive oncroachmont on their national sovereignty, that 
they wore not burdensome or troublesome and that they were an essential aspect 
of the effort made to relieve the world from the fear of atomic destruction, 
by voluntarily submitting their peaceful atomic programmes to the Agency's 


inspection and safeguard procedures. 


26. There we.s another aspect of the same problem which ho felt impelled to 
discuss, o When the functions of the Agency had first been considered there 
had been a widespread idea ~hat it would become a sort of vrorld bank or intermediary 
for nuclear f uc'J s and materials. That idea was based on the promise 
that uranium would be in short supply and that a balanced system of international 
allocation would be essential. It had also been thought that nuclear 
power would become economically competitive with traditional sources of power 
in a relatively short time Both those premises had had to be reconsidered. 
Atomic power was not yet generally economic and there was certainly no shortage 
of uranium. It was. not only the shortage of uranium, however, which had caused 
the founder's of the Agency to think of it as a world broker. It had been considered 
highly desirable, if not imperative, that all fissionable materials 
entering international trade should do so under conditions which not only 
guaranteed that the health and safety of the people was protected, but also 
prevented the possible diversion of those materials from exclusively,peaceful 
ends. The present situation did not permit such assurances and was, therefore, 
a causo for sei'ious concern. 
27. The trade in nuclear materials was not always coupled with public guarantees 
in regard to health hazards or risks of diversion to non-peaceful uses; 
sometimes they were sold under a cloak of secrecy concealing the conditions, 
purpose and price. In that connexion he had suggested at the second session 
of the General Conference that countries supplying uranium should voluntarily 
undertake to register with bbe Agency their shipments to foreign countries.-E/ 
Although that suggestion had not been put into effect, the situation it was 
designed to meet remained the same and there was more justification for it than 
ever. Hence he would urge all countries supplying nuclear fuel to go much 
further and to subject all their foreign sales to the condition that the 
materials should be used in accordance with the Agency's safeguard procedures. 
El)/OR.14, paragraph 50= 



GC(III)/0E.26 
page 9 


28. ITuclear raw materials would probably remain in abundant supply for some 
years to come, but it was nonetheless true that special fissionable materials, 
the enriched or fissile materials, wore at present obtainable only from a very 
few sources. The Agency had become one such source by signing agreements with 
the three leading atomic Powers for the supply of considerable quantities of 
5/ 


those materials^. 


29. Some countries had made enquiries of the Agency about the supply of special 
fissionable materials, but no firm request had yet been received, That was 
doubtless due to the very low world demand for fissile materials for power 
reactors and to the fact that the terms under which they could be obtained 
through the Agency were no more attractive than those offered by other sources 
under bilateral agreements. 
30. It was clear that the Agency could not achieve its aims unless it could 
offer attractive terms to its customers. Potential purchasers had not yet 
learned that oven without any direct financial inducement it would be to their 
advantage to obtain fissionable materials through the Agency because of the 
export services and advice which the Agency would render in connexion with any 
project carried out under its auspices. If, however, the Agency could also 
offer some material inducements, thanks to preferential terms given by supplying 
countries, its role would be immediately enhanced. 
31. Turning to the question of the administration and organization of the 
Agency, ho expressed the view that now the initial period which had seen the 
the birth of the Agency's activities was completed, it would be necessary to 
establish a division of tasks between the Director General and the Board of 
Governors which would enable the Board to devote its full attention to policy 
formulation and which would clearly lay upon th.c Director General and the Secretariat 
the responsibility for the execution of those policies. It was the duty 
of the Board to map out a course for the Agency, subject to review by the Genoral 
Conference. It seemed, however, that the Director General should have a freer 
hand not only in the management of administrative matters but also in suggesting 
new activities to the Board and in furnishing the information necessary for a 
considered determination of the Agency's policy. 
5/ INFCIHC/5. 



GC(III)/OR.26 
page 10 


32o He was in no sense advocating a premature revision of the" Agency!s Statute 
or rules5 he merely felt that the time was ripe for considering the kind of 
changes which might he desirable. In the meantime he was certain that the 
working arrangements which had been established during the last two years would 
continue to yield satisfactory results, and he hoped that a certain balance 
would eventually be arrived at between the duties of the Board of Governors 
and those of the Director General. 


33- The picture which he had painted of the Agency's activities showed that 
some of them had been developed beyond the scope originally anticipated. That 
was true of health,, safety and technical assistance activities. On the other 
hand some of the major functions assigned to the Agency had remained a dead 
letter because of the changes which had taken place in the world atomic industry. 
It was only a question of time before those functions, which the Agency was 
ready and able to assume, wore entrusted to it. 


34° The changes v/hich had taken place during recent years in the atomic industry 
were not, however, the only outside factors which had prevented the Agency from 
playing the full role for which it had been cast. It had been understood that 
the establishment of the Agency would obviate the need for external assistance 
Lindor bilateral agreements5 so far, no single bilateral agreement had been 
turned over to the Agency, At the last session of the Conference the parties 
to one bilateral agreement had made a declaration of intent—', and a number of 
other agreements provided for the possibility of making use of the Agency for 
the application of safeguards and health and safety measures. However, nothing 
had yet been done in that regard. 


35. The fact that it had not yet be GH p o ss ible to agree on a sot of safeguard 
principles and regulations should not prevent other interested Member States 
from making a declaration of intent. It might then be expected that, onco a 
system of safeguards had been set up by the Agency, numerous bilateral agreements 
would be turned over to the Agency for implementation of the relevant 
clauses. 
0/ GC(II)/0E.17, paragraph 9 and GC(II)/OR.18, paragraph 12. 



GC(III)/OR,26 
page 11 


STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


36. At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bunohe (Representative of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations) mounted the rostrum, 
37* . Mr* BUNCHE (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations), after conveying Mr. Hammarskjold's cordial wishes for the full success 
of the third regular session of the General Conference, congratulated the Board 
of Governors, the Director General and the Secretariat on the remarkable progross 
made by the Agency since the first session of the General Conference,, 
The Agency had quickly become an effective working member of the United Nations 
family, with all the co-operative relationships and complexities that that 
implicdo 


38. During the past year, there had been increasingly close co-operation 
between the Agency and the United Nations. As points of contact multiplied, 
questions of co-ordination arose with increasing urgency. Those questions 
were the primary concern of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination (ACC) 
which had presented to the Economic and Social Council in the current year two 
detailed studies based on drafts prepared by the Agency's Secretariat. One of 
then was a general paper on intcr-agency co-ordination in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, while the other dealt with the possibilities of concerted action 
on the effects of radiation resulting from the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
In that respect, the Economic and Social Council had requested ACC to give 
further attention to multilateral and other measures directed to co-ordinated 
and concerted action in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Reports on that 
question would be made regularly to the Economic and Social Council. 
39. The Council had noted with satisfaction the establishment of the Agency's 
Scientific Advisory Committee, a close link with the United Nations being provided 
by the fact that the membership of that committee was generally the samo 
as that of the United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee. The Agency's 
participation in the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the fact 
that the Agency was represented on the Governing Council of the new Special Fund 
and had joined the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund were othor links 
between the Agency and the United Nations, Steps had also been taken by the 
Economic and Social Council to associate the Agency with the programme appraisals 

GC(iIl)/0P,26 
page 12 


for the period 1959-1964 which wore lacing undertaken in the United Nations and 
in some of the specialized agencies and which aimed at making the contribution 
of the United Nations family to economic and social development more effective. 
Participation in that project by the Agency would certainly enhance its value, 


40. There were two fields in which co-operation between the Agency and the 
United Nations could be of particular benefit. The first was the economic 
studios concerning small- and medium-power reactors for loss developed countries. 
That field was of special interest to the United Nations, which had. 
been dealing with the development of under-equipped countries for many years. 
The Agency was mainly concerned with the promotion and. cost of nuclear power, 
whoroas the United Nations, including its regional economic commissions, was 
concerned with the basic importance to economic development of energy in any 
form. The efforts of the Agency and of the United Nations were therefore 
complementary, the more so since the Agency was now coming closer to the actual 
evaluation of nuclear power programmes in specific countries. In each case 
the possiblo dovolopmcnt of nuclear pov\ror would have to be evaluated in the 
light of the potential development of other sources of energy and in the general 
context of economic development, ' With regard to those natters, the United 
Nations had both experience and data which should be helpful to the Agency. 
Close and continuing contact between the Agency and the United Nations was 
thorcforo essential to combine, as appropriate, the competence of the two 
organizations in the pursuit of certain studies as well as in field work. One 
possiblo form of mutual co-operation was +hat of mission teams comprising staff 
members or consultants from both organizations. 
41. The other fiold in which increasingly close co-operation was taking place 
between the two organizations was that of the effects of ionizing radiation. 
At its thirteenth session, the General Assembly had decided that the United 
Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation should continue 
its useful work in consultation with other interested organizations, and had 
called upon all concerned to assist the Committee as appropriat The Committee 
would continue to report annually to the General Assembly and planned to 
issue a second comprehensive report on radiation and its effects in 1962. 
Members of the Agency's scientific staff had participated in the Committee's 
work and there had been interchanges betwoen the scientists on the staffs of the 
two organizations. 
7/ Resolution 1347(XIIl) of the United Nations General Assembly. 



GC(III)/0Ee.26 
page 13 


42. The Radiation Committee's scientific interest centred upon radioactive 
fallout and its effects. 
The Agency was co-operating in the Committee's pro90 


gramme for the exchange of calibrated Sr samples among Member States. The 


Radiation Committee also recognized that the disposal of radioactive waste into 


the sea was likely to present an increasingly serious problem, with regard to 


which close co-operation with the Agency would he necessary. The Committee 


had decided that henceforth, information on such disposals could be submitted 


by Jlombor States to either body, thus avoiding duplication of effort. 


43. The Radiation Committee had welcomed the Agency's offers of co-operation. 
It anticipated that its work would he increasingly assisted hy the Agency as 
tlio latter expanded its work on radiation and environmental contamination. 
In turn, the Agency, in the discharge of its regulatory functions, might find 
the scientific evaluation and judgement the Committee was equipped to provide 
increasingly helpful. The intermingling of those functions of regulation and 
of scientific evaluation lent point to the need for regular consultation, which 
had been recognized hy the Board of Governors hy its decision inviting the 
Radiation Committee to held one of its sessions at the Agency's Headquarters in 
Vienna. That invitation would certainly ho given earnest consideration hy the 
Committee at its next session. 
44" Tko work of the Agency and the success of its efforts were vitally affected 
hy the international political climate. It was to ho hoped that the efforts 
which were being made at high levels would lead to a relaxation of present international 
tension. It was not unduly optimistic to assume that even the first 
stops towards ending the cold war would result in an increase in the funds 


-ivailahle for the technical assistance which the IAEA and the specialized 
agencies could provide. In any case, the,United Nations would continue to 
assist the Agency in the performance of its duties in whatever way it could. 


GEITERAL DEBATE AID REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958-59 
(GC(III)/73, 85) 


45. l!r. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) said that the third regular session of 
the General Conference was being held at a time when important diplomatic events 
wcro taking place. It was the universal hope that those events would make an 
important contribution to international co-operation and to mutual confidence 
between countries with differing social systems. It had often been pointed 

GC(III)/0E.26 -. 
page 14 


out 5 at the second session of the General Conference, that the work of the 
Agency could not he separated from events in the rest of the world. The 
Agency was in a position to play an important role in solving the major political 
problems of the day, and it was its duty to do so, 


46. The Report of the Preparatory Commission of the Agency stated, "Atomic 
energy has been, in the years since the Second World War, the object and the 
symbol both of the highest hopes and of the deepest fears of mankind".-' It 
was therefore only just that a complete' ban on nuclear weapons and the destruction 
of existing stocks should be considered as the most urgent task of disarmament. 
The first step in that direction would be the signature of the 
agreement on the permanent discontinuance of nuclear weapon tests which was 
being negotiated in Geneva by the delegations of the Soviet Union, the United 
States of America and the United Kingdom, The discussions, which had now 
lasted a year, had achieved certain results, but the situation as described in 
the said Report remained fundamentally unchanged, 
47- At present, the peaceful uses of atomic energy absorbed only a very small 
proportion of the human and material resources devoted to the production of 
nuclear armaments. Mankind was still very far from using nuclear energy to 
improve the living standards of the inhabitants of the globe and to increase 
their well-being. On the contrary, the atmosphere was becoming more and more 
contaminated by the radioactive fallout from nuclear explosions which, 
according to the report of the United Hations Scientific Committee on the 
Effects of Atomic Radiation (the Radiation Committee), were a source of very 
gravo danger to present and future generations. If a solution to that problem 
were repeatedly postponed, the number of countries capable of manufacturing 
nuclear arms would continue to increase. The radioactive strontium content 
of the fallout already exceeded the values predicted and its effects would 
therefore also be worse than had been predicted, vizs that for every nuclear 
explosion equivalent to 20 megatons of conventional explosives, more than 
15 000 children throughout the world would suffer from serious genetic injuries 
and a still larger number would suffer from minor defects. 

8/ GC.1/l, paragraph 1. 



QC(III)/OR.26 
page 15 


48, The primary task was therefore to do everything possible, without delay, 


to harness atomic energy to exclusively peaceful ends. In order to remain 


faithful~to-the.noble aims which had been assigned to it in its Statute and 


Initial Programme, it was the Agency's duty to play an important role in 


carrying out that task. Being keenly conscious of those facts and of the 


Agency's responsibilities, the Czechoslovak delegation was submitting to the 


9/ 


General Conference a draft resolution which he then read out.—' 


49* In preceding sessions of the General Conference the principal task had 

been to surmount initial difficulties and to decide on the means which would 
permit the Agency to attain its objectives. It was now necessary to go further 


and to see whether the Agency had effectively contributed to the development of 


the use of atomic energy, particularly in less developed countries. In other 
words, had the Agency in fact become the scientific and technical organization 
which its founders had envisaged, and had it preserved the co-operative atmosphere 
which had marked its birth and which was essential for the natural development 
of its activities, 


50. The Agency had clearly discharged with success one task - the international 
exchange of scientific knowledge and of the results of researoh. It had been 
able to obtain the services of eminent men of science from many different countries, 
and the results achieved had been worthy of note, e.g. in the elaboration 
of safety standards for handling radioisotopes and. transporting radioactive 
materials and in the study of the problem of waste disposal, 
51= Equally successful had been the Agency's publications, which had been 
appreciated by the Czechoslovak experts, its scientific conferences and symposia, 
and the development of its programmes for the exchange of documentation and for 
fellowships. It was to be hoped that in future all the fellowships offered by 
L'lombcr States would be taken up. 


52. Agreements on deliveries of fissionable, source and other materials had 
been concluded in the past year between the Agency and the Soviet Union, the 
United States and the United Kingdom. However, he regretted that in the case 
of the largest offer there had been no satisfactory clarification of its terms. 
9/ Subsequently issued as document GC(III)/89 and Add.1, 



GC(III)/OR„26 
page 16 


Ilorcovor, insufficient•energy had gone into implementing the General Con-fcrcncc's 
decision regarding the reactor programme5—' that was connected with 
the fact that the Agency had not yet used a single gramme of the enriched 
fissionable material which had heen placed at its disposal two years previously. 
Although that was a complex question, it appeared that the Agency could and 
should have done more in that respect. 


53. Ho noted that in the Agency's activities during the past year certain 
tendencies had emerged which had little in common with the spirit of friendly 
international co-operation which should he a basic pillar of the Agency's 
structure. .At earlier sessions the Czechoslovak delegation had stressed that 
the Agency was built on the mutual consent of Member States, which implied that 
decisions should only be taken after a thorough examination of all bona fide 
interests and that they should be universally acceptable. In that spirit the 
Czechoslovak delegation had stressed the necessity of the Agency's becoming 
from the outset a technical organization, keeping aloof from political controversies. 
However, certain decisions of the Board of Governors revealed 
a different tendency and manifested the desire of certain States to use the 
Agency for the pursuit of their political objectives. That applied, for 
example, to the decision to withhold consultative status from the World Federation 
of Trade Unions, which represented 93 million workers in 67 countries and 
which enjoyed consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Labour 
Organisation. It also applied to the decision to provide technical assistance 
to the Chiang Kai Shck regime. Those were acts of political provocation which 
aimed at turning the Agency into an instrument for furthering the policy of 
certain States rather than into a truly international organization. The sane 
could be said of the tactics adopted by certain States to speed up the preparation 
of an unacceptable safeguards system. 
54* nis delegation also believed it necessary to protest against certain 


unhealthy tendencies which had appeared in the Secretariat. Ho was thinking 


particularly of its action in transmitting direct to the Technical Assistance 


10/ GC(ll)/BES/27. 



GC(III)/OR.26 
page 17 


Board certain requests for technical assistance without submitting them first 
to the Board of Governors5 there had also been unjustified requests for an 
increase in the strength of the Secretariat. His delegation was not opposed 
to such requests if they vrere justified and particularly if they concerned the 
recruitment of experts for the less developed countries. It was also necessary 
to put an end to the regular practice of keeping certain Secretariat documents 
secret from Member States and organs of the Agency. 


55. The draft programme and budget for 1960—' displayed certain tendencies 
which were incompatible with the Agency's mission. He recalled the views 
expressed hy many delegations, including his own, with regard to the Agency's 
research activity and the building of the functional laboratory. The work of 
the laboratory - as it had been defined during the second session of the 
12/ 
General Conferencer^ -should be confined to carrying out the Agency's statutory 
functions. However, the draft programme and budget for 1960 suggested that a 
complete nuclear laboratory was to be constructed. The Czechoslovak delegation 
would comment in greater detail on that point in the Programme, Technical 
and Budget Committee. 


56. Czechoslovakia, which had been among the founders of the Agency, had 
undertaken, as early as the first session of the General Conference, to make 
every effort to help the Agency fulfil the expectations which had been placed 
in it at its birth. In the very first year of the Agency's activities the 
Czechoslovak Government had asked the Central Technical Library of Czechoslovakia 
to make available to the Agency, free of charge, technical documentation 
and scientific publications dealing with atomic energy5 that had been done 
regularly ever since. In July 1958 the Czechoslovak Government had offered 
the Agency 13 fellowships to enable research workers from less developed countries 
to spend the academic year 1958-59 studying at the Faculty of Theoretical 
and Nuclear Physics of the Charles University, at the Industrial School of 
Nuclear Technology and at the Institute of Nuclear Physics of the Academy of 
Sciences in Prague, His Government had also offered two fellowships for 
technical training in radiobiology at the Biophysical Institute of the Czocb.07 
Slovak Academy of Sciences. At the second session of the General Conference, 
the Czechoslovak delegation had offered the Agency the services of ten experts 
in the utilization of radioisotopes, reactors, biology and health measures, and 
11/ GC(III)/75. 
12/ GC(lT)/EES/25, Part B, paragraph 3. 



GC(III)/0E.26 
page 18 


tlio handling of radioactive materials, and had also offered special measuring1 
13/ 


apparatus of Czechoslovak manufacture to the value of 100 000 crowns.—' It 
had also announced the willingness of the Czechoslovak Government to supply 
the Agency with natural uranium undei- Article IX of its Statute,, on the assumption 
that specifications would he drawn up as soon as the needs of interested 
Iloraber States were known.—" 


57. The Czechoslovak Government followed with sympathy the Agency's efforts 
to holp Member States, particularly those in less developed areas. -It had 
therefore decided to renew its offer of the free services of ten experts and 
consultants. Moreover, in confirmation of its 1958 offer, it was placing 
the following fellowships for less developed countries at the Agency's disposals 
eight fellowships at the Faculty of Theoretical and Nuclear Physics 
of the Charles University and the Industrial School of Nuclear Technology in 
Prague, beginning with the academic year 196O-6I5 five one-year fellowships 
at the Institute of Nuclear Research of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciencos 
in Prague, to begin on 1 October 1960% and two fellowships for technical 
training in radiobiology at the Biophysical Institute of the Czechoslovak 
Acadomy of Sciences in Brno, to begin on 1 January 1960. 
58. Czechoslovakia was ready to act as host coxmtry for one of the Agency's 
forthcoming scientific conferences or meetings, in the firm hope of thus contributing 
to the successful implementation of its programme of meetings. The 
Czechoslovak.Government was also putting at the Agency's disposal a sum of 
100 000 crowns and Czechoslovak scientific apparatus of an equivalent value. 
In supporting it in that way, the Czechoslovak Government hoped that the Agency 
would become what -it was supposed to be under its Statute, namely a universal, 
effective and living scientific and technical organization. 
59. At past sessions certain delegations had emphasized the fact that the 
success of the Agency's work depended on the participation of States throughout 
the world and that the exclusion of certain countries could only weaken 
its authority and prestige. The Agency's universality should not be artificially 
impaired by purely political considerations. To prevent the Chinese 
People's Republic from participating in the work of the Agency could only 
damage the Agency itself°9 it was ridiculous to pretend that Chiang Xai Shok's 
regime represented China. 
13/ GC(II)/OR,19, paragraph 8. 
.14/ Ibid., paragraph 11. 



GC(III)/OR.26 
page 19 


60, The Czechoslovak delegation hoped that the Agency's activities would 


develop in conformity with its Statute and. the United Nations Charter, and 


that they would he favourably affected by the relaxation of international 


tension and the efforts that wore at present being made to re-establish con


fidence among States. In conclusion, he stressed again the fundamental role 
which the prohibition of nuclear weapons and the destruction of existing stocks 


could play towards that end. The Agency could make a vital contribution to 


the accomplishment of those objectives by adopting the draft resolution sub


mitted by the Czechoslovak delegation., 


ol. The PRESIDENT said that the Czechoslovak draft resolution would be 


examined at a later meeting, once it had been reproduced, translated and dis


tributed and delegations had had time to consider it. 


62. Mr. SOLE (U nion of South Africa), after congratulating the President 
and extending to him his warmest wishes, welcomed, as representative of the 
African and Middle East area in the Board of Governors, the two new Member. 
States from that area which had joined the Agency since the second session. 
63. .In 1960 several African and Middle Eastern States would achieve independence;, 
and the Union of South Africa hoped that those countries would be rapidly 
admittod to the Agency. 
64. 
At the second session of the General Conference he had deplored the "crisis 
15/ 
of confidence" in the future of the Agency.—^ Its prestige among scientists 
had been at a low ebb, and it had been regarded by many observers as just 
another "cold war" platform rather than as an instrument for harmonizing co


operation among men of science and atomic technicians. There had been fears 
that it might become little more than an expensive means of dispensing a limited 
amount of technical assistance and practical knowledge to the less developed 


countries. 


65. Happily, ho was no,/ convinced that the Agency's progress during the past 
twelve months had almost surmounted that crisis of confidence. Not all its 
troubles had disappeared, but it'could record some commendable achievements. 
15/ GC(II)/OR.l6, paragraphs 16 - 18. 



GC(III)/OR.26 
pago 20 


66. The creation of the Scientific Advisory Committee, the quality of the 
Agency's technical publications and the value of its seminars had increased 
its scientific reputation. The development of its fellowship programme 
should prove invaluable. As the Secretary-General's representative had 
just said, its' relations with the United Nations were now normal. 
67. The Union of South Africa hoped that that spirit of co-operation would be 
reflected in closer co-ordination of the Agency's work with that of the Radiation 
Committee. 
68. lie was pleased to note that for about a year past political manoeuvring 
and propagandist debate in the discussions of the Board of Governors had been 
diminishing. Furthermore, the major atomic Powers had given greater support 
to the Agency's work. The United States of America had generously provided 
$600 000 for the establishment of a laboratory. The benefits derived from 
the existence of that laboratory would doubtless be fully recognized by the 
time the General Conference held its fourth ordinary session. 
69. If an international control organization for detecting atomic explosions 
were set up, the Powers concerned intended that its headquarters should be in 
Vienna; although atomic disarmament was not within its competence, the Agency 
would be able to assist the new organization to solve various technical 
prohloms, 
70. The progress achieved in the last year gave him much more solid hope for 
the Agency's future than could have been justified at the same period in 195*3. 
The Director General and the Secretariat should be warmly commended for the 
manner in which they had mot the challenge engendered by the crisis of confidence. 
71. However, many difficulties remained to be overcome. The principal 
raispn d'etre of the Agency was its operational programme. In terms of the 
Statute that programme had to be financed to a considerable extent by voluntary 
contributions. That system of financing would become increasingly unsatisfactory 
as the operational programme expanded, for advance planning was 
extremely difficult when the amount of money which would be available was 
unknown. 

GC(III)/0H,2 
page 21 


72. In order to avoid the impediments created by Article XIV of the Statute, 
the Board of Governors charged to the regular budget more and moro expenditure 
which should properly he regarded as operational. While recognizing the 
handicaps imposed by Article XIV, South Africa was completely opposed to such 
amendment of the Statute by interpretation. Article XVIII, which provided 
for a review of the Statute, might afford a way out of the dilemma. lie made 
the personal suggestion that the Board of Governors should undertake in the 
next two years a study of amendments to the Statute which would enable the 
financing of the Agency's operational programme to be placed on a sounder 
budgetary footing. 
73. Amendment of the Statute would, however, take several years. The 
voluntary contributions had, in 1959, for the second time, fallen short of 
the target fixed by the General Conference and, in order to overcome the 
resulting difficulties without delay, a balance of priorities should at once 
be achieved in the operational programme. Technical assistance, though highly 
important, should not constitute almost the whole of that programme. In the 
1960 draft programme and budget, 85 per cent of the operational budget was 
devoted to technical assistance, including fellowships. A more equitable 
proportion of the operational budget should be assigned to projects which would 
meet the needs of all Member States of the Agency and advance its scientific 
prestige. By Article III of the Statute the Agency's first function was to 
encourage and assist research on, and development and practical application of, 
atomic energy. Technical assistance was merely one means of reaching that 
goal, and should moreover be financed from the Expanded Programme of Technical 
Assistance rather than from the Agency's General Fund. 
74° He therefore appealed to the less developed countries to recognize the 


need for allocating a fair share of the Agency's operational expenditure to 


projects which would benefit its whole membership rather than individual Ilcrnber 


States. In the long run the less developed countries themselves would be sure 


to gain from the larger contributions to the General Fund which, that policy 
would stimulate. 


75. Furthermore, all Members of the Agency should be encouraged to make contributions 
to the General Fund, even if only a token contribution of less than 
US $1 000. The informal suggestion had been made that Member States should be 
recommended by resolution to contribute to the General Fund in proportion to 
their assessment under the administrative budget, or at least to mako token contributions. 

GC(III)/OR.26 
page 22 


76. South Africa was one of the eight Members which had contributed .to the 
General Fund in 19581 it had already contributed US $10 000 for 1959 and was 
prepared to pledge a similar amount for 1960. 
77. In order to encourage continuity of support for the General Fund by Member 
States, there should also he proper financial control over expenditure from 
the Fund in relation to its anticipated revenues. It was the duty of the 
Board of Governors to exercise such control, and in order to discharge that duty 
a rosorvo should be built up in the General Fund. South Africa hoped that 
the Conference would accept that view and that no proposal would be made, either 
by the Conference or subsequently by Board Members, which would have the effect 
of vitiating the concept of a reserve in the General Fund. 
78. The problem of scientific manpower was almost as important as that of 
financial resources.. It was common knowledge that the Agency was experiencing 
difficulty in recruiting scientists for its Secretariat, and even more so for 
its technical missions. Though there was a world shortage of atomic scientists, 
ho appealed to the leading atomic Powers to be liberal in making their exports 
available for service with the Agency. Experts should be able to servo with 
the Agency for two or three years and then resume their permanent assignments 
in their own countries without forfeiting any of their acquired rights. It 
was particularly important that appropria-te steps be taken in favour of experts 
seconded, not from Government services, but from universities and,scientific 
institutes. As an inducement to scientists of the right calibre, the Director 
General should use the power given him by the financial rules to pay special 
allowances in cortain individual cases. It was more important, hovTCvcr, to 
ensure that employment in the Agency should enhance the prestige of the scientist. 
Scientific prestige was not built up on programmes of technical assistance. 
There again the question of an equitable balance of priorities arose. 
To build up the Agency's scientific prestige would not be detrimental to its 
technical assistance programme^ on the contrary, it would undoubtedly improve 
the quality of the technical assistance it provided. 
79* In the immediate future the Agency's scientific prestige would be closely 
linked to what it was able to achieve in connexion with the establishment of 
recognized international standards and regulations, the quality of its scientific 
seminars and technical publications, and its achievements in oncouraging 
and co-ordinating research. All those features of the Agency's programme 
deserved as much emphasis as technical assistance in its various forms. 



GC(III)/OR.26 
page 23 


80. If5 as announced, the United States and the Soviet Union were to utilize 
the Agency as a repository for all useful information on the peaceful application 
of atomic energy, the Agency's scientific prestige would he greatly 
enhanced. 
81. In order to encourage more scientists to attend the General Conference,, 
one of the Agency's scientific conferences should he held at the same time. 
82. As the Director General had just stated, the Agency's potentialities would 
he even greater if the Great Powers succeeded in reaching agreement on the 
cessation of nuclear tests. Although atomic disarmament was not yet in sight, 
the cessation of nuclear homh tests should facilitate the diversion of vast 
resources into peaceful channels. To benefit from that development the Agency 
must enjoy a measure of prestige and scientific attainment commanding the 
respect of scientists and statesmen;; oti-Grw'isre it would not he used to assist 
in developing the new vistas which a cessation of nuclear homh tests would 
open up. The General Conference should do what it could to ensure that the 
Agency earned that respect. It could best do so hy eschewing political 
bickering and concentrating on a constructive discussion of the Agency's scientific 
responsibilities. 
83. Lord PLOTOEN (United Kingdom) congratulated the President on his 
election and thanked the Austrian Government for its hospitality. 
84. The United Kingdom was pleased to see that at the third regular session 
of the General Conference the Agency was a fully-established working institution, 
with real achievement already behind it, and with a solid programme of 
work for the future. It hoped and believed that the Agency would continue 
on those lines. The United Kingdom Government, conscious of the obligations 
of countries advanced in atomic energy, intended to give its full support to 
the Agency to help it render service to all Member States. 
85. Among the Agency's various activities, health and safety were of common 
Importance to all Member States. The United Kingdom, which had gained much 
practical experience of the subject, was ready to share its knowledge with 
other Member States. 

GC(III)/0H.26 
page 24 


86. The Agency's health and safety work was important for three reasons. 
First; it was essential to gain and build up the confidence of the public, to 
whom atomic energy was still something frightening. Since any loss of confidence 
might create a serious prejudice against the nuclear industry, it was 
necessary to prevent a serious nuclear accident from occurring in any country. 
The nuclear industry had a good safety record, which showed what could he 
achieved if proper precautions were taken. The Agency did the v/orld a great 
service by promulgating procedures and practices in health and safety which 
incorporated the best of.collective experience, 
87. A second reason concerned the disposal of radioactive waste' and liability 
for damage, in which the practice of each country was of great importance to 
its neighbours. The United Kingdom hoped that through the intermediary of 
the Agency - particularly as a result of the Conference on the Disposal of 
Radioactive Waste to be held at Monaco in November 1959 -an agreement could 
be reached on common procedures and standards which each country could use as 
a basis for its own practice. 
88. Thirdly, with regard to international trade, the supply of nuclear materials 
and equipment required reasonable uniformity of practice in such matters as 
the transport of radioactive materials and civil liability. ' The Agency had 
an opportunity to evolve common standards before the practices of individual 
countries diverged too greatly or became too rigid. It was desirable, not to 
impose uniformity of detail, but rather to establish models to which national 
procedures could conform. 
89. The United Kingdom welcomed what the Agency'was doing to promote the 
exchange of information, particularly the holding of specialized symposia and 
conferences and the proposed publication in 1960 of a journal dealing with 
controlled thermonuclear fusion. 
90, Ho hoped that the Board of Governors would produce a universally acceptable 
safeguards system for submission to the fourth regular session of the 
General Conference. Technical assistance was highly important and an essential 
expression of the Agency's ideals. The United Kingdom, which was deeply conscious 
of the needs of the less developed countries, was determined to support 
that side of the Agency's work as far as it could, and had therefore made the 



GC(III)/OR.26 
page 25 


second largest financial contribution to the Agency's General Fund. It wel


comed the Board's proposal to the Conference to raise the figure for technical 
assistance expenditure in 1960 to $2 100 000, and hoped that pledges from 
Member States would reach that total. 


91. It was essential for the Agency to establish simple basic rules and priorities 
governing the grant of technical assistance. To comply with Article 
III.B.3 of the Statute, Agency assistance had to be related both to the 
requesting countries' needs and to the Agency's objectives and capacity. A 
judicious balance must be struck between the different types of assistance the 
grant of fellowships, and the provision of experts, services and equipment. 
92. The Agency's training fellowship scheme had got off to an excellent start, 
for which the Secretariat deserved congratulation. By receiving 62 Agency 
follows, the United Kingdom was showing its desire to contribute actively to 
the scheme's success. There again, however, a balance had to be kept between 
the practical possibilities for nuclear energy in the various countries and 
the scale of their training programmes. The Agency project for an investigation 
into the economic prospects of nuclear poYv-er development in the less 
developed countries therefore deserved particular attention. 
93- In many areas that investigation would doubtless indicate that in the 


immediate future conventional means of generating electricity would remain more 


economic than nuclear methods. However, that did not mean that the less 
developed countries should neglect atomic energy. Indeed, the development of 
small and medium-size reactors held out interesting long-term prospects| and 
the use of radioisotopes offered immediate and almost limitless benefits to 
all countries in return for a relatively small expenditure. That part of the 
Agency's programme also deserved the fullest support. 


94. After thanking the United States Government for its generous contribution 
to the cost of building the Agency's laboratory, he stated that the United 
Kingdom would accept the programme and budget for 1960 as proposed by the Board 
of Governors. It was a well-balanced document, with reasonable and precise 
objectives. 

GC(III)/OR.26 
page 26 


95. The United Kingdom was grateful to the Director General and Secretariat, 
and also to the Board of Governors, for their work, and maintained its entire 
confidence in the Agency* It remained convinced that the Agency had an 
important role to play in the development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
for the greatest henefit to all Member States. The United Kingdom Government 
would therefore continue to give the Agency all the support within its power. 
The meeting roso at 1.15 P.ra. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC (III)/OR.
7 December 
27 
1959 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1959 at 3.20 p.m. 


Presidents 
Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 1 - 30 
Governors for the yea. 1958-59 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the Union 

of Soviet Socialist Republics, Argentina, 


the Republic of Korea and Mexico 


* GC(III)/88/Rev,2, 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the third regular session of 
the General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2, 

GC(III)/OR.27 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND EEPOET OF THE BOARD UP GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958-59 
(GC(III)/73, 85) (continued) 


1. Mr. KOVJKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) made the following 
statement-/s 
"The third regular session of the General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency opens in circumstances which, unlike those 
of previous years, are distinguished by a manifest relaxation of tension 
in relations among States and particularly the Great Powers. This conclusion 
is confirmed by the not unimportant events which have occurred 
between the second and third sessions of the General Conference, It will 
be useful if we recall here at a plenary meeting what these events were 
and if I draw certain conclusions of interest to the Agency. 


"At Geneva on 31 October 1958 the meeting of representatives of the 
Soviet Union, the United States of America and the United Kingdom began 
its work on the question of discontinuing tests of all types of nuclear 
weapons, as has been so earnestly desired by the people in all countries 
of the world. A year of unremitting labour by the meeting brought forth 
definite results% the texts of the great majority of articles in the 
agreement on the cessation of atomic and hydrogen weapon tests have been 
agreed. Three or four clauses of the agreement are still to be agreed,, 
the main one concerns the number of the inspection teams to be sent 
annually into the territories of States parties to the agreement to 
investigate events suspected of being nuclear explosions. This is the 
most serious disagreement of substance among the three Powers. If 
agreement can be reached on this question, there will be no great 
difficulty in reaching agreement on the other matters which have not been 
agreed. 

"Unfortunately, to judge by the statement by Mr. Herter, the 
Secretary of State of the United States of America, at the plenary meeting 
of the United Nations General Assembly on 17 September 1959, the United 
States intends* to make this question an insurmountable obstacle to 


1/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's requo.it 
under Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 


GC(III)/Ofc.27 
page 3 


achieving agreement on the cessation of tests. The United States of 
America is demanding that the number of visits of inspection should he 
determined on a scientific basis. In effect, this implies a revision of 
the conclusions and recommendations of the meeting of experts which took 
place at Geneva in July and August 1958. We consider that to review 
today something that was agreed yesterday is an unacceptable way of 
conducting discussions. Those who raise the question of revising the 
Geneva agreements are acting only out of a desire to prevent the cessation 
of tests, in other words the cessation of the construction of new and 
ever more destructive kinds of nuclear weapon. 


"But let us return to the question of the international situation. 


"In that same city of Geneva in May 1959, the meeting of the Foreign 
Ministers of the Soviet Union, the United States of America, the United 
Kingdom and France began its work, Yrtiich is not yet completed. Although 
unfortunately the meeting has not yet succeeded in reaching agreement on 


the items which formally appear on its agenda, the very fact that such a 
meeting was comrsnod is a striking indication of the relaxation of international 
tension. It is encouraging to note that this meeting has 
prepared a solution for a question as important as the establishment of 
a small body to examine the question of disarmament. The establishment 
of such a body with a membership of ten States - the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, the United States of America, the United Kingdom, 
France, Bulgaria, Italy, Canada, Poland, Romania and Czechoslovakia has 
been approved by a resolution of the United Nations Disarmament 
Commission. Agreement on establishing, on a basis of parity, a small 
body to review the question of disarmament constitutes a distinct 
contribution to reducing international tension. 


"The visit of Mr. Macmillan, the Prime Minister of Great Britain, to 
the Soviet Union was an important event. Particular significance also 
attaches to the visit of Mr. U.S. Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of 
Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, to the United States 
of America and the forthcoming visit of Mr. Dwight D. Eisenhower, President 
of the United States of America, to the Soviet Union. The meetings 
between Mr, Khrushchev and the President of the United States may well 
result in a fundamental transformation of the relations between States and 



GO(III)/OH.27 
page 4 


may clear the way for the solution of such problems as the discontinuance 
of the cold war, disarmament;, the prohibition of all types of atomic 


weapons, the extension of economic co-operation, the elimination of trade 
restrictionsj and so on. Agreement on all these matters would deliver 


mankind from the threat of a new world war involving the use of all types 
of destructive weapons, and this is, in the final analysis, the most 
important consideration for the peoples of all continents. 


"It is for just this reason that all peace-loving peoples are 
eagerly awaiting the meeting between the leaders of these two Great 
Powers. This is clearly the kind of event for which the world has been 
waiting. The meeting between the two heads of Government is also of 
great importance because the United States and the Soviet Union are the 
two leading- world powers in atomic energy and in other advanced scientific 
and technical developments, such as rocket-building, artificial 
satellites, etc. You, gentlemen, fully realize the enormous importance 
which attaches to international co-operation, and in particular to cooperation 
between the Soviet Union and the United States of America, for 
the future peaceful development of mankind. The rejection of a policy 
of international co-operation has, in the past, led to dangerous consequences, 
to wars, destruction and suffering by many nations. In our 
age - the age of atomic and rocket techniques - war threatens mankind 
with ever more inevitable calamities. 


"Thus it is of particular value and importance that the leaders of 
the two mightiest countries in the world, masters of the most advanced 
military techniques, should now be applying their efforts to eliminate 
these dangers and to achieve co-existence and the peaceful development 
of nations. 


"Mr. President and gentlemen, I have drawn your attention to events 
which do not themselves yet mean the cessation of the cold war but which 
constitute definite grounds on which genuinely friendly relations among 
all States of the world can be based, without regard to the social systems 
existing in those States. 


"This trend in international events allows us to hope that the 
activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency will become more 
fruitful than they have been till now. 


GC(III)/0H.27 
page 5 


"If the International Atomic Energy Agency is really interested in 
extending and reinforcing its activities - and we hope it is - then it too 
is 'bound to take action with a view to hastening the conclusion of an 
agreement on the prohibition of atomic weapons. In this connexion, the 
Soviet Union delegation has much satisfaction in mentioning the initiative 


2/ 


taken by the Czechoslovak delegation which this morning proposed—' that 
the General Conference of the Agency should address an invitation to the 
countries concerned to apply their efforts to the prohibition of atomic 
weapon tests. For its part, the Soviet Union is prepared immediately to 
sign an agreement with the Western Powers on the permanent cessation of 
nuclear weapon tests. It would be difficult to overestimate the import


ance of such an agreement. It would be the first significant stop towards 


the complete prohibition of atomic weapons, their elimination from 


national armaments and the destruction of stocks of such weapons* 


"At every conference, the Soviet delegation speaks on the need to 
put an end to the atomic arms race and to prohihit atomic and hydrogen 
weapons, We are told in reply that we are merely indulging in propaganda 
or that we want the conference to discuss political questions, This is 
nonsense, of course. Surely it must be evident that as long as atomic 
weapons form part of national armaments, the general use of the atom for 
peaceful purposes oannot even be discussed and hence there oan be no fullscale 
activity on the part of the Agency. Those who suggest that we 
should close our eyes to the continuation of the atomic arms race are 
inhibiting the development of the Agency's activities, whether they want 
to or not. 


"The Soviet Union has more than once oome forward with proposals on 
the disarmament question. This it still continues to do. Only a few days 
ago Mr. U.S. Khrushchev, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, speaking to the United Nations Ganeral 
Assembly', placed before- it a proposal for general and complete disarmament* 
Wo propose that all States should, over a four-year period, do away with 
all their armed forces and armaments, including atomic, hydrogen and other 
types of weapons of mass destruction, and should establish appropriate 
control measures. 


2/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraph 48. 



GC(III)/OR.27 
page 6 


"The adoption of this proposal would open up the widest prospects 
for the development of science and engineering for the benefit of all 
mankind,, and particularly for the benefit of the. economically less 
developed countries,, Allow me to cite one example in this connexion. 


"On 14 September 1959, a Soviet rocket conveyed a container of 
scientific apparatus and the pennant of the Soviet Union to the moon. 
With that achievement; mankind's age-old dream of reaching out to another 
planet was realized. And if Soviet scientists, engineers, technicians and 
workers were able to achieve such a fantastic shot in present circumstances, 
it can.be imagined with what rapidity it would be possible,~by 
combined effort, to advance in science and engineering, once the problem 
of disarmament had been solved, if all forces and resources were redirected 
exclusively to peaceful construction. . 

"Gentlemen, the powerful atomic ice-breaker Lenin was recently 
completed and launched in the Soviet Union. This ship embodies important 
modern achievements of science and engineering. In this connexion, 
Mr. U.S. Khrushchev, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, addressed the following appeal to the 
whole world s 


...The launching of the ice-breaker Lenin, whose engine is now powered 
by nuclear onexgy, has also a symbolic significance. It is no accident 
that the Soviet people, who were the first in the world to put into 
operation an atomic power station, were also the first to build an atomic 
ice-breaker. In so doing, we have once again given visible proof that 
the Soviet people are fully determined to utilize the energy of the atom 
for peaceful purposes. 

"'Our atomic ice-breaker, the Lenin, will crush not only the ice of 
the oceans but also that of the cold war. It will open the way into the 
minds and hearts of the nations, calling them to turn from rivalry among 
States in the armaments race to rivalry in the use of atomic energy for 
the wellbeing of mankind, to fire the human mind and body and to create 
all that is necessary to meet the needs of mankind. We are prepared to 
co-operate with all peoples in the peaceful use of atomic energy and it 
would be a great pleasure to us if this appeal were taken up by all 
States. ' 



GC(III)/OR.2T 
page 7 


"It is not only atomic vessels that we in the Soviet Union are now 
building. A number of large nuclear power stations are also under construction 
at Ulyanovsk and Voronezh and in the Urals, The construction 
and operation'of these stations will provide a wealth of material on 
which the future rapid development of atomic powor engineering will be 
based. 


"Is all this feasible in other.countries, Yes, definitely. In some 
countries it is even more essential than in the Soviet Union, for the 
simple reason that the USSR is extremely rich in such conventional forms 
of fuel as coalj oil and' natural gas. However, there are many countries 
in the .world where there is a severe shortage of fuel resources or no 
fuel whatever." As Dr. Homi Bhahha stated yesterday in< his interesting 
talk, nuclear energy may already represent an economically feasible source 
of power for certain less developed countries possessing inadequate power 
resources for the development of their economies'. 

"To this end, we must,apply nuclear energy exclusively for peaooful 
purposes. To achieve that, the States Members of the Agency must males 
their contribution;, thoy could make their voices heard in demanding the 
prohibition of the use of atomic energy for military purposes and the 
complete channelling of the atom into the service of the peaceful needs 
of humanity. The sooner this is done the better, particularly for States 
possessing slender fuel resources. 


"In the meantime, however, the end of the use of nuclear enexgy for 
military purposes is still not in sight. Jbr example, the press is full 
of reports that Prance intends to proceed to atomic weapon tests in the 
Sahara in the near future. The peoples of Africa, particularly those in 
the regions'immediately,adjoining the Sahara, whore the testing of the 
atomic bombs is planned, are seriously concerned at this action of the 
Jronch Government. A reflection of this concern is the fact that the 
matter has been placed on the agenda of the fourteenth session of the 
United Hations General Assembly. We believe that the conduct of tests 
of this kind merely plaocs fresh obstacles in the way of achieving 
agreement on the prohibition of nuclear weapons and the prohibition of 
tests of such weapons. 


GC(IH)/OR.27 
page 8 


"The continuing use of.atomic energy for military purpcsos is one 
of the principal obstacles in the way of a genuine expansion of the 
activities of the International Atomic Enorgy Agency. 


"I cannot pass over a further circumstance which is having a 
deleterious effect on the development of the Agency's work, and that is 
that there are practically no applications to the Agency by Member States 
for the supply of fissionable materials, although it is common knowledge 
that the Agency has at its disposal 5 140 kg of nuclear fuel enriched up 
to '20 per cent. The Agency has no plans for the use of these materials. 
Translating the matter into commercial language, one may say that the 
goods are available hut there is no demand for them. Why, On what 
grounds do States refrain from purchasing, nuclear fuel, Why are there 
no applications from Member States for assistance in building, say, large 
or small nuclear power stations, or in the use of atomic enorgy in 
industry, transport, etc., The answer to this question does not appear 
in the report of the Board of Governors (GC(III)/73). 

"The USSE delegation considers that the indifference of Member States 
towards the typos of assistance which I have indicated is to some extent 
explained by the fact that, for all but two or three countries; atomic 
power stations and atomic ships represent something new and untried, and 
therefore these countries are bound to display a certain prudence in the 
matter and to wait, until countries which are more advanced in nuclear 
matters have accumulated experience in these fields. 


"There is no doubt that this factor, is holding back the demand for 
assistance in the construction of nuclear power stations or vessels. 
However, it is only a secondary factor. One of the main oauseo, , in our 
view, is 'the fact that the strict control which the Agency wishes to 
exercise over the utilization of the assistance which it rondors is 
repellent to States and prevents them from applying to the Agency. This 
is indeed entirely understandable, as the control measures proposed by 
the Agency in effect constitute intervention by the Agency in the internal 
affairs of States and an infringement of their sovereign rights. 


"Gentlemen, what is it that arouses doubts and misgivings in many 
people when they consider the question of control, The Agency has thus 



GC(III)/OR,27 
page 9 


far not allotted a single gramme of the 5 140 kg of fissionable materials 
at its disposal; while there has already been established in the Agency's 
Secretariat a Department of Safeguards and Inspection, as it is called, 
whose duties include control of the use.of these materials and which is 
made up of the Office of the Inspector General, the Division of Safeguards 
and the Division of Inspection. 


"The Board of Governors is engaged on the urgent preparation of a 


comprehensive system of safeguards and inspection, which will even- extend 


to uranium and to plutonium isotope separation plant. The Western Powers, 


as the discussion at the last series of meetings of the Board of 
. Governors showed, are attempting to introduce safeguards in such a 


desperate rush as would give the impression that the Agency is already 


handling so many projects that their implementation may involve the risk 


of diversion of fissionable materials to military purposes, 


"In considering, the problems of controlling the use of atomic 
materials exclusively for peaceful purposes, the question also arises 
whether such, control achieves its purpose. We of the USSR delegation 
answer this question in the negative. 


"The uses of atomic energy are in fact at present developing in 
three directions. There are, for example, countries such as the Soviet 
Union, the United States of America and the United Kingdom, These Powers 
are in a position independently to produce nuclear source materials, 
concentrate them, and utilize them for peaceful or for military purposes 
without the assistance of anybody, and consequently without any control 


•whatsoever by other States, 
There are also countries which are unable 
to use atomic energy independently and must rely on the assistance of 
other countries, provided under bilateral agreements. Experience of 
bilateral agreements shows that the United States, for example, links its 
atomic assistance to other countries with the' imposition of a rather 
strict control of the use made by the latter of the nuclear materials 
and facilities.provided. In contrast to this, the Soviet Union does not 
impose any kind of control in the bilateral agreements whioh it concludes. 
There are also oountries which wish to obtain assistance in the form of 

GC(III)/0B.27 
page 10 


nuclear materials or facilities from, cr through, the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. It is intended to make such assistance conditional 
upon the acceptance 'of a system of strict control. 


"The overall picture is therefore as follows. A number of States 
have the power to produce nuclear materials in any quantity without 
control and to use them either for peaceful or for military purposes. 
Other States may have at their unrestricted disposal such fissionable 
materials as they are able to produce by their own efforts but may he 
subject to control In respect of the fissionable materials or the 
facilities which they obtain as assistance under bilateral agreements 
(with the exception of those concluded with'the Soviet Union) or under 
agreements with, the International Atomic Energy Agency. Finally., a third 
group of States5 working solely with nuclear materials supplied through 
the Agency, will be under full Agency control. 


"I have described this matter in considerable detail in order to 
demonstrate the full absurdity of the situation which has arisen whereby 
one group of States is entirely free from control, a second group is 
under partial control, and a third group is under full control. 


"Under the pressure of certain Powers, attempts are now being made 
to channel the Agency's attention towards control and safeguards questions 
and to make them the Agency's main task. As a large number of scientists 
and statesmen have justly pointed out, Agency controls and safeguards 
will, in fact, be imposed on those countries which, even if they have 
access to enough fissionable materials, will be unable in the coming 
years cr even decades, owing to their present technical and oconomic 
weakness, to manufacture atomic weapons and still less to use them for 
military purposes. This becomes quite evident when it is remembered 
that requests for assistance in the form of fissionable materials and 
facilities will mostly come from loss developed countries which do not 
possess a developed industry and are unable to manufacture nuclear 
weapons. On the other hand, countries which do possess such facilities 
are not and will not be recipients of Agency assistance, and will consequently 
be outside the range of that control upon which some countries be 
it noted, incidentally, countries which will in fact not be subject 
to control themselves - are insisting. Thus, the Agency's safeguards 



GC(III)/OE.27 
page 11 


system is of no possible use as a moans of controlling oountrios which 


are intent on embarking upon a nuclear armament programme* 


"The proposed system in fact can only lead to the dominion of the 
strong over the weak. In this connexion; I must refer to a statement by 
Dr. Gunnar Eanders, the prominent Norwegian scientist, who is .'veil 
acquainted with the Agency's work, in his article in the April number of 
the "Bulletin of Atomic Scientists". Referring to control within the 
framework of the Agency, he comes' to the conclusion that the only form 
of positive control is that proscribed for countries possessing no atomic 
weapons5 no nuclear source materials and no means for the direct procurement 
thereof, and that it is thus the kind of control established by 
rich relations over poor. 


"In this way, under the pretext of control, the nascent atomic 
industry in those countries could easily become dependent on various 
companies and corporations in the countries which are technologically 
most advanced. What purport to be safeguards against the possibility of 
producing atomic weapons would really become economic control over the 
development of atomic industry and. science in the less developed 
countries, and possibly over their economies as a whole. 


"This system which is now being introduced, in the absence of an 
agreement providing for the prohibition of nuclear weapons under international 
supervision, would have a one-sided character and would apply 
only to countries receiving assistance from the Agency. It would not 
prevent the more extensive use of atomic energy for military purposes 
since it would not affect the nuclear powers or countrios which do not 
ask the Agency for assistance, 


"The procoduro for elaborating a system of control and safeguards 
which has been chosen by the Secretariat is also a matter for surprise. 
Under this prooedure, the general principles for establishing control and 
safeguards wore to be elaborated and approved by the Board of Governors 
hero and now. It may well 'bo asked why the Board of Governors, in which 
only a few Members of the Agency are represented, should approve the 
control and safeguards system. Why should that be done in the absence of 
all those Members of the Agency who will in future be subject to control, 



GC(III)/OR.27 
page 12 


The Soviet delegation proposes that the General Conference, and not the 


Board of Governors, should approve the draft general principles for 
establishing the control and safeguards system. Let those countries 


which will he subject to control express their views on the matter. 


"The Soviot delegation would like to refer to two or three other 
questions. It is only too obvious that one of the serious shortcomings 
in the Agency's work is that, in defiance of common sense and the real 
state of affairs., a number of States are excluded from taking part in 
the Agency's activities. On the other hand, the Chiang Kai Shek clique 
is a Member of the Agency. 


"The presence of a representative of the Chiang Kai Shek clique, 
which consist's in fact of a private group of emigrants who have been 
driven from the mainland by the Chinese poople and maintain themselves 
for the time being in Taiwan with United States assistance; cannot be 
regarded as lawful in the Agency any more than in any other international 
organization. 


"Nor is it possible to accept as normal the fact that only South 
Korea is a Menbor of the Agency, while the People's Democratic Republic 
of Korea continues to be excluded. In violation of the Genova Agreements 
on Indo-China, South Viet-Nam is also a Member of the Agency. 


'"Wo also cannot pass over in silence the discriminatory decision 
taken by the Board of Governors to reject the application by the World 
Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) for the grant of consultative status 
with the Agenoy. At the same time, two other international trade union 
organizations wore granted consultative status. This is cloar discrimination 
against a trade union organization which is, incidentally, the 
largest of the throe. Moreover, on more than one occasion the Agency has 
already used the services of scientists and experts who are mombers of 
this organization. It is rather a strange state of affairs when members 
of the WFTU are accepted by the Agency as experts and yet tlio Agency 
refuses to recognise an organization which really exists and functions, 
enjoys consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social 
Council, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 



GC(III)/0E.27 
page 13 


Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 


and the International Labour Organisation and is fully entitled to similar 


status with the Agency. 


"The Soviet delegation has decided to put the question of the grant 
of consultative status to the WFTU forward as a separate item on the 
General Conference's agenda-^ and hopes that the General Conference will 
reconsider the decision of the Board of Governors in accordance with 
Article V of the Statute. 


"Another defect in the Agency's work is the fact that on a number of 
questions the Secretariat has taken steps which cannot he regarded otherwise 
than as attempts to circumvent the Board of Governors. This happened, 
for example, with the allocation of the funds received by the Agency from 
the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, The 
Secretariat did not even ask the Board's opinion on the technioal aspects 
of the projects for which appropriations were made, hut merely submitted 
a document for information. The grant of technical assistance to Members 
of the Agency is a question which should he decided by the Board of 
Governors and not by the Agency's Secretariat, 


"I should also like to refer to the Agency's excessive preoccupation 
with administrative questions of all kinds, which results in an inflation 
of the administrative machinery at the expense of the scientific personnel, 
as well as to'inefficient use of members of the Secretariat, unnecessary 
waste of funds and unjustified travel by administrative staff on numerous 
missions. 


"The Agency is incurring unjustified expenditure by engaging a 
considerable number of consultants, who in fact become permanent members 
of the staff;, furthermore, this is permitted at a time when not all the 
existing posts have yet been filled. This practice results in unnecessary 
expenditure and failure to observe the principle of equitable geographical 
distribution in engaging experts to carry out the Agency's tasks. We are 
impelled to utter a fully justified warning against the unhealthy tendency 
which is manifest in the inflation of the Agency's budget, The budget 

3/ GC(III)/94. 



GC(III)/OR.2T 
page 14 


submitted to the General Conference for approval—'exceeds last year's 
budget by more than US § 600 000. We consider that there is no 


justification for. this increase and that it outstrips the volume of the 
Agency's operational activities. The Soviet delegation will give its 
views on this question in the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee. 


"Another feature of the Agency's work that I should like to refer 
to is the absence of publicity for the work of the Board of Governors. 
The Soviet representative has raised this question at meetings of the 
Board. In our view, it is time to make the Board's work open to the 
publicj as is done in the case of the corresponding organs of the 
specialized agencies, and to stop holding meetings in camera. The 
meetings of the Board of Governors should not be closed meetings and its 
decisions and deliberations should take plaoe in public. Representatives 
of the press should be admitted to the Board's meetings. In this way the 
Agency would receive assistance from the public in its work, for it would 
be easier for the Board of Governors and for the Agency's Secretariat to 
take decisions on many questions if they could hear the voice of public 
opinion. In many instances this would make it possible to avoid the 
mistakes and blunders which have occurred in the past two years of the 
Agency's work. 


"It is true that during the past year the Agency has devoted more 
attention to practical activities than in the year before, and in a number 
of cases some progress has been made. In this connexion we may refer to 
the training of scientific and technical personnel, the convening of 
conferences, seminars and symposia and the grant of technical assistance 
to a number of Member States. However, the Agency has still done very 
little. Basically, its -practical achievements in the space of two years 
amount to the following; 


(a) It has helped Japan to obtain three tons of natural uraniumj 
(b) It has awarded 165 fellowships and selected 349 candidates 
for the receipt of fellowships£ 

4/ GC(III)/75. 



GO(III)/OE*27 
page 15 


(c) 
In 19585.Agency fact-finding teams visited Latin America, 
Pakistan, Thailand and the United Arab Republic, Greeoe, 
Morocco and Tunisia. In 1959, missions visited Burma. Indonesia, 
Thailand and Ceylon, Japan, South Korea, South Viert-HaiT and the 
Chiang Kai-Shek regime, Argentina, Brazil and Venezuela. In 
other words, a total of six missions was sent out. Plans have 
been made for the provision of technical assistance to a number 
of countries. In connexion with the organization of the above . 
missions, the Soviet delegation has just one remark to make. 
Jbr what reasons was the Chairman of the mission to the Latin 
American oountries sent to Washington both before and after the 
visit to Latin America, Why did the Secretariat have to send 
him to Washington both before and after, 
(d) 
The Agency has held 12 conferences, symposia and seminarsj 
(e) 
The Agenoy has published a manual on the safe handling of 
radioisotopes and directories of reactors and nuclear 
electronicsj 
(f) 
The Agenoy has collected a variety of information whioh may 
prove useful in the future. 
"That is, in fact, the sum total of the Agency's practical work. 


"The results achieved in the Agency's two years of activity in no 
way justify its enormous expenditure, even taking into account the 
expenses entailed during the period of initial organization. 


"I wish to make one further remark about the statement made by the 
Director General today. The Soviet Union delegation has not had time to 
study that statement and reserves the right to comment on it if necessary, 
but I would like to make one observation about it now.. 

"At one point the Director General said 'Atomic power is not yet 
5/ 


generally economic1^ . Fdrstly, this assertion seems to us premature. 
And secondly, on the basis of what data, for what countries and in relation 
to what conditions was it made, On the basis of what work of' the 
Se oretariat and by what scientists has the general conclusion been reached 


5_/ 
GO (III)/OH. 26, paragraph 26. 



GO(III)/OE.27 
page 16 


that atomic energy is at present not generally eccnomio, It seems to us 


that the Director General has been a little too hasty with his statement 
for, as anyone who was at the lecture yesterday and heard the delegate of 
India knows, under oertain conditions and in certain countries atomio 
energy can he very important and even now can compete with electrioity 


produced from thermal or hydroelectric sources. 


"The Soviet Union regards the Agency as an organ of international 


collaboration and co-operates with it at all times. It has ooncluded 
6/ 


with the Agency an agreement for the supply of uranium-235* Students 


and scientists have been sent by the Agency to train in the Soviet Union, 


and Soviet experts have gone out to a number of Member States to provide 


assistance free of charge and to work out plans and measures for the 


utilisation of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The USSR has earmarked 


500 000 roubles for technical assistance to the Agency's less developed 


Member States. 


"The Soviet Union will continue to take an active part in the Agency's 
work. In its view, the Agency's activities should be based on the 
principles of business-like collaboration and goodwill, principles which 
preclude decisions being imposed by an automatic majority. On that 
depends the success of the Agency's work. 


"The Soviet delegation trusts that the Agency's conference will be 
fruitful." 


2. . The PRESIDENT observed that, although it might be impossible to 
exclude all reference to political issues from the general debate, it was highly 
desirable that speakers should avoid such references to the greatest possible 
extent. 
3. Mr. LOPEZ (Argentina) said that during.the year which had elapsed 
since the last session of the General Conference, the Agency's progress had 
been significant, if modest. The preliminary stage of its existenoo had come 
to an end and all its efforts must now be devoted to making a success of the 
1960 programme. A certain period of consolidation was necessary and the 
6/ INFCIRC/5. 



GC(III)/OR.27 
page IT 


scientific side of its v/ork, together with its technical assistance activities, 
had to 'be organized on a permanent basis. The Agency was wise in not trying 
to construct too hastiljr. 


4. Argentina had been glad to participate in the work of the Board of 
Governors in 1959 and-toi help in drawing up the 1960 programme. The work done 
had been considerable, Missions had gone to various parts of the world and 
experts had been sent to help in organizing atomic energy programmes. At the 
present phase of the Agency's activities the Government of Argentina believed 
that the Agency should concentrate on technical assistance work, providing 
experts' and equipment,, and that it should continue to arrange for the exchange 
of scientists and the provision of fellowships. Compared with the programmes 
of some specialized agonoiesj the Agency's programme was modest. However, the 
quality of the advice and services supplied had "ooen extremely high and the 
technical assistance programme would undoubtedly be gradually extended. 
5. Atomic energy had only recently begun to be utilized for peaoeful purposes. 
Some countries were already very advanced in that field; others had made some 
progress, yet others had begun to realize its potentialities and there were 
some which had not so far been able even to make a start. Argentina was one 
of the more advanced oountries and was in a position to help, through the 
intermediary of the Agenoy, those countries whioh did not yet have programmes 
of their own. In 1959 it had been happy to put a considerable number of 
fellowships - almost all taken up - at the Agenoy's disposal;, it was also 
providing facilities for an international course on the application of radioisotopes 
which would be held from 9 November to 18 December 1959 and had offered 
the services of-experts, one of whom had been placed at the disposal of the 
Government of Venezuela. 
6. He wished to emphasize again the importance his Government attaohed to 
the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
7. The Agency could make a significant contribution to the scientific 
knowledge of mankind, and it should concentrate on research which was likely 
to give practical results, and avoid duplication. 
8<, Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea), recalling that from the outset the 
Republic of Korea had participated enthusiastically in the Agency's work, said 
that it was pleased to be able to express satisfaction with the polioy which 



GC(III)/OR.27 
page 18 


had been followed. It had been a member of the Board of Governors for the 
year which was coming to an end and he was glad to pay tribute to the work 
accomplished by the Board. 

9. In spite of its tragic reoent history, the Republic of Korea had succeeded 
in rebuilding its system of education and was now trying to raise the standard 
of its science and teoh.niq.ue. It gratefully acknowledged the help received 
from friendly States in training engineers and technicians for various branches 
of work connected with atomic energy. 
10. At the beginning of 1959 an Atomic ISneTgy Authority and a researoh 
institute had been set up and a radioisotope research section would shortly 
be established. A small research reactor would be completed by the end of 
1959 under a bilateral agreement with the United States of Amerioa. Any 
fundamental research which could contribute to the advancement of science was 
also being encouraged, 
11. The Republic of Korea had an abundance of ores, including uranium and 
thorium, and the working of the latter formed an important part of its atomic 
energy programme. Being a less developed country, its economic polioy had to 
be based on a realistic appreciation of conditions as they were. In that 
connexion, it had been very glad to receive the visit of an Agency preliminary 
mission in June 1959. Visits from such missions would always be weloome, 
12. He hoped the Conference would study the question of setting up regional training 
centres and also see if work in certain branches of nuclear research 
could not be assigned to the less developed countries. The exarnplo of the 
regional training centre for Latin America should be followed in other areas, 
including the Jar East and South-Bast Asia,. Such centres would not only help 
to improve technological and industrial conditions but also lead to greater 
co-operation between the Governments concerned. It should also be borne in 
mind that the award of contracts to the less developed countries for research 
on subjects which particularly concerned them would greatly stimulate their 
research activities. 
13. Mr. ORTIZ TIRADO (Mexico) remarked that another year in the Agency's 
history had plainly shown that genuine international co-operation was beginning 
to yield some of the fruits expected from the spread of the peaceful uses of 

GC(III)/OR.27 
page 19 


a-feomio energy throughout the world. It was now possible to move confidently 
on to further achievements, given faith in their purpose and the efforts and 
understanding of all nations in furthering the oommon work from whioh they, 
without doubt, would increasingly benefit. 


14,' It augured well that a number of Member States had already submitted 
requests for assistance which the Agency was beginning to meet within the 
limits of its budget. The annual report of the Board of Governors showed how 
the resolutions of the second session of the General Conference on vital 
activities of the Agency were being implemented. Co-ordination of its 
activities with those of the United Nations and the specialized agencies was 
beginning to show results. The Agency's participation in the Expanded Programme 
of Technical Assistance and its agreements with the specialized ag-onoies 
provided solid bases for fruitful international co-operation, 


15. It could not be considered other than an act of international justice to 
accord priority in the Agency's work to activities for the benefit of the less 
developed countries. The counsels of the Scientific Advisory Committee which 
had been established would be most valuable in so far as they were based on 
sound scientific and technical considerations and the Board and the Director 
General continued to pursue the objectives laid down in the initial programme 
recommended by the Preparatory Commission.-^ While the training of technicians, 
experts and research workers was proceeding more rapidly than before, the 
number trained, though gratifyingly large, was not yet enough to keep pace with 
the urgent demands created by population pressure throughout the world, the 
use of new sources of energy and the drive for constant improvement. 
16. - The large number of requests for Agency assistance in regard to health 
and safety measures was not surprising because it was generally realized that 
radioactive substanoes must be handled by really competent experts if mankind 
was to be protected from the dangers of uncontrolled irradiation. The Agency's 
activities in that oonnexion were invaluable and all he had to suggest was that 
the studies already under way be completed as rapidly as possible, without 
prejudice to their quality and the performance of other necessary work. 
2/ GC.1/l. 



GC(III)/0E.27 
page 20 


17. He had noted with the greatest interest the efforts made to find a 
solution for the problem of waste disposal, particularly disposal into the sea. 
Apart from the widespread misgivings on scientific and technical grounds about 
the possible risks involved in that method of waste disposal, the alarm felt 
by the general public must also be borne in mind. The Conference on the Law 
of the Sea, held in Geneva in 19585 had concluded that it was the duty of 
every State to take steps to avoid contamination of the sea by disposal of 
radioactive waste, in accordance with rules and regulations to be laid down 
by the competent international agencies. He accordingly believed it of vital 
importance for the Agency to pursue its studies on the matter with the utmost 
dispatch so as to put definitive regulations at the disposal of States as 
early as possible. 
18. Without underestimating the efforts of the scientists concerned., one 
could not deny that research teams had not as yet succeeded in establishing 
exact criteria regarding the possible harmful genetic effects of irradiation 
or in determining the maximum permissible doses for human beings. It being 
one of the loftiest duties of Governments to protect the health of their 
peoples, it was entirely legitimate to hope that the Agency would do its 
utmost to stimulate and support such work, and at the same time to disseminate 
the latest information on the subject. 
19. On the most important question of safeguards, the possibility that the 
Agency might assume responsibility for administering safeguards prescribed in 
bilateral agreements and not merely those it itself established was a highly 
attractive one. His delegation wished to emphasize how important it was that 
the work already done by the Board of Governors in preparing draft principles 
for the application of safeguards should ultimately lead to definitive 
regulations which would give Member States intending to submit requests for 
assistance a clear idea of the obligations they would have to assume in respect 
of certain types of eissistance offered by the Agency and would, at the same 
time, enable the Agency to apply uniform safeguards in all similar oasos. 
20. The provision of technical assistance was still regarded by the Mexican 
delegation as one of the most important of the Agency's functions and a 
valuable moans for enabling countries, particularly the less developed countries, 
to institute or pursue national atomic energy programmes. Mexico accordingly 

GC(III)/OR.27 
page 21 


continued to attach primary importance to the fellowship programme and, despite 
its gradual expansion, was of the opinion that the Board of Governors and the 
Director General should intensify their efforts to ensure even better results. 
New criteria to govern the granting of fellowships, plans to grant them in 
such a form that the holders could subsequently work together in groups where 
desirable, and a scheme for improving qualifications at the sub-professional 
level, might all be considered. 


21. It was also desirable to study ways and means of appreciably increasing 
the number of fellowships offered, in view of the wide gap between the needs 
of the less developed countries and the help the Agency was at present in a 
position to offer them. Such an increase should, however, be achieved without 
laying an additional financial burden on those countries whose financial 
resources were as small as their training needs were great. His delegation 
might be submitting draft resolutions on those matters as a constructive 
contribution towards improving the services rendered by the Agency to less 
developed countries. 
22.' The preliminary assistance missions despatched at the request of certain 


Governments had proved most valuable and led to the drawing up of specific 
programmes conforming to the actual needs of the countries concerned. It would 
be a fitting consummation of the work of the missions for the Agency to 
provide the experts, equipment and other assistance requested. 


23- He also thought that the Director General should go further afield in the 
visits he was making to Member States in order to establish direct contact with 


their Governments and the officials in charge of the development of national 
atomic energy programmes. Visits of the kind were especially necessary in the 
case of countries far distant from the Agency's headquarters. 


24. He had listened with the greatest attention to the Director General's 
statement and wished to pay a tribute to the zeal with which he had discharged 
his functions. 
25. The diversification'of the Agency's activities, essential for its normal 
development, merited encouragement and support, with .due regard to the views of 
those Members who ardently desired effective aid in improving their national 

GO(III)/OR.27 
page 22 


programmes, so as to enable the less advanced oountries to press forward with, 


the development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy as far as was consonant 
with their special circumstances. 


26. In its constant preoccupation with the problem of shortage of personnel', 
Mexico had taken every opportunity to send staff abroad for training and the 
National Atomic Energy Commission and the lational University had organized 
basic courses on radioisotopes (including the manufacture of the necessary 
equipment). On their return, staff thus trained trained others and carried 
out experimental work. In that way, technical training was being extended 
throughout the country and additional training centres were being formed in 
local universities and institutes, which had been provided with the requisite 
equipment. 
27. Promising results had been obtained in prospecting for uranium-bearing 
ores, and plans were in preparation for setting up processing plants. Work 
was going forward on setting up and developing laboratories dealing, inter 
alia, with radiological protection, the uses of radioisotopes, electronics, 
radiobiology and inorganic chemistry. Studies preparatory to the drawing up of 
an integrated programme covering the various peaceful uses of atomic energy 
were also being pursued with the utmost vigour, 
28. It was Mexico's intention to take as active a part as possible in the 
Agency's work. With that idea in mind, it had put forward its oandid.ature for 
the seat on the Board of Governors which Argentina would be vacating. 
29. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no further speakers for the 
time being, suggested that the list of speakers in the general debate be closed 
at noon the following day., closure of the list would not apply to discussion 
of the draft resolution introduced by Czechoslovakia at the 26th meeting. 
30. It was so agreed. 
The meeting rose at 4.45 P.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 

Distr. 


ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY 

GENERAL 


GC(III)/OR.28 
7 December 1959 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 24 September 1959 at 10.45 a,m. 


President: 
Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of Paragraphs 
agenda* 


10 
General debate and report of the Board 1 - 104 
of Governors for the year 1958 - 59 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the 
United States of America, France, 
Poland, Australia, Italy, Netherlands 


* GC(III)/88/Rev.2 
N,B. The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2. 



GC(III)/OR.28 


page"2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958 - 59 


(GC(III)/73, 85, 89 and Add.1, 92) (continued) 


1, Mr. FLOBERG (United States of America) said that He would refrain 
from mentioning purely political questions, which should not be discussed by 
the General Conference. The United States Government reaffirmed its faith 
in the major objective assigned to the Agency by its Statute, namely "to seek 
to accelerate and enlarge the contributions of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world". 


2. Since the second regular session of the General Conference, the Agency 
had made significant progress in carrying out its programme. In particular, 
he wished to mention the work done by the Agency's panels, especially the 
panel on civil liability and state responsibility for nuclear hazards. 
3. Since President Eisenhower had put forward the idea of an international 
body to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy, significant changes had 
occurred. For example, there was a glut of uranium on the world.market, 
instead of its being difficult to obtain°9 the supply of reactor fuels thus 
presented no problem. On the other hand, the cost of conventional fuels 
had decreased so that the construction of nuclear power plants appeared less 
urgent. Moreover, experience had shown that the construction costs of such 
plants would exceed the optimistic estimates made a few years previously. 
For those reasons, in spite of advances in nuclear power technology, nuclear 
power plants were not yet competitive except in areas where conventional fuels 
were very costly. More detailed study was necessary to reach the point at 
which nuclear power vrould be an economic proposition throughout the world. 
The United States of America, in particular, aimed at developing power 
reactors which would be competitive with conventional fuels, 
4, During the experimental stago of nuclear power development, the Agency 
could develop its programme in other more pressing spheress experimental"and 
training equipment, increase of radioisotope production 'facilities and their 
better utilization, health and safety programmes, assistance to Member States 
in the organization and administration of their atomic energy programmes and 
the training of specialists. 



GC(III)/OR*28 


page 3 


5, Ho believed that the General Conference would recommend the Board of 
Governors to strengthen the Agency's programme in all those aspects, following 
the principle of giving help where it was most required. The moral 
responsibility rested on the more advanced Member States, while the beneficiaries 
would be mainly the countries of the "underdeveloped areas of the world", as 
the Statute stressed. The United States had always had deeply at heart the 
wellbeing of those countries, many of v/hich were Members of the Agency or, it 
was to be hopodj would become so on attaining independence. 


6. To an increasing degree, the Agency was becoming an information centre 
where the results of the experience gained by its Members would be centralized. 
It would thus be able to guide and advise countries which might not understand 
some of the hard realities of the atomic age. Prom now on, the Agency would 
be in a position to provide a co-ordinated effort which would best servo the 
interests of the less developed countries, . For that reason, the United States 
of America would rely more and more on the Agency to make United States technical 
aid available. The Agency had also shown an increasing ability to 
deal internationally with problems of safeguards and of health and safety, 
7, The United States was submitting for consideration by the General 
Conference recommendations concerning seven aspects of the Agency's programme of 
activity* expanded technical assistance, training, radioisotopes, research, 
information, nuclear power, and health and safety. Those recommendations wore 
primarily concerned with the Agency's 1961 programme, since the United States 
supported the programme and budget for 1960 recommended by the Board of 
Governors,—' 


8. 
The United States strongly hoped that the target of $1 500 000, set for 
2/ 
the operational budget at the second session of the General Conference,—' 
would be attained by the end of 1959* The United States would make its pledge 
for 1960 when the General Conference came to that item on its agenda. It 
wished now to urge every Member State to do its utmost to ensure the success 
of the Agency's operational programme. 


1/ GC(III)/75, 
2/ GC(II)/HES/25, Part B. 



GC(III)/0H.28 
pago 4 


9. Turning to the Agency's activities in the seven fields he intended to 
review, ho first stressed the need for increased technical assistance. The 
programme for providing experts was going well, hut it would be advisable iia 
1961 greatly to increase the supply of specialized equipment to less developed 
countriess equipment such as sub-critical assemblies,, radioisotope irradiation 
sources, irradiation facilities and laboratory equipment. The methods for 
carrying out the programme of equipment supply could be worked out by agreement 
bet,reen the donor countries, the Board and the Secretariat, The United States 
would assist the Agency, to the extent to which funds wore available, to meet 
current requests for equipment submitted by Member States, 
10. The rapid growth of the Agency's training programme was encouraging. 
The United States would continue to make fellowships available in 1960 for 
Agency-selected students. The Agency should encourage Member States to 
acquire an independent capacity to provide training, especially for university 
faculties and secondary schools, 
11. The Agency's work in connexion with radioisotopes should be intensified, 
especially for the benefit of the less developed countries. - A wide use should 
be made of its mobile laboratories for training specialists. The Agency could 
do useful work in connexion with radioisotopes produced by research reactors, 
by helping Member States to plan the production of radioisotopes and by 
providing for their most effective use. It could also assist a number of 
Member States by suggesting how the accumulated experience of other Member 
States in the application of radioisotopes could be adapted to their own 
special needs, 
12. It was advisable to start preparing plans for the standardization work 
which would be carried out by the Agency's functional laboratory, For 
example, there wore no uniform methods for making precise measurements of 
radioactivity. Agreed standard measurements of radioactivity were essential 
to the Agency if it was to carry out waste disposal studies and investigations 
of natural or reactor-induced radioactivity and of nuclear accidents. 
13. It was most important that the Agency should encourago and co-ordinate 
research activities, especially with regard to the possibility of controlled 
thermonuclear reactions. The United States would continue the research it was 
undertaking in conjunction with the Agency, A contract had already been signed 
for studying the difficult problem of producing calcium-47. - Other contracts 
were being negotiated on the subjects of plant breeding and animal and human 
genetics. 

GC(III)/OR,28 
page 5 


14. The distribution of technical information should also be intensified. 
Publication of the Agency's journal on thermonuclear fusion and plasma physics 
should be expedited* The Agency, which was already publishing useful 
international reference works such as the directory" of reactors and the 
international directory of radioisotopes, should also collect, for the use of 
all its Mcmbors, technical data communicated to it by the advanced countries 
as, for example, on nuclear cross-sections. 
15. With regard to reactor development and nuclear power, ho was pleased to 
see that the Agency was carrying out a survey on the economic aspects of small 
and medium power reactors. The United States would contribute to the success 
of the survey by supplying information and the services of experts. 
16. The realistic attitude which the United States took with regard to the 
prospects.for the development of nuclear power should not be mistaken for 
pessimism. On the contrary, his country was undertaking promising experiments 
covering various types of small and medium-sized reactor, in particular a 
small prototype reactor of the pressurized water typo, intended solely for 
generating power. The reactor project had been planned with the Agency's 
programme in mind, since its' purpose was to meot the power needs of areas 
which were not heavily industrialized. The United States proposed to make 
arrangements with the Agency whereby technical personnel from the Agency could 
participate in all stages of the project including design, construction and 
operation of the prototype. It would also provide the Agency with information 
on other small and medium-siaed reactor projects. 
17.. The Agency should undertake a study - in which the United States would 
actively participate - of the oconomic aspects of reactor systems using 
thorium. 


18. Finally, with regard to the important subject of health and safety, a 
high priority should be given to the problem of radioactive waste disposal. 
The number of radioisotope users.was constantly increasing, uranium mining 
was growing and the chemical processing plants to handle the spent fuel would 
also increase. More than 300 civilian reactors were either already in 
operation or soon would be. The disposal of the resulting waste raised a 
problem which could only be solved on an international basis. 

GQ(III)/OR.28 
page 6 


19, The United States proposed that the Agency,, which was the most suitable 
organization to deal with that highly complicated problem, should adopt a 
programme - to which his country would give every possible assistance consisting 
of the following five points, 

(a) 
A study to determine the feasibility of establishing regional or 
international burial grounds for packaged and solid radioactive 
wastes;. 
(b) 
An investigation to designate specific soa-disposal sites and 
establishment of an international register for sea-disposal 
operationsj 
(c) 
Studios to determine the fate of radioactive materials that 
found their way into international rivers, in order to 
determine the maximum permissible quantities of radioactive 
materials in such waterways, particularly those used for 
irrigation or to provide drinking water, 
(d) 
The development of basic criteria for radioisotope laboratories, 
with emphasis on health, safety and waste disposal, and the 
preparation of a handbook on the treatment and disposal of 
lo\r/-levol wastes 
(0) 
A complete analysis of the problem of waste disposal in order 
to emphasize its international nature, 
20, 
The Agency, which was acquiring a staff qualified in reactor safety, 


should also consider assuming responsibility for evaluating reactor hazards. 
The waste disposal and reactor safety evaluation programmes would lead the 
Agency to co-ordinate its activities with those of other national and 
international organizations in order to assist in securing the adoption of 


standards for maximum permissible radiation exposure. 


21, The proposals which he had made on behalf of his Government formed an . 
impressive panorama of the opportunities that lay before the Agency, Their 
adoption would provide the best possible means for the more developed Member 
States to help all other Members and to bring the benefits of the atomic ago 
to all nations. 



^(111)702,23 
pago 7 


22, With regard to Agency safeguards, he pointed out that the increase in the' 
use of fissionable materials made it imperative that steps be taken to put 
Article XII of the Statute into effect. The United States Government wished 
to compliment the Board of Governors on the excellent progress so far made in 
drawing up a set of principles to govern the application of safeguards. He 
hoped that during the ensuing year the Board would adopt regulations based on 
those principles and that both the principles and the regulations would be 
transmitted to all Membor Statos, well in advance, for consideration at the 
fourth regular session of the General Conference, 


23. The United States delegation had clearly defined its position on safeguards 
from the time of the earliest negotiations which had led to the establishment 
of the Agency. At the second regular .session of the General Conference, it had 
endorsed the request of the Government of Japan that the Agency should take 
over as rapidly as possible the administration of the safeguards provisions in 
the Agreement for Co-operation between Japan and the United States. It was 
confident that other countries which were signatories to bilateral agreements 
would follow the same course. 
24. The United States had accumulated a considerable body of information on 
accounting for and control of fissionable materials, and was prepared to make 
that information available to the Agency, 
25. The uranium market situation had changod greatly since the establishment 
of the Agency, The scarcity of uranium in 1953 had given way to plenty. 
However, the United States delegation still considered that the Agency had a 
vital role to play in the distribution of nuclear materials throughout the 
world. The Agency -was in a position to supply substantial quantities of 
those materials arid many nations might wish to satisfy their requirements 
through it rather than through bilateral arrangements. In that connexion, 
the United States delegation was glad to learn that two countries, one of 
t'hem boing.Austria, had mado enquiries of the Agency with regard to the supply 
of uranium. The United States would not fail to encourage its bilateral 
partners to draw upon the Agency's pool of fissionable materials to satisfy 
their requirements. 

GC(III)/OR,28 


page 0 


26, After recalling the offor of uranium-235 which the United States had 


made to the Agency, and which had led to an agreement-' that had come into 


forco on,7 August 1959, he said that the United States Government was 


prepared, subject to appropriate authorizations and the development of an 


adequate Agency safeguards system, to supply the Agency with as much 


fissionable material as it might need to meet the requests of its Members, 


27, The United States was also prepared to donate, in the course of the 
coming year, up to $50 000 worth of enriched uranium (nearly 3 kilogrammes at 
present prices) for use in Agency-sponsored research projects. Moreover, 
as had been announced in February 1959, the United States was ready to supply 
enriched uranium for Agency-sponsored power projects, payment to be spread 
out, if desired, over a period of 20 years, 


28, Finally, ho stressed the fact that the existence of an organization such 
as the Agency was indispensable in the atomic age, and hoped that all Member 
States would make every effort to contribute to the Agency's work in a way 
which would enable it to expand further its role in promoting the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 


29, Mr* COUTURE (Franco) said that, at the end of the Agency's first 
normal working year, it was becoming clear where the Agency would have a 
specific role to play while it was equally becoming apparent that it would not 
be called upon to carry out certain other functions contemplated at the time 
of its establishment, 


30, For instance, it had been intended as one of the Agency's main tasks 
that it should act as a broker in nuclear raw materials which were to be used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes, ' So far, however, despite the large 
quantities of uranium-235 offered to the Agency, no country had asked its 
help in obtaining that material, which was used in most research reactors, 
everything being arranged by bilateral agreements. Similarly, no bilateral 
agreement had been submitted for implementation under Agency supervision, 
despite the provision mado in the Statute, In the case of natural uranium, 
now certain to be in abundant supply for many years to come, the Agency was 
involved in only one agreement, which concerned less than Q,0Vfo of present 
production. On the other hand, the somewhat laborious negotiation of that 
agreement had had the useful effect of inducing a 25/£ reduction in the prices 
which had obtained up till then, 

_3_/ INFCIRC/5, section III. 



GC(III)/OR,28 
pago 9 


31. France would therefore continue, as it had always done, to recommend 
moderation in regard-to safeguards and controls, The work now being done 
by the Board of Governors to devise practical means of giving effect to 
Article XII of the Statute was an interesting attempt to get away from 
principles which were too broad. Over-rigid rules should also be avoided, 
however| it should be remembered that control had psychological and political 
as woll as purely technical aspects. Flexibility and some measure of 
empiricism, taking into account in particular the stage of development reached 
by the receiving countries, were esssontial if it was desired that the Agency 
should be asked for substantial assistance. 
32. On the other hand, the Agency had in 1959 begun useful and serious work and 
was doubtless the only body which could do it effectively - in regard to 
technical assistance and technical co-operation, including the training of 
technicians, the organization of conferences and the despatch of teams of 
experts. 
33. The French delegation fully approved the Agency's fellowship programme, 
France had undertaken to receive 19 Agency fellowship holders from 11 countries 
in 1959, 12 of them had been given fellowships which Franco had placed at the 
Agency's disposal, France would receive about 30 more in 1960 and, as in 
1959, would continue to make fellowships available to the Agency, 
34. Conferences, and symposia offered a fruitful and rapid method for 
bringing together technical experts from distant countries and for 
disseminating knowledge, and it was the Agency's duty to employ it. In 
July 1959, France had been pleased to receive at the Saclay Nuclear Research 
Centre participants in a symposium on atomic energy and its educational 
problems. Small specialized gatherings of not more than 20 to 30 people 
would probably be more useful than very large meetings which wore necessarily 
infrequent and required a financial outlay out of keeping with the Agency's 
present budget, 
35. With regard to publications, the usefulness of the Agency and its staff 
had been shown up particularly clearly by two important productions - the 
international director of power reactors, and the directory of radioisotopes 
which were available from various manufacturers. 

GC(III)/OR,28 
page 10 


36, The French delegation unreservedly approved the Agency's work on health 
and safety and would continue to take part in the study groups on radioactive 
waste disposal and the transport of highly radioactive materials. 


37* The Agency's main activities wore in the vast field of technical 
assistance. As in the past, France would continue to provide exports for 
preliminary technical assistance missions and would endeavour to satisfy 
requests for technical assistance from States Members of the Agency, 


38* The success of the technical assistance programme was shown by the 
number of requests received during 1959 but,, in the light of the Agency's 
modest operational budget - even including the contribution received under 
the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance - that success 
itself gave rise to some anxiety. It might well be that the piecemeal 
financing of a large number of projects virhich, although of individual interest,, 
were unco-ordinatod, was a stop in the wrong direction. The Agency should 
perhaps copy other international organizations and place more emphasis on 


"major projects" which, through co-ordinated action backed up by all the 
Agency's resources, would help whole regions to advance in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. To increase the effectiveness of the programme of 
technical assistance and to ensure that the Agency's resources were 
distributed as fairly as possible, Franco was also in favour of draft rules 
whereby technical assistance requests would have to be considered at fixed 
dates and a ceiling would be placed on appropriations for supplies of 
equipment, 


39. The extensive survey of small nuclear povror plants carried out in 
pursuanco of resolution GC(II)/EBS/27 seemed to correspond exactly to the 
French delegation's conception of a "major project", A study of that kind 
should enable nations with inadequate povror resources to benefit by the 
accumulated experience of the highly industrialized countries. In Franco 
the G~2 reactor at the Marcoule Centre had become operational in 1959, for 
several months past it had been supplying some 30 megawatts of electricity 
to the national grid. Under the power programme for 1965 there would be'a 
capacity of almost 1 000-megawatts, to be provided partly by the stations 
included in the national plan and partly by a station to be built under the 
Agreement between the United States and the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM). That showed France's faith in the future of the new source of 

GC(III)/0H,28 
pago 11 


poviror, Nevertheless the French delegation felt in duty hound to point out 


that experience gained in France and in the other highly industrialized 
countries confirmed that, generally speaking, nuclear power would not in the 
near future provide a solution to the prohlems of those countries which were 
embarking on a programme of industrializations the production of nuclear 
power demanded considerable investments in industrial equipment and highly 


skilled manpower that might very likely handicap the national economy as a 
whole, 


40, That was his delegation's understanding of the Agency's present role. 
During discussions on the budget his delegation had opposed an incrcaso of 
more than 10fo in the Agency's staff, in the hope that 1960 and even 196I 
would be years of consolidation and not of expansion. It was satisfied with 

the present division of the Agency into four departmentsf and paid a 
tribute to the work of their heads, 

41, The Agency's technical staff would be assisted in their work by the 
laboratory which was under construction, Franco had already made it a gift 
of electronic equipment and intended to present a substantial amount of the. 
same typo of equipment in 1960 to a total value of approximately 15 million 
francs, 


42, The French delegation was still dissatisfied Tfith the cumbersome working 
of the Board of Governors| preparation for its meetings took up a large 
amount of the Secretariat's time, to the detriment of its productive work. 
The Board should restrict itself to a quick survey of the major projects, 
and should hand over the secondary questions entirely to its committees 


(which, the French delegation was concerned to note, wore decreasing in 
number). 


43* The French delegation welcomed the establishment of the Scientific 
Advisory'Committee, whose composition was such that it would help to strengthen 
the Agency's links with the United Nations, France continued to hope that 
the Agency would steadily develop closer relations with the United Nations, 
and become, so to speak, its right hand in all technical problems concerning 
atomic energy. 



GC(III)/OR,28 
page 12 


44. For those reasons France approved the 1960 programme in its broad lines, 
it marked a stage in the development of the Agency into an indispensable 
instrument of international co-operation in atomic energy, 
45* Mr. BILLIG (Poland) pointed out that the Conference was opening 
at the very moment when the whole world was deeply impressed by the launching 
of the moon rocket by Soviet scientists. 


46, Ho noted with satisfaction that current world events - of which the most 
important was obviously the historic exchange of visits between Mr, Khrushchev 
and President Eisenhower - gave room for hope that the idea of co-existence' 
was on the way towards final triumph. Ho was deeply convinced that that 
new development would further enhance the Agency's role, 


47. The first harbinger of a now, more active and more fruitful period in 
the work of the Agency was the agreement between Mr, Emelyanov and Mr. McCone 
that the Soviet Union and the United States should refer important information 
concerning the peaceful uses of atomic energy to the Agency for circulation, 
48, There could be no doubt that during the previous year the Agency had 
become much more active. 


49. Everywhere in the world attention was now being paid to the training of 
specialists in atomic energy. That was a serious problem, not only for the 
countries which had to make great efforts to catch up, but also for those 
which had an extensive atomic industry, 
50. In that connexion, the Polish delegation expressed its satisfaction at 
the Agency's fellowship programme, A few Polish fellowship-holders had 
already returned home, and his Government thanked those countries which had 
so generously welcomed them and endeavoured to make their stay as profitable 
as possible. However, ho felt that Member States, including Poland, wore 
not yet drawing the maximum possible benefit from the Agency's fellowship 
scheme, 
51. The conferences and scientific meetings organized by the Agency wore 
most valuable. He was pleased to see that the resolution proposed by the 
Polish delegation at the second regular session of the General Conference, 
that the Agency should take a more active part in organizing scientific 
meetings, seminars and conferences,-' was being put into operation, and that 
the Agency was itself organizing conferences and meetings of that typo. 
4/ GC(II)/EBS/28, 



GC(III)/OR,28 
page 13 


52. The Agency's first scientific conference,, held in Warsaw, showed that 
the Secretariat considered such meetings highly important. The experiment 
had confirmed their value - provided, of course, that they were well prepared ' 
and dealt with questions of importance to many countries, 
53, Among the Agency's successes should be included the publications it had. 
issued during the previous yearf they were very useful and sure to contribute 


to the dissemination of valuable scientific and technical information. The 
rapid and efficient dissemination of information on the state of research and 
the latest progress in atomic energy had become a sheer necessity, opening up 
a vast field of activity for the Agency, 


54t Another of the Agency's notable achievements was the conclusion of 
agreements whereby the United States of America, the United Kingdom and the 
Soviet Union had placed uranium-235 ab ^ho Agency's disposal for supply to 
Member States,^ The Agency had also begun to give technical assistance to 
Member States, sending missions and experts and supplying certain materials 
and equipment, 


55. The Secretariat and the Board of Governors had devoted a great deal of 
time and effort to the problem of safeguards, Poland was not, of course, 
opposed to the application of the safeguards mentioned in the Statute, which 
it had ratified, but those safeguards should be reasonable and should provide 
security without discouraging Member States which wished to obtain the Agency's 
assistance, The assistance which the Agency.would be able to give its Members 
during the 'next few years did not require the sort of safeguards proposed by 
certain Member States, 
56, Vilhen the Agency had been'esbablishod, the presumption had been that it 
would be the sole'supplier of source and fissionable materials. Mow, however, 
several countries were receiving reactors and other materials under bilateral. 
agreements, and there was no reason for thinking that that state of affairs 
would change soon. 


57. For instance, Poland had received from the Soviet Union an enrichoduranium 
reactor, some" special appliances and much other equipment. The 
Soviet Union had also supplied Poland with three tons of uranium metal for 
experimental purposes. That had been a purely commercial.transaction, with 
5_/ See INFCIRC/5. 



GC(III)/OR.28 


page 14 


no extra conditions attached. Another agreoment had already been made with 
the Soviet Union to supply Poland with fuel for a second experimental reactor 
and to assist in its construction;, without imposing any control. 


58, Poland had already stated .in the Board of Governors, and now repeated/ 
that in so important a matter as control it was hard to understand such 
anxious haste to impose a system of safeguards. In such a matter as that, 
there was need for discretion and prudence, and unanimity amongst Member 
States, No decision on the implementation of safeguards should he taken 
until the Agency had acquired some practical experience in its relations 
with the various countries, 

59. Similarly, assistance to less developed countries called for special 
care on the Agency's part. That delicate question must be handled wisely 
if surprises were to he avoided, 
60. Agency activities concerning loss developed countries could he extended 
only on the hasis of a long-term plan and an intimate knov/lpdgc of their 
needs. The Agency should use the data already assembled by the specialized 
agencies and the United Nations regional organizations in co-operation with 
the countries concerned and be guided by them in preparing a long-term 
programme of assistance to less developed countries. That, of course, did 
not mean that the Agency should pursue unduly ambitious or remote aims. 
61. The Agency's financial resources wore very slender, so that in drafting 
its programme of assistance to less developed countries it should give 
priority to those forms of assistance that would yield tangible results 
quickly. It ought to begin, as the first stage, by endeavouring to oncourage 
the use of radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture and industry in those 
countries. For that purpose it should encourage the necessary research, 
paying special attention to the training of specialists and the provision of 
suitable working conditions. 
62. The,second stage would consist essentially, once nuclear power had become 
economic, in developing the production of nuclear power - a matter of vital 
importance to the loss developed countries - together with other applications 
of atomic energy. 

GC(III)/OR.28 
page 15 


63. At the moment, the Agency, in co-operation with other competent 
organizations, should concentrate on studying the stage of development reached 
by the, various countries and regions, and providing assistance in any sectors 
where it was required. That involved considerable expenditure, however, and 
the necessary funds were still lacking. But it could he done with a mere 
fraction of what was spent on atomic weapons. 
64. Technical assistance to the less developed countries was financed from 
a fund made up of voluntary contributions from Member States. The Agency must 
therefore see that that fund was not used for purposes not approved by the 
contributing States, such as the despatch of a mission to Taiwan - done in 
spite of the objections of several States, including Poland, which had asked 
that no discord should be introduced, and that major decisions should be 
adopted by unanimity. 
65. Poland was by no means opposed to such missions, but considered that, 
during its initial period, the Agency should, in the organization of training 
centres for example, give regional assistance mainly. Missions had to be 
carefully prepared in the light of general conditions, the economic needs of 
the regions concerned, and results of economic and social development schemes 
carried out by the regional economic commissions of the United Nations. 
660 On the administrative side of the Agency's work, he said that international 
organizations usually tended to inflate their administrative 
machinery, and the Agency had fallen into the same error. It should modify 
the Secretariat's structure by appointing relatively more technical staff and 
fewer pure administrators, and by making better use of the abilities of those 
taken on during the 'initial period of organization. 

67. The Agency had failed to make use of certain resources offered to it. 
It could, for example, send the experts made available to it free of charge by 
certain Member States to the less developed countries either as consultants or 
in order to organize e'ertain types of work. 
68. As an example of problems of Member States which the Agency could help in 
solving, he referred to research on thermonuclear energy, which could be 
considerably speeded up and advanced if co-ordinated as between the different 
countries. Poland welcomed the Board's decision to publish a specialized 
journal on fusion research and plasma physics and eagerly awaited its 
appearance., it hoped that that first step would be followed by others. 

GC(III)/0H.28 
page 16 


69. The Agency could also usefully promote closer co-operation on high-energy 
particle accelerators. They were very costly to build, and several oountries 
and groups of countries competed in building them, with scientific results not 
always proportionate to the scale of the installations. If those countries 
could agree under Agenoy auspices to co-operato closely and draw up their 
future plans, they could reduce their expenses considerably and get better 
scientific results. 
70. Those examples showed that during the next few years, by a judicious use 
of its relatively modest resources, the Agency could play an important part 
in the development of international research. 
71. The Agency's activities, however, could only he expanded if all obstacles 
to far-reaching co-operation between the various countries were removed. 
Conditions favourable to the free development of human thought must also be 
established, and a relaxed political atmosphere created in which the greatest 
scientists of the world could pool their efforts. The tension generated by 
international conflicts was unresolved, and the "cold war" and the armaments 
race which inevitably accompanied it charged the atmosphere with a distrust 
which inhibited ox even prevented altogether any serious exchange of 
information and the co-ordination of research in all branches of learning, 
including nuclear scionoc. Moreover, that state of affairs immobilized large 
material resources which could be used for constructive purposes. The Polish 
delegation therefore warmly supported the Czechoslovak delegation's proposals 
and the draft resolution it had submitted (GC(III)/89 and Add.1). The Agency 
was directly interested in the cessation of nuclear explosions and in steps 
to ensure that atomic energy was used exclusively to servo the peaceful1 
purposes for the promotion of which it had in fact been established. 
72. The Agency already had considerable success to its credit. It would 
be able to do more when the remains of the "cold war" had vanished from the 
atmosphere. But the road to peace was long and arduous. The world was 
haunted by the memory of the "mushroom cloud" and by the occurrence of now 
nuclear explosions. Nevertheless, the Polish people remained full of optimism. 
The forthcoming resumption of negotiations for disarmament, and the progress 
already made in the negotiations between the Great Powers on the oessation of 
nuclear explosions, were conclusive evidence that reason would prevail and 
point the way to universal peace and co-operation between nations. 

GO(III)/OE.28 
page 17 


73, }lir. BAGGATT (Australia) found it encouraging that the Agency, which 
had been established little more than two years previously, had already brought 
into being a sound and constructive programme, attuned to the objectives laid 
down in the Statute and in line with the available resources. 

74. The Australian Government considered that the Agency's three most 
important present activities were the provision of technical assistance, 
regulatory activities - particularly in regard to safety - and the collection 
of information. 
75. Many' serious health and safety questions could be dealt with satisfactorily 
only at the international levels for example, standardization of measurements 
and techniques - e.g. for- handling radioisotopes -, regulations for the 
transport of radioactive materials and the discharge of radioactive waste into 
the sea and waterways.. 
76. The importance of the technical assistance activities could not be overemphasized. 
Many Member States were doubtless aware that the Australian 
Government itself granted technical assistance to certain less developed 
countries, in particular to its neighbours in South and South-East Asia (under 
the Colombo Plan), and also to other countries as part of the United Nations 
Expanded .Programme of Technical Assistance. 
77° Australia had set up an Institute of Nuclear Science and Engineering at ' 
Sydney, near the. Australian Atomic Energy Commission's research reactor. The 
institute provided excellent facilities for training technicians and for 
research. 


78. It was well known that there was a world shortage of personnel highly 
qualified in atomic energy. Australia itself was suffering from that shortage. 
It was important that the Agency's attempts to remedy that situation should be 
closely eo-ordinated with those of the other organizations within the United 
Nations family and of the members of the Colombo Plan and other regional 
organizations. It was also necessary to estimate future progress in technical 
development and to relate to that assessment the need to avoid training 
technicians who would no't immediately find employment. --' , 
79* The development of atomic energy held out great prospects, but it had to 
be remembered that the atomic era was only just beginning. The present aim 



GC(III)/0E.28 
page 18 


should therefore be to find the typos of reactors which could give the best 
results in particular situations,. While any reactor admittedly could be used 
for training personnel; such training could often be given just as well and 
probably at lesser cost in existing centres. 


80. Australia's power situation illustrated some of the problems facing 
many countries. The total installed power capacity in Australia was about 
4 000 MW. At the present rate of economic expansion, the needs would be 
doubled in the next eight or nine years. Those needs could be mot by thermal 
and hydro power stations, because the industrial regions where the demand for 
energy was greatest wore also rich in bituminous and brown coal deposits and 
in sources of hydro power. In the near future, therefore, Australia would 
be interested in nuclear plants only if their generation cost was particularly 
attractive - for example, 4 to 5 mills per kWh. In addition, the speedy 
general economic development of the country called urgently for capital. 
Thus, even if nuclear power cost little more than conventional power, nuclear 
power stations would still be less attractive than the others because of the 
heavy investment needed for their construction at the expense of other branches 
of the economy. 
81. In certain regions of Australia, however, power was dear because it had 
to be generated from coal or oil transported over very long distances. Places 
in those regions fell into two distinct categories: mining•centres where the 
power demand was within the range 60 - 120 MW and the load factor very high| 
and isolated places with a much lighter power demand and a load factor of no 
more than about 40 per cent; In the first category, the Mount Isa Company a 
typical example - had decided after an exhaustive enquiry into nuclear 
power to instal additional coal-generated capacity. In places of the second 
category, on the other hand, the need was to develop small economic power 
units. Australian research in atomic power development had therefore mainly 
taken that directiono because of the shortage of water in those regions 
Australia was carrying out research into high-temperature gas-cooled reactors 
which could drive a gas turbine. 
82. Although he had emphasized the development of power reactors, the 
Australian delegation did not underrate the importance of radioisotopes in 
medicine, agriculture and industry. Indeed, probably the largest plant in 

GC(III)/OR.28 
page 19 


the world for the sterilization of animal fibres by radiation was being 
installed in Australia, 


83. The Australian delegation appreciated the work done by the Agency in its 
early years. Though it would offer some criticism on budget procedures and 
on the scale of the .programme, it was generally in accord with the programme 
and budget proposed for 1960, 
84. Mr. K)CACCIA (Italy) observed firstly that the continual increase 
in the Agency's-membership was the best proof of the excellence of its aims. 
On behalf of the Italian Government he welcomed the Governments of Iran, 
Iraq., the Philippines and Sudan, which were now taking part in the work of 
the General Conference. 
85. The Italian delegation wholeheartedly approved the realism with whioh 
the Board had prepared its report (GC(III)/73). Erom all the lines of activity 
theoretically open to the Agency, the.Board had succeeded in selecting those 
best suited to present trends in industry and the world market and to the 
Agency's objectives. 
86. The Italian delegation particularly welcomed the fellowships and training 
programme, the holding of conferences and symposia, the exchange of documentary 
material and the sending of missions, and hoped that those activities would be 
progressively increased. Indeed, technical assistance to the less developed 
countries offered the Agency its most important role. However,. that should 
not be taken only to mean the assistance which the more advanced countries 
could give to the others| it also included reciprocal aid between countries 
which had much the same level of nuclear development but had individually done 
more towards solving- one or other problem, and so were in a position to 
exchange information and help each other. . 
87. Ibr example, an Italian expert had recently gone with the Agency's mission 
to Brazil, to bring to the Brazilian project for the construction of a nuclear 
power station the experience acquired ~by Italy on the "MSI" project. 
Needless to say, the Italian authorities would be very glad to place that 
experience at the disposal of interested parties - for example in a study 
project of the same kind; organized and co-ordinated by the Agency. 

GC(III)/OR.28 
page 20 


88. An Italian expert would shortly go to Egypt to collaborate in the 
development of that country's nuclear electronics programmes on his return 
an Egyptian expert would come to work in the Italian laboratories. 
89. The Italian delegation attached great importance to radioactive waste 
disposal. However, it was not enough to lay down standards and impose 
regulationsj provision had to be made for preliminary basic research. The 
first stop might be to establish a co-ordinated system of radiation measurement. 
Thereafter it would be advisable to determine the .factors influencing 
the distribution of radioactive substances in the Mediterranean; the 
imminent entry into service of the first nuclear power stations on the shores 
of that sea made it urgent to establish the zero point for the measurement of 
artificial contamination. 
90. The Italian National Committee for Nuclear Research had, indeed, already 
been making studios on those lines for a year, and a laboratory had been 
established near Spezia. That laboratory, for which the Agency's financial 
assistance had been requested, could later become a centre of collaboration 
between the various research workers interested in the subject. The competent 
Italian bodies would like to participate in the work of the Agency's panel on 
disposal of radioactive waste into the sea, on which they had already 
collected interesting documentary evidence. 
91. With regard to the economic aspects of"power reactors, the Italian delegation 
appreciated the grounds for the prudence shown by the Board, However, 
although the building of nuclear power stations had not been as rapid'as had 
been expected in 1955j important projects wore nonetheless under way. Ho 
hoped that to increase the available information and experience, coonomic 
studies would be encouraged. 
92. His delegation was gratified at the importance ascribed to extending the 
'use of radioisotopes and radiations. The human and social significance of 
their medical and biological uses were self-evident. To avoid widening the 
gap between countries at unequal stages of development, the industrial 
application should not be a monopoly of the advanced countries., the spread 
of knowledge and techniques was therefore of particular importance. 

GO(III)/OR.28 
pago 21 


93. The Italian delegation noted with pleasure the strengthening of the . 
Agency's ties with other international organizations. Co-operation with the 
United Nations Economic and Social Council was of particular value, since it 
made easier the task of guiding into useful channels the influence which 
nuclear energy could and should exert on all sectors of the world economy and 
in international relations, for the furtherance of universal peace and 
prosperity. 
94. Mr. TAM'IES (Netherlands) stressed the symbolic significance of the 
election of Mr. Furuuchi to the Chair, as representative of the first country 
which had chosen to accept nuclear material subject to the Agency's control. 
The supply of such material under the Agency's safeguards procedures was one 
of the Agency's most important statutory functions. It was therefore highly 
satisfactory that the Board of Governors should be engaged in drafting genoral 
principles for the application of safeguards by the Agency. 
95. Although that'urgent task had not yet been completed, there was no reason 
to differ from the Board's opinion that 1960 should be a year of consolidation. 
Since sufficient progress had been made in fulfilling the Agency's other 
statutory functions, its efforts to consolidate those achievements could be 
regarded as a statesman-like policy. 
96, The Agency's present activities were twofolds those directed towards 
establishing rules and recommendations in the interest of all Member States, 
and those benefiting more particularly the less developed countries. 

97. The first category included the establishment of the Agency's functional 
laboratory, the early completion of which .was facilitated by the United States' 
generous gift. 
98. The Board's report on technical assistance, to loss developed countries 
for the production of nuclear power—'would without doubt be. fruitfully discussed 
in the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee For the present, however, 
he would merely deal in general.with the Agoncy's technical assistance 
activities. 
6/ GC(III)/76. 



GC(III)/OR.28 
page 22 


99. BIG Statute stated in several places that the Agency, in carrying out . 
.its functions, should bear in-mind the special needs of the less developed 
rcountr'ies.. . Ten years previously, the United Nations and its specialized 
agencies had embarked upon the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance 
.(EPTA) under which they had since been.trying to improve standards of living 
in many areas, first of all by developing their national resources. The need 
for capital investment was more clearly understood at present, and that had. 
resulted in establishment of the Special Jund. He hoped that, when outlining 
the principles by which the Agency would be guided in its technical assistance 
programme, the Board of Governors .and the Director General would not deviate 
from the well-established policies within the United Nations family. Eo 
warned the Agency against embarking on a supply programme of its own. The 
provision of equipment and supplies should in general be confined to demonstration 
and research and made in conjunction with visits by experts. 


100. The Netherlands delegation was pleased that the Agency was participating 
in EPTA. As a result it had received certain funds, but that would not justify 
Member States in overlooking the need for voluntary contributions to the 
General Rind, so that the target of $1.5 million would be reached. 
101. One of the basic problems of technical assistance was that of coordinating 
the programmes of the various organizations in the United Nations 
family. It was therefore a matter for satisfaction that the Agency had 
established good relations with the United Nations and its specialized agencies. 
Co-ordination should not be confined to technical assistance activities. The 
Agency must also establish rules and regulations for the safe handling of 
radioisotopes, the transport of large radiation sources and the disposal of 
radioactive wastes in co-operation with the competent United Nations 
organizations and other intor-governmental and non-governmental bodies. 
102. At the twenty-sixth plenary meeting the representative of the Secretary-
General' of the United Nations' had referred to the proceedings of the twentyeighth 
session of the Economic and Social Council.-^ During that session 
considerable attention had been given to the twenty-third Report of the 
J/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraph 38. 


GO(III)/OR.28 
page 23 


Administrative CommittoG on Co-ordination (ACC). For the v/ork of the General 
Conference, two annexes to that document were of particular value. The first 
dealt with the advantages and disadvantages of concerted action when studying 
the effects of radiation resulting from the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
the second with co-ordination of atonic activities in general. The Netherlands 
delegation unreservedly supported Economic and Social Council 
resolution 743 (XXVIIl), which requested the ACC to give further attention to 
multilateral and other measures designed to secure concerted action between 
the organizations concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The 
Netherlands Government was convinced that the adoption of such multilateral 
measures would produce the desired results, 


103. In the same resolution the Economic and Social Council requested the 
Agency to join the specialized agencies in submitting a "five-years' appraisal" 
of its proposed activities during the years 1959-1964 and a forecast of the 
scope and trends of its programme and the expenditure involved. The 
Netherlands delegation believed that the decision of the Board of Governors to 
accept that invitation was of paramount importance for the success of the 
Agency's future work. 
104. Since its inception the Agency had given rise to the genuine hope that 
rapid progress would be achieved. Even more than in the case of other international 
organizations, it was the conviction of an urgent need, of a vital 
task, which had made some 80 States decide unanimously to sot up the Agency. 
It seemed that the rapid development of nuclear power would, as a by-product, 
create conditions for mutual trust in the most solemn international undertakings. 
The fact that many immediate practical problems had to be solved 
every year by the General Conference should not prevent delegates from keeping 
in mind the initial concept out of which the Agency was created. They should 
not forget that they were planning for the year 2000 and approaching an era of 
international relations of a new typo. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 


ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(III)/OR.29 
8 December 1959 
ENGLISH 
General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE TWENTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Hold at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 24 September 1959, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS' 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


8 Report of the Credentials Committee 1 - 39 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 40 - 102 
Governors for the year 1958-59 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the ' 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Canada, 
Federal Republic of Germany, Switzerland 


GC(III)/88/Rev.2. 


N.B. The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2. 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 2 


REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(lll)/9l) 


1. Mr. ROCHE (Venezuela), Chairman of the Credentials Committee, presented 
the Committee's report (GC(III)/9l) and drew attention to the two draft resolutions in 
paragraph 18. Although political issues had been raised in the discussions 
of the Credentials Committee; he was happy to say that the report had been 
adopted unanimously. 
2. Mr. NOVIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), after drawing 
attention to paragraphs 14 and 17 of the report of the Credentials Committee, 
said that the Soviet Union delegation was willing to admit to full rights those 
delegates to the Conference who had not yet submitted proper credentials. 
At the same time it must point out that of the nine delegations comprising the 
Credentials Committee, three had not submitted credentials in due form. The 
Soviet Union delegation therefore considered, both on moral and on legal grounds, 
that adoption of the Committee's report should be postponed until the representatives 
of Ceylon, Iran and Venezuela, who were members of the Committee, had 
presented- valid credentials in due form. 
3. Mr. REGALA (Philippines) observed that the procedure followed by the 
Credentials Committee was similar to that adopted by the United Nations and other 
international agencies. The point at issue had already been raised, quite 
properly, by the Soviet Union delegate in the Credentials Committee itself. 
He found it strange that a member of that committee, after voting in favour of its 
report without reservation, should now raise objections in plenary session. It 
was accepted practice in such cases for a delegate to abide by the report he had 
endorsed. 
4. Mr. VORSHIRM (Dominican Republic) made the following statements—' 
"The sole object of the statement just made by the delegate of the 
Soviet Union is to sabotage the work of the Credentials Committee in order 
to compel recognition of Communist China. This is the real aim of the 
Soviet Union delegation. 


"The second regular session of the General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency which took place last year at the same time had to delay 
..tha.-be-ginning_x,f .its- -work dn order--to-hear the--unfounded arguments -which 


1_/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(III)/OR.29 
page 3 


have now been repeated anew on the outworn subject of the representation 


of the Republic of China. 


"At that time, at the very-moment when the People's Republic of China 
was taking aggressive action in the Straits of Formosa, the delegate of the 
Soviet Union recommended the admission of Communist China as a Member State 
of the Agency and the exclusion of the representative of the Republic of 
China, who legitimately occupies his place amongst us in virtue of the 
signature and ratification of the Statute of* the International Atomic Energy 
Agency by the Republic of China. 


"This year, precisely when the sanguinary aggression of Tibet, the 
disturbances in Laos fomented by Communist China and the intimidation and 
pressure against India are taking place, the Communist block once again, 
and most inopportunely, reiterates its unfounded allegations. 


"We have seen, without any shadov/ of doubt, that the People's Republic 
of China has done nothing but substantiate, year after year, the declaration 
rightfully made by the General Assembly of the United Nations in denouncing 
it as an aggressor. In view of this position adopted by the United Nations 
in I95I5 and of the continual direct and indirect aggressions of the People1 
Republic of China in flagrant and open violation of the lofty principles of 
the United Nations Charter, it is inadmissible that the discussion on this 
subject should be prolonged. 


"For these reasons, and in accordance with the unequivocal attitude 


consistently taken by my Government in the family of nations, manifesting 


its resolute opposition to all and every aggressor country in no matter what 


geographical region, and also so that"we may proceed with the constructive 


work of this Conference, the delegation of the Dominican Republic asks this 


assembly to approve the report of the Credentials Committee." 


2/ " 


.5. Mr. JANOSSY (Hungary) made the following s tatemsnt s—' 


"As the delegate of the Government of the Hungarian People's 
Republic provided with formal credentials, I protest categorically against 


This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GO(III)/OE.29 
page 4 


the proposal contained in the report of the Credentials Committee that 


the General Conference should take no decision concerning the credentials 


of the delegate of the Hungarian People's Republic. I wish to underline 


emphatically that the resolution of the United Nations, referred to in the 


proposal, sharply conflicts with the.letter and spirit of the Charter of 


the United Nations. 


"The Hungarian People 's • Republic., against which this proposal is 
directed, has wide international relations. Several Member States of the 
Agency - including the State which submitted the proposal - have maintained 
uninterrupted diplomatic, economic and cultural relations with Hungary for 
many years. The scientific links between Hungary and other countries are 
growing from year to year. Many Hungarian scientists paid visits to 
several foreign countries, where they enjoyed a good welcome and a great 
number of foreign scientists had the opportunity to visit Hungarian institutes 
and see the work done by their Hungarian colleagues. Among others 
we welcomed with great pleasure this year Mr. Cole, Director General of the 
Agency, who could convince himself that the Hungarian People 's Republic 
wishes to participate in the development of international scientific 
relations and is able and willing to promote the noble purposes of the 
Agency. 


"I am convinced that the discriminatory and unfounded proposal with 
reference to the credentials of the Hungarian delegation can in no way 
contribute to develop international scientific collaboration and can by 
no means promote the solution of problems of the peaceful use of atomic 
energy. This proposal aims to turn the Agency into a tool for political 
manoeuvres which have no place in this body." 


6. Turning to.the question of the representation of China, he protested most 
vigorously against acceptance of the credentials issued by the Chiang Kai-Shek 
regime. The only lawful Government of China was that of the People's Republic 
of China, with which an increasing number of countries had diplomatic relations. 
The Agency should decide without more ado to recognize the representatives of 
"k^0 cle facto and do jure Government of a country with 600 million inhabitants § 
otherwise one of the major world Powers would be excluded from the Agency's 
activities. 

GC(III)/OR..29 
page 5 


7. Mr. LEE (China) said that, though reluctant to intervene, he felt 
compelled to refute the charges made against his Government. It was regrettable 
that the Conference must waste the valuable time which should he devoted to 
advancing the work of the Agency in listening to Communist arguments that had 
been repeated time and time again at almost all international meetings. 
8. In challenging the Communist contention that representation was being 
denied to the 600 million people on the Chinese mainland, he cited the statement 
of a well—known statesman to the effect that the Communist regime, which had been 
imposed by force and was kept in power by purges,of innocent people,could not be 
regarded as representative of the Chinese people, which was denied the right to 
express its free will. 
9. Mr. LALL (India), explaining his delegation's vote in the Credentials-
Committee on the draft resolutions it recommended, stated that the Indian 
delegation would vote against the first draft resolution, as the Government of 
India recognized the Government of the People's Republic of China as the only 
legitimate Government of China. 
10. On the other hand, as the Indian delegation did not object to the report 
of the Committee on the credentials of Member States generally, it would vote 
in favour of the second resolution. That vote, however, must not be considered 
as an endorsement of the credentials presented on bohalf of China. 
11. Mr. FOSTER (United States of America) stated that the United State's 
supported the report and the draft resolutions recommended by the Credentials 
Committee. 
12. The Soviet Union delegate in the Credentials Committee had taken exception to 
the Committee's action on two matters - the representation of China and the 
credentials of the delegation of Hungary. The United States took the most 
strenuous objection to the statements he had made in that connexion. 
13. The views of the United States on the substance of those matters had been 
made clear time and time again in the political organs of the United-Nations ancL. 
elsewhere, and were known to the members of the General Conference.. At the 
session of the United Nations General Assembly now in progress, the United States 
had had a further occasion to restate its policy and to reveal in detail the 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 6 


facts - including some of very recent date ~ underlying its strong opposition to 
the seating of Communist China in international organizations. The United States' 
Government would also take the opportunity in the General Assembly to reiterate 
the reasons for its attitude on the question of.Hungarian credentials. 


14. For those reasons and in deference to the general desire in the Conference 
to avoid political issues and concentrate on the Agency's important ¥/ork, he 
did not intend to engage in a debate on the merits of the questions raised by 
the Soviet delegate* 
15. The recommendations of the Credentials Committee in regard to the representation 
of China and to the credentials submitted on behalf of the Hungarian delegation 
conformed vri. th the. action repeatedly, taken by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations. The Agency and other technical organizations within the United 
Nations system had consistently recognized that political issues of the kind 
wore the primary concern of the United Nations. The Agency's task was to 
concentrate on the promotion of co-operation in the peaceful use of the atom. 
To enable it to press on with that task, he moved that an immediate vote be taken 
on the draft resolutions recommended by the Credentials Committee. 
16. Mr. WOVIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) challenged the 
statement of the representative of the Philippines that the Soviet Union delegation 
had voted in the Credentials Committee in favour of the adoption of its 
report, The Soviet Union delegation had voted against the report in committee 
and would vote against it in plenary session, considering itself entitled like 
a-ny other delegation - to defend its position in every organ of the Agency. 
17. He also regretted that it had onoe again proved necessary to revert to the 
questions of the credentials of the Chiang Kai-Shek clique and of the Hungarian 
People's Republic. There was no justification for refusing to recognize the 
credentials of the delegation of the Hungarian People's Republic, and only the 
Government,of the Chinese People's Republic, not the Chiang Kai-Shek clique,,was 
entitled to represent China. 
18. Mr'. SUPJARWO (Indonesia) stated that his Government, acknowledging 
realities in Asia, recognized the Government of the People's Republic of China 
as the only legitimate Government of China. The Indonesian delegation accordingly 
opposed both the exclusion of the Peking Government and approval of 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 7 


credentials issued in the name of China by any authority other than that 
Government and would thus vote against the first draft resolution submitted by 
the Credentials Committee, Furthermore, it had no objection to approving the 
credentials submitted on behalf of the Hungarian delegation. With those Wo 
reservations, it would vote for the second draft resolution. 


19. Mr. MBLLER-CONRAH (Poland) regretted that the Polish delegation was 
unable to vote for the report of the Credentials Committee. It was an absurd 
situation that year after year the proposal should be made to recognize the 
people in power in a group of islands as the Government of the mainland of China. 
Until such time as the legitimate Government of China, the Government of the 
People's Republic of China, was represented in the Agency, it would not be 
possible to make useful progress on problems connected with the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. 
20. Again, he vra.s unable to accept the majority viow of the Credentials 
Committee on the question of Hungarian credentials and would vote against that 
part of the report. The recommendation was tantamount to interference in the 
internal affairs of a Member State. It had been contended that the Agency 
must follow United Nations action on both those questions but a scrutiny of the 
voting pattern over the years would show an interesting change of attitude in 
that body. 
21. Mr. WOVACU (Romania) observed that admirable progress was being made 
year by year towards universality in the. membership of the Agency. It was 
accordingly all the more inadmissible that the place of China should continue 
to be filled by an outsider. The present state of affairs was contrary to 
realities and to the Agency's best interests. Indeed, it might legitimately 
be asked how the Agency could carry out its functions, as laid down in Article III 
of the Statute, without the co-operation of one of the most powerful nations of 
the world. In the ten years that had elapsed since the proclamation of the 
People's Republic of China, the country had made enormous progress economically, 
culturally and scientifically, and its co-operation could do much to further 
the vrork of the Agency. 
22. The Romanian delegation was unable to accept the first draft resolution,, 

GC(III)/OR.29 


page 8 


23. Mr. REGALA (Philippines) wished to make it clear that, as its Chairman 
had stated, the Credentials Committee had approved its report unanimously. The 
Committee's records would confirm that and would show that the Soviet Union 
delegate had made no reservation in the Committee that would justify his action 
now in opposing adoption of the report. 
24. Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) deplored the situation whereby, at the third 
session of the General Conference of the Agency, the People's Republic of China 
was still debarred from its legitimate place, its seat being filled by representatives 
of the Chiang Kai-Shek regime. The Government of the People's 
Republic of China was the only legitimate Government of China and his delegation 
could accept credentials in the name of China issued by that Government alone. 
25. He trusted that it v/ould be possible to have. a separate vote on the first 
draft resolution, as otherwise his delegation would be compelled to vote against 
the report as a whole. 
26. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslavakia) made the following statement—' g 
"Since the only legitimate Government of China is the Government of 
the Chinese People's Republic, 'the Czechoslovak Government, as it has 
previously declared at the International Conference on the Statute of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and at the First and Second General 


Conferences, does not recognize the signature of the Statute on behalf of 


China since it was not made by representatives,of the Government of the 


Chinese People's Republic. For these reasons, the Czechoslovak Government 


does not recognise any credentials which are not issued by the legitimate' 
Government of China." 


27. He expressed the Czechoslovak delegation's deep regret that the People's 
Republic of China was still debarred from becoming a member of the Agency. 
That abnormal situation reacted against the Agency itself and would of necessity 
reflect unfavourably on the implementation of its tasks and on general international 
co-operation in the sphere of atomic energy. It was well known that 
the so-called "representatives" of the Chiang Kai-Shek clique did not in fact 
_3_/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(III)/OR.29 
page 9 


represent anybody and that their very presence at the Conference was possible 
only because of the protection accorded to that clique by the armed forces of 
the United States, The situation was thus'abnormal and at variance with the 
political and economic facts. The development of international relations 
in recent years showed ever more convincingly that without the participation 
of China it was impossible to achieve a lasting solution of important, international 
questions, Czechoslovakia was convinced, that the time was rapidly 
approaching when the Chiang Kai-Shek clique would no longer be"in a position to 
claim the representation .of China. 

28. In conclusion, he too expressed the hope that the two draft resolutions 
before the Conference would be put to the vote separately. 
29. ' Mr, PASECMIK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) declared that 
the Ukrainian delegation felt bound to draw the attention of the General. 
Conference once more to the question of the-credentials of certain persons 
who held a place in the Agency illegally and in defiance of its Statute. 
The Chiang Kai-Shek clique, expelled by the Chinese people from China, did 
not and could not represent anyone apart from itself, and was not in fact a 
Member of the Agency. It would be recalled that at the "time when Governments 
had been depositing instruments of ratification of the Statute, many Governments, 
including that of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, had sent notes to 
the Government of the United States of America, stating that they did not 
recognize the validity of the signature for China appended to the Statute by a 
representative of che Chiang Kai-ShoK' clique,--- It-was-clear that the. Central 
People's Government -of. the-People;s Republic of China was the only,. Government of 
China, and its representatives alone could and should represent China, both in 
the Agency and in other international organizations„ The Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic would accordingly vote against recognition of the credentials 
of the Chiang Kai-Shek representatives, 


30. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea) said his delegation wholehearted,7 rv-lorsed 
the report of the Credentials Committee, He deplored the introduction of 
political considerations into the discussion. The credentials of the Chinese 
delegation were perfectly valid and the Committee 's policy was in accordance 
with that followed in the United Nations, 

GC(III)/0H.29 
page 10 


31. Mr. FAHMY (United Arab Republic) said his delegation would vote 
against draft resolution I, because his Government recognized the Peking 
Government as legitimately representing the Chinese people. Though ho would 
vote for the report of the Credentials Committee as a whole, his action was 
likewise not to be taken as any reflection on the validity of the Hungarian 
delegation's credentials which his own delegation considered to be valid, 
32. Mr. SEVCHENKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
his delegation supported the proposal for a separate vote on the credentials of 
the Kuomintang and would vote against their acceptance, since the only valid 
credentials could be those submitted by the Central Government of the Chinese 
People's Republic. 
33- The Byelorussian delegation had not recognized and never would recognize 
the legality of the signature appended to the Agency's Statute by Chiang KaiShek's 
representatives, for present-day China was not the island of Taiwan, 
where the Chiang Kai-Shek clique had settled, but the Chinese People's Republic 
headed by its lawful, elected People's Government. 


34. The PRESIDENT said that unless there were any objections, he would put 
the report of the Credentials Coitunittoo to the vote. At the request of a number of 
delegations, there would be votes by roll-call on paragraph 1 of draft resolution I 
and on the draft resolution as a whole. The vote on paragraph 2 would be by 
show of hands. 
Draft resolution Is paragraph 1; vote by roll-call 


35. Czechoslovakia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon 
to vote first. 
The result of the vote was as followsg 


In favourg Dominican Republic, El Salvador. France, Federal Republic 
of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iran, Italy, Japan, 
Republic of Korea, Luxembourg, Ilexico, Monaco, Netherlands, 
Now Zealand., Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, 
Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, 
Vatican City, Venezuela, Viet-Nam, Argentina, Australia, 
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Cuba. 


GC (ill)/OR,29 
page 11 


Againsts Czechoslovakia, Denmark:, Finland; Hungary, India, Indonesia, 
Norway, Poland, Romania, Sweden; Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab 
Republic, Afghanistan, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Ceylon. 
Abstaining, Iceland,' Israel,. Morocco, Pakistan, Switzerland, Tunisia, 
Yugoslavia, Austria. 

Paragraph 1 was approved by j6 votes to 19i_JV2-_th Q abstentions. 

Draft resolution Is paragraph 2 


36, Paragraph 2 was adopted by 39 votes to 16, with 0 abstentions. 


Draft resolution I as a wholes vote by roll-call 


37. Bl Salvador, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
The result of the vote was as follows % 

In favours HI Salvador, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Honduras, Iran, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, 
Luxembourg, Eexico, Monaco, Netherlands; New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Thailand, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, 
Vatican City, "Venezuela, Vie^-Nam, Argentina, Australia, 
Belgium, "Brazil, Canada, Ceylon, China, Cuba, Dominican 
Republic 


Againstg Finland, Hungary, India, Indonesia; Iraq., Norwe,y, Poland, 
Romania, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
"Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, 
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia. Czechoslovakia, Denmark. 


Abstaining, Iceland, Israel, Knrocco, Pakistan, Switzerland, Austria. 


Draft resolution I was adopted by 38 votes to 20, .with 6 abstentions. 


38. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote 0:1 draft resolution II, 
39. Draft resolution II was adopted by 49 votes to 10, with 2 abstentions. 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 12 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958-59 
(GO(III)/73, 85, 89 and Add.1, 92) (continued) 

40. Mr. PASBCHNIK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
Conference was holding its session at a momentous time in history,, when the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and other peace-loving countries v/ere 
forcing the exponents of the "cold war" and "brinkmanship" onto the defensive, 
when the heads of the Governments of the Soviet Union and the United States of 
America wore holding meetings which might well be of great significance for 
the maintenance of universal peace and security, and when Mr. Fhrushchev's 
proposals for general disarmament, submitted to the fourteenth session of the 
United Nations General Assembly, offered the possibility of concrete action to 
achieve that purpose. 
41. Turning to the position of the Agency, he said that, as time passed, the 
importance of its role in the strengthening of poa.ee and the promotion of 
international co-operation became over more apparent. Everyone was aware that 
the discontinuance of nuclear weapon tests would be an important step towards 
the complete and permanent abolition of such weapons, and would permit the 
technical and other resources at present used for military purposes to be 
devoted exclusively to peaceful nuclear development and hence to an expansion 
of the Agency's work. The Ukrainian delegation therefore warmly supported 
the Czechoslovak draft resolution (GC(III)/89'and Add.1), which, in its view, 
accurately reflected the Agency's aims and objectives as set forth in the 
Statute. The unanimous decision of the United Nations General Assembly at 
its tenth session to establish an international atomic energy agency had in fact 
been largely inspired by the hopes of the world that, once such an agency was set 
up, nuclear energy would be ever more widely used for peaceful rather than 
for military purposes. 
42. The 42 million-strong Ukrainian people, who had known the horrors of two 
world wars, eagerly supported any action likely to reduce international tension 
and load to the final abolition of atomic weapons. 
43.. The Ukraine possessed large conventional fuel resources - coal, natural 
gas, oil, etc. - and was in a position to run its industries with them for very 
many years to come. Nevertheless, his country was constantly expanding research 
into the potentialities of nuclear power and into the application of sources of 
radiation to industry, agriculture, science and medicine. 



GC(III)/OR.29 
page 13 


44# At the second United Hations International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy (the second Geneva Conference), Ukrainian scientists had 
presented papers on such subjects as fast neutron reactors, the search for 
fresh reactor materials, cyclotron ion resonance, and magnetic traps for containment 
of plasma. In the Ukraine,, an experimental reactor, accelerators . 
and other apparatus were employed in research into nuclear power engineering; 
nuclear physics, radiobaology and radiochemistry. Scientists from his country 
had made great efforts to ensure the success of the International Conference 
on High-Energy Physics held in its capital, Kiev, in July 1959° 


45. Besides their numerous industrial uses - for example in technical 
inspection processes in shipbuilding and engineering - radioisotopes were being 
widely applied in medicine and biology. Considerable attention was also being 
given to the study of the harmful effects of ionizing radiations on living 
organisms, and groat significance was attached to research on the early 
diagnosis of cancer and other malignant diseases, and on the treatment of 
radiation sickness. 
46. The Ukraine attached great importance to the work of the Agency as the 
world organization mainly responsible for promoting international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and for assisting countries that were 
backward in the nuclear field. The report of the Board of Governors (GC(III)/73) 
and the statements made by a number of delegations made it clear that some 
progress had been achieved during the past year, particularly in the provision 
of technical assistance. 
47. However, the Agency's work was marred by a number of serious defects. 
For example, there had been no valid grounds for sending a preliminary assistance 
mission to Taiwan,, there being no purpose in entering into relations with the 
group of individuals who happened to be temporarily in control of that island. 
480 Likewise, the Board's decision to refuse the grant of consultative status 
to the World Federation of Trade Unions could not fail to have a detrimental 
influence upon the Agency's work. 


49. Another unsatisfactory feature was the excessive attention paid to the 
matter of the Agency's safeguards. It was inconceivable that the less 

GC(III)/OR.29 


page 14 


developed countries would use the research reactors or other assistance 
provided through the Agency for military purposes - the countries in question 
in any oase urgently needed nuclear energy for the peaceful development of their 
economies. Control and safeguards were justified only if they wore applicable 
in equal measure to all States without exception, and he was glad to observe 
that the delegate of Prance had urged caution in the matter of the application 
of safeguards and the conduct of inspection.—' 


50. Referring to the programme and budget for ±%0^J he said that his delegation 
noted with satisfaction that it made provision for further technical 
assistance to less developed countries, the training of exports, the holding 
of scientific conferences and so on. However, the programme had a number of 
shortcomings which should be made good. His delegation intended to offer 
detailed recommendations on the subject at the meetings of the main committees, 
and for the time being he would merely refer briefly to the principal weaknesses. 
51. In the first place, it was a matter for serious concern that the Agency 
had made no progress in certain important sectors of its work, and especially 
had failed to put any of the five tons of fissionable material which it had 
at its disposal to use as intended, 
52. The Agency's budget also inspired him with serious misgivings. Although 
the Board had stated that it was not intended to,introduce major changes in 
the 1960 programme as compared with that of 1959, there were nonetheless 
proposals to increase the budget allocations and expand the Agency's staff. 
In his delegation's view, better use should be made of funds already available 
and overlapping should be eliminated. If a limit was set upon the number 
of scientific conferences to be held, they could be better prepared and would 
yield better results. It was also difficult to justify the increased budget 
allocations for salaries of experts and consultants, particularly since a 
number of countries had promised such services free of charge. The Agency did 
not seem to be taking proper advantage of those offers. 
4/ GC(III)/OR.28, paragraph 31. 
5/ GC(III)/75. 



GC(III)/OR.29 
page 15 


53. His delegation also opposed, the projected setting up of a group of experts 
to prepare recommendations on the subject of regulations to govern the disposal 
of radioactive waste in international waterways. His Government, in any case, 
considered that the discharge of waste into inland waterways should be prohibited 
altogether. 
54* For all those reasons his delegation considered the proposed increase in 
.the regular budget for 1960 to ho entirely unjustified, and would vote in 
favour of maintaining the budget at the 1959 level, 


55- If action wore taken on the lines he had indicated the Agency should 
rapidly overcome its difficulties and be better able to proceed with the lofty 
and noble task entrusted to it. 


56, Mr. MKICENQVIO (Yugoslavia) said that if the negotiations at present 
under way resulted in agreement on the onding of nuclear weapon tests, more 
resources could be devoted to the development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes^ that would open up now perspectives for the Agency. 


57. In a relatively short time, the Agency had built up its organization and 
significant results had been achievod, though he believed even more could have 
been done if more care had been taken to avoid political disputes. Amongst 
the tangible results obtained, the following were especially noteworthy, a 
considerable number of fellowships had been awarded under the technical 
assistance programme, scientific conferences had been held, there had been some 
important scientific and other publications, and assistance had been provided 
for the less developed countries, especially through the services of consultants 
and exports. 
58. Standards of development in regard to atomic energy varied so much from 
one Member State to another that no general formula for extending assistance 
could be laid down v/hich would held good for all countries. He was glad to 
note that the Board and the Secretariat were keeping that factor in mind and 
studying the specific problems of individual c0untr5.es. His Government 
considered it very important that the Agency should, as soon as possible, 
draw up a long-term plan for assisting the less developed countries through 
comprehensive and well-balanced national and regional programmes. 

GC(III)/0E.29 
page 16 


59. His delegation had been very glad to note that representatives of the 
atomic energy commissions of the two most highly developed countries in the 
atomic field had recently expressed the intention of placing further information- 
about research at the Agency's disposal. It had also noted that the 
Agency was elaborating health and safety standards and other regulations in 
connexion with certain problems which had to be dealt with internationally. 
60. There seemed to be some disproportion between administrative and operational 
expenditure in the budget. Administrative expenditure should be kept to a 
minimum and it would appear that the present professional staff was sufficient 
to handle an expanded programme. Work could also be contracted out to national 
research centres5 the system of having panels of exports composed of consultants^, 
from Member States had proved very effective„ 
610 During the preceding year Yugoslavia had co-operated closely with the 
Agency. It had received technical assistance; been awarded a considerable 
number of fellowships and had had the benefit of advice from Agency experts. 
Conferences and symposia organized by the Agency had been much appreciated by 
Yugoslav scientists. Yugoslavia had offered the Agency a number of fellowships 
to provide training in its nuclear research institutes and had been happy to 
present the Agency with Yugoslav-made electronic equipment for gamma ray 
spectroscopy. The five-Yugoslav nuclear institutes,, with a staff of more than 
600 research workers, were open to the Agency and Ilcmber States, and experts 
and equipment would be made available on request for research work and for the 
training of fellowship holders. 


62. Yugoslavia had until recently been numbered among the less developed 
countries but had since made rapid economic and social progress. In addition, 
a large number of scientists had been trained and the material basis created for 
scientific work and the development of atomic energy for peaceful uses. 
63. In approving the report of the Board of Governors, he wished to declare 
that his Government would continue to co-operate wholeheartedly with the 
Agency. 
64. Mr. MDJAKOV (Bui garia) remarked that the Agency had completed the 
phase of administrative organization and was at present entering a new phase, 
where its task would be to realize the objectives sot out in the Statute. It 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 17 


now had its own place in the United Nations family and had also established 
relations with a number of specialized and non-governmental organizations. 
Closer relations had also been established between the Agency's governing 
organs and a number of Member States by missions and other means§ Bulgaria 
had been glad to receive a visit from the Director General during the year. 


65o Considerable progress had been made in connexion with technical assistance, 
the exchange of scientific and technical information, the training and exchange 
of experts, the provision of scientific equipment, the organization of conferences 
and so on. But his delegation believed that the Agency could do 
more. It was the international organization responsible for ensuring that 
all countries could take advantage, at the earliest possible date, of the 
possibilities offered by atomic energy. His delegation believed, in common 
with some others, that not enough had been done in connexion with certain 
fundamental objectives. For example, little or no progress had been made 
in the supply of fissionable materials, although the Agency had more.than 
5 000,kg of enriched uranium at its disposal. At least during its early 
years, the Agency should concentrate on a limited number of objectives, rather 
than disperse its resources in trying to deal with too many. Co-ordination 
with other organizations was also essential to avoid duplication of effort. 


66. It was of capital importance for the Agency's prestige that the People's 
Republic of China should be enabled to take part in its work. It was in 
flagrant contradiction with Article II and III of the Statute that a country 
of 600 million inhabitants should be excluded from participation in the 
Agency's work, particularly in view of the progress made by the Chinese people 
during the 'last ton years - including its successful development of atomic 
energy independently of the Agency. The Academy of Sciences at Pokin already 
had a first-class atomic institute, with a 10 MW heavy-water research reactor, 
a cyclotron and various other items of research equipment. China was also 
co-operating with the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna. The 
Agency's attitude to the People's Republic of China, and to certain other 
countries, must be revised. 
67. Similarly, the Agency in general, and the General Conference in particular, 
wore departing from the spirit and letter of Article III.B.l of the Statute in 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 18 


doing nothing to support the efforts that were being made to bring an end to 
nuclear weapon tests and to prohibit such weapons, with, general disarmament as 
a final aim. His delegation would wholeheartedly support the draft resolution 
submitted in that connexion by the Czechoslovak delegation, together with the 
amendments (GC(III)/92) submitted by the delegation of Morocco. 


68. He also v/ished to draw attention to the fact that the Board of Governors 
had accorded consultative status to a whole series of non-governmental organisations 
but had refused to do so for the World Federation of Trade Unions which 
numbered some 100 million members in almost all countries of the world. lie 
wondered what provision of the Statute could justify,such discrimination. Not 
only did the Federation satisfy all the requirementsf but it played a much more 
important role than others which had been accepted by the Agency. That abnormal 
situation could be righted by adopting the Soviet Union proposal for 
reconsideration of the decision taken by the Board of Governors.-^ 
69. The Bulgarian delegation was sure that if a joint effort wore made in a 
spirit of good-wills the Agency could really become an important centre of 
international co-operation for the development of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. 
70. Mr. WBRSHOF (Canada) congratulated the President on his election and 
expressed the conviction that his tenure of that office would make an important 
contribution to the success of the Conference ,. 
71. One year previously the sense of satisfaction which all delegations had 
felt about the accomplishments of the first year of the Agency's existence had 
been accompanied by some regret that they had been mainly organizational and 
administrative and that the Initial Programme was only just getting under way. 
On the present occasion, however, it was apparent from the annual report of 
the Board that Member States had already begun to reap the benefits of the 
preparatory period, and the Canadian delegation wished to voice its general 
satisfaction with the progress made in 1959. 
72. The Agency's activities could be said to fall into two main categories those 
which wore of general benefit to all llomber States, and those which were 
designed to meet the specific requirements of one or several Members, 
6/ GC(III)/94O 



GC(III)/OR.29 
page 19 


730 The activities of general benefit included such natters as scientific conferences 
and symposia,, technical publications and the development of regulations 
and standards, particularly in connexion with health and safety. They also 
covered basic studies on the possibilities of applying atomic energy for power 
development, having in view that that source of energy might eventually be of 
particular benefit to the less developed areas of the world, and other activities 
designed to fulfil important statutory obligations such as those relating to 


safeguards against the diversion to military purposes of any fissionable 
materials, etc. made- available to Members through the Agency. 


74. The Secretariat had approached that side of the Agency's work in a 
vigorous and effective manner and its record of accomplishment was one of which 
all could legitimately feci proud. The only comment the Canadian delegation 
wished to make under that head was that the Agency should take care not to 
overreach itself in 1960. If its efforts were diffused over too wide an area, 
or if too many demands were made on its resources, the result would inevitably be 
to reduce the quality and usefulness of its activities. It was gratifying to 
note that the Scientific Advisory Committee had given special attention to such 
problems and had made useful recommendations to the Board of Governors. 
75° The Canadian delegation had hoped that it would be possible for the Board 
to report more encouragingly to the General Conference on the development of 
an effective system of safeguards. However, it recognized the complexity of 
the issues involved and looked forward with confidence to the adoption by the 
Board in the near future of a staxoment on the basic principles to govern the 
application of Agency safeguards. In that respect ho wished to stress the 
fact that, unlike some other Member States, Canada did not regard the prospective 
Agency safeguards system as a burden to be imposed on certain States, but 
rather as a useful contribution towards the achievement of world security and 
lasting peace. 


76. The second category of Agency activities - those aimed at meeting the 
specific requirements of individual Member States - in effect comprised the 
technical assistance programme, including the provision of fellowships, exports 
and equipment. 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 20 


77. The underlying difficulty in operating any technical assistance programme 
was that limited resources - which, in the Agency's case, derived mainly from 
the voluntary contributions of Member States and fund;; made available through 
the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance - had to be divided among a 
number of deserving claims without completely satisfying any of them, A 
balance had to be maintained between the various forms of technical assistance 
and the competing requirements of the applicant countries. That task would, 
of course, continue to be a responsibility of the Board of Governors. 
78, The Canadian delegation regretted that the 1959 technical assistance 
programme was smaller than originally planned because of the failure to reach 
the target for voluntary contributions set at the second regular session of the 


7/ 


General Conference.--' It also regretted that certain Governments had deemed 
it necessary to place various limitations on their contributions to the General 
Fund. In cases where assistance was thus limited there was, notwithstanding 
the value it might have, the inevitable consequence that the total original 
programme had to be curtailed or distorted to some extent. The Canadian 
delegation hoped that in future the contributions of Ilernber States to the 
General Fund would bear a reasonable relationship to their percentage share of 
the regular budget, that such contributions would be without limitation and 
that they would be made in readily usable currencies. 


79. As far as future developments wore concerned, the Canadian Government 
thought the Board of Governors had been wise in deciding that on the whole 
1960 shoiild be a year of consolidation with very modest increases in the 
Agency's programme and staff, and those only in specific areas where a definite 
need could be demonstrated. 
80. The Canadian Government also believed that because of the Agency's failure 
to reach the 1959 target for voluntary contributions, the Board of Governors 
had had no alternative but to maintain the 1960 figure at the same level. 
While such restriction at the present stage would probably not seriously 
hamper the Agency, it should be emphasized that in the absence of generous 
financial support from Member States, all that had been so confidently said 
about the Ageney in the past, and all that had been so carefully planned since 
its inaiiguration, would be vain. 
jj GC(lI)/SES/25, Part B. 


GC(III)/OR.29 
page 21 


81. In that connexion it would be appropriate to recall and reaffirm the 
assurance of support which he had made on Too half of the Canadian Government 
at the first and second sessions of the General Conference. During the past 
year a number of Canadian scientists had been made available as consultants 
and to participate in the work of panels of exports, seminars and conferences. 
The first group of students holding Agency fellowships had gone to Canada in 
1959 and they were now receiving specialized training in Canadian research 
institutions. In March 1959 Canada had had the distinction of being the 
supplying party in the first transaction involving the provision of nuclear 
material under Agency auspices to a Member State. It had been a source of 
additional satisfaction to the Canadian Government that the revenue from the 
sale of the three tons of uranium under that transaction - approximately 
$100 000 - had been made available to the Agency to further the development of 
its research and technical assistance programmes. 
82. In the coming year Canada would continue to do its utmost to promote the 
Agency's activities. In that connexion he wished to announce the opening of 
a reactor school at the Chalk River atomic energy establishment. The school 
was being set up. in response to the wide interest shown in the nuclear power 
systems under development in Canada. The proposed course of studios would 
place special emphasis on power reactors moderated with heavy'water and 
fuelled with natural uranium. The reactor school was not intended to duplicate 
university courses but to afford suitably qualified graduates an opportunity of 
obtaining first-hand knowledge, not only of power reactors but of advanced 
research and engineering test reactors, and the design, construction and operation 
of nuclear reactors in general„ The first course would start on 1 February 1960 
and would last 12 weeks. The number of courses held each year would depend on 
how many persons in Canada and elsewhere applied to join the first course. It 
was intended to limit admission to each course to 20 students and he was glad to be 
able to state that as a token of support for the Agency, the Canadian Government 
was prepared to admit five Agency-sponsored applicants to each course. 
83. The Canadian delegation had listened with groat interest to the statement 
made by the Director General at the twenty-sixth meeting.—' The important and 
constructive suggestions he had made would be carefully considered by the 
Canadian Government. 
8/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraphs 7-35. 



GO(III)/OE.29 
page 22 


84. Mr. CARSTEHS (Federal Republic of Germany) associated himself with, 
the previous speaker in congratulating the President on his election, and wished 
him every success in guiding the work of the Conference, 
85. The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany had noted with appreciation 
the opening statement made by the Director General and the annual report of the 
Board of Governors. All would, agree that the Agency had made further progress 
during the past year towards achieving its objectives. , It was apparent that 
in something as now as the utilization of atomic energy, reliable results 
could be obtained onljr aftor careful preparation. His delegation believed that 
that course had been wisely followed by the Secretariat. 
86. He wi&hed to congratulate the Agency on despatching a number of successful 
technical assistance missions to various less developed countries to investigate 
possibilities for the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Nevertheless, 
before a start could be made on building reactors to meet power requirements, 
calculations should be made in order to ascertain which of a number of reactors 
of proven type were the most economic by comparison with conventional power 
resources and which should therefore be recommended for construction. German 
reactor development groups were following with great interest the studies undertaken 
by the Agency in that connexion. 
87. Since the inception of the Agency, the Federal German Government had soon 
as one of its most important tasks the establishment of uniform rules for health 
protection. It therefore wished to express its appreciation of the publication 
of the manual on the safe handling of radioisotopes. That work had already proved 
of considerable assistance for all those who, for industrial, medical or scientific 
purposes, had to deal with radioactive isotopes. It was hoped that other 
publications of the same high standard would follow and in that connexion the 
issue of a handbook on reactor safety and the establishment of rules for the 
safe transport of radioactive materials wore awaited with particular interest. 
88. The development of the Agency's fellowship programme had also been followed 
with great interest in the Federal Republic of Germany, As yc~, his Government 
had been unable to contribute to that programme as extensively as it would have 
wished. As many.would be aware, it had established a widespread fellowship 

GC(III)/OR.29 
page 23 


programme on a bilateral basis for students from less developed countries. That 
programme was adequately financed and was, he believed,, being implemented to the 
satisfaction of all parties. Efforts were also being made to offer Type II 
fellowships to the Agency, The plan had unfortunately met with certain difficulties, 
mainly because of a shortage of training facilities, but he hoped that 
it would be possible to submit interesting proposals in the near future, 


89. The international conferences and symposia arranged by the Agency for 
the exchange of scientific information had had a great value in promoting and 
co-ordinating scientific work and in establishing personal contacts between 
scientists. As soon as the research centre at Karlsruhe came into full operation, 
as it would in 1960, his Government would be most pleased to receive a proposal 
from the Director General to held a meeting there. 
90. His Government also welcomed, and would always be prepared to participate 
±nf the Agency's work on the standardization of international law in relation 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. To mention only one example$ it seemed 
vital to establish international regulations with regard to nuclear ship propulsion. 
91. His delegation was happy to note that the Board of Governors and the 
Director General had succeeded in avoiding major increases in the budget in 
spite of the continuous growth of the Agency's programmes. As the delegate 
of the Union of South Africa had already pointed out,--^ it seemed desirable that 
in future budgets a clear distinction should be made between the regular and 
the operational budgets, 
92. His delegation accepted the proposed operational budget for 1960 and would 
raise no objection to the fact that a rather large sura would be carried forward 
to 1961. It feltj howeverj that the question of whether or not reserves should 
in principle be permitted merited further deliberation before any final decision 
was taken. 
93. With regard to the voluntary contributions to the General Fund, the Government 
of the Federal Republic of Germany hoped that the target proposed by the 
Board of Governors would be reached and to that end would be prepared to increase 
its own contribution. 
9/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraphs 71 and 72. 



GC(III)/OR.29 
page 24 


94. Having taken note of the Auditors' report-—' it wished to express its 
appreciation of the financial administration of the Agency. It would be happy 
if the Auditors' suggestions could be followed and if the Agency could apply, 
as far as possible, the financial regulations adopted by the United Nations. 
95. It night be of some interest to the Conference if he gave a short account 
of the development of atomic research and industrial activities in the Federal 
Republic of Germany. In late 1958, research reactors had come into operation 
in Berlin and Hamburg. It was expected that the 12 1IW reactor at Karlsruhe 
would roach criticality in the spring of 1960. A number of auxiliary institutes 
to deal with physics, chemistry and medicine would be added to the reactor 
station there. The two realtors obtained from the United Kingdom for the 
research centre in Forth Rhine-Westphalia were expected to come into operation 
in the first half of 1960. An industrial firm working on reactor development 
had constructed a small reactor in Munich which would be operated on fuel obtained 
from the United States. By the end of 1960 it was anticipated that nine research 
reactors in all would be operating in the Federal Republic. 
96. With regard to experimental power reactors, a 15 H"/ boiling-water reactor 
was expected to become critical in the spring of 1960 and another 15 KW hightemperature 
reactor was to be built, shortly. Industrial reactor development 
groups.were preparing final plans for three reactors, each with a capacity of 
100 MW, one a heavy-water reactor operating on the prossure-tube principle9 the 
second a boiling-water reactor with nuclear superheating and the third an 
advanced gas-cooled reactor. BTo decision had yet been taken about the construction 
of large power reactors. 
97. There were now six large cobalt sources in the Federal Republic of Germany, 
four of which were operated by universities for medical purposes and two by 
industrial plants. So far as nuclear physics was concerned, a 6 GoV electronsynchrotron 
would be built within the next four years. 
98. The Max Planck Institute for Physics and Astrophysics in Munich was working 
on fusion research. It intended to build a quick stollarator with a plasma 
source similar to the one at Livormore. 
10/ GC(III)/8l. 



GC(III)/OR.29 
page 25 


99. An experimental centre for research on radiation production was being 
established near Munich for research on radiation biology and for long-term 
experimental work on the larger animals. The centre would be pleased to make 
available a number of places in its present training courses to Agency-sponsored 
students. 
100, Ho emphasized once again the great importance attached by the Federal 
German Government to international co-operation in atomic energy. Despite the 
various viewpoints which had emerged during the genera,! debate and which might 
be difficult to reconcile, there remained much on which all delegations were 
broadly in agreement. The chances for fruitful development of such international 
co-operation wore great if delegates refrained from raising matters on which 
insufficient data were available and if they limited themselves to promoting by 
positive action the noble objectives of the Agency as sot forth in its Statute, 


101. Mr. CAMPICHE (Switzerland) referred to the continuing interest of his 
Government in the Agency's technical assistance activities and expressed its 
satisfaction at progress made in carrying out the fellowship programme. 
Another activity of equal interest to less and more advanced countries alike was 
the provision of scientific and technical information and expert services. In 
the latter connexion the Swiss Government had applied to the Agency for expert 
advice on the organization of security measures to be applied in operating a 
reactor in Switzerland and he now wished to convoy its thanks to the Director 
General for the high quality of the services provided* 
•102, He was pleased to be able to state that in 1960 Switzerland would, as in 
1959, make a voluntary contribution to the General Fund, 
The me eating rose at 6.15 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(III)/OR.30 
8 December 1959 

ENGLISH 


General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1959, at 10.55 a,m. 
President: Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 
Item of the 
agenda* 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 
10 General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for the year 1958-59 (continued) 
I-64 
Statements by the delegates of Pakistan, 
Japan, Morocco, India, Austria, Albania 
and Brazil 

* GC(III)/88/Rev.2. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev,2. 

GC(IH)/OR.30 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958-59 
(GC(III)/73, 85, 39 and Add.1, 92) (continued) 


1. Ilr. AHMAD (Pakistan) said that in the general debate at the second 
session of the General Conference the delegation of Pakistan had pointed out 
that the first two years of the Agency's life had to be spent on setting up 
the machinery necessary for the achievement of its objectives, He was glad 
to noto that that task had been largely fulfilled. 
2. The Agency had already embarked upon a useful programme of training and 
fellowships, and had taken practical steps for the provision of experts in many 
specialized branches. It had brought out several useful publications, including 
the Directory of Reactors and the Manual of Safe Handling of Radioisotopes, 
and had successfully arranged a first series of scientific symposia 
and conferences'. It had started to provide out of its technical assistance 
funds certain quantities of eq\iipment badly needed by some of its Member 
States, 
3. Thanks were due to those advanced countries whose offers had made those 
achievements possible, and to the Secretariat which had implemented them 
successfully. However, the Agency was experiencing some difficulties which 
he would review in order to offer some constructive suggestions. 
4. TThile for general training in. reactor technology, use of radioisotopes 
and the like, six months to a year might be sufficient, a thorough knowledge 
of the higher and more advanced aspects of atomic energy, such as shielding 
and hoat transfer, required more time. Moreover, opportunities should be 
provided for some of the fellowship-holders to engage in research work on their 
own account in the laboratories and institutions of the advanced countries, 
with tlio idea of continuing such work on their return to their own countries, 
'thus opening the way to mutual exchange of knowledge and, as it were, to bilateral 
co-operation in research. In the future, therefore, the Agency should 
provido two kinds of fellowship to meet these two different needs. It was 
also to be hoped that the offers of fellov/ships made by certain countries would 
not, as in the past, be partially offset by limiting factors. 


5. Pakistan had been delighted when some advanced countries had first informed 
the Agency that they were placing a number of experts at the Agency's disposal 
and the Agency had set apart some of its technical assistance allocation for 

GC(III)/OR.30 
page 3 


the provision of experts. But Pakistan's hopes had been disappointedp and, 
to judge from the Director General's remarks on the Agency's difficulties in 
obtaining the services of experts-^, other countries must have been disappointed 
too. If the Agency was to carry out its responsibilities, the present system 
mu.3t be 'remedied immediately. The Agency might consider the permanent 
employment of a number of experts, to be paid from technical assistance funds 
and sent out as and when required. Furthermore, a country might require a 
series of experts for a specific plan or programme, and adequate flexibility 
was necessary in that respect. To have the same expert throughout the whole 
duration of a project might not always be in the receiving country's interest. 


6, It had often been said that the Agency was not an organization for the 
supply of equipment5 but atomic energy research entailed expensive equipment 
and for that reason, even if they had equal qualifications, the experts of the 
less developed countries might be seriously handicapped. The most skilful 
mathematician could not replace an electronic computer. The Agency should 
therefore be willing to provide large sums for the supply of equipment. 


7, The various forms of technical assistance required considerable expenditure, 
but the operational parx of the Agency's budget was very small. To raise funds 


2/ 
an effort might be made, in accordance with the Director General's suggestion—' , 
to make the sale of source and fissionable materials through the Agency 
economically attractive so that the Agency might derive additional revenues 
under Article XIV.E and F of the Statute. By giving the Agency free of cost 
three,tons of natural uranium for supply to Japan, Canada had set an example 
which, it was to be hoped, would be followed. 
8, The Agency's main task was still to study the generation of electricity 
from nuclear sources in small and medium-size reactors for the benefit of the 
less developed countries. Last year a resolution on that subject, sponsored 
by sovoral delegations, including that of Pakistan—' , had met with scepticism^ 
the studies which had been ma6.e in pursuance of it seemed to highlight the 
difficulties rather than the possibilities. However, there had been a considerable 
shift of opinion in that respects for instance, the United Kingdom 


l/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraph 15, 
2/ Ibid,,paragraph 30. 
3/ GC(II)/EES/27. 



GC(III)/OR.30 
pago 4 


dolegatc had urged the Agency to carry out the studies in an understanding and 
sympathetic manner—'. According to some American sources the cost of nuclear power 
would come down to 8 - 10 even to 6 mills/kWh by 1970, and six of the 
16 reactors in the United States which were planned to become critical before 
1962 wore small and medium-sized reactors with installed capacities of from 


10.5 ~to 2S MW. The question of nuclear power, with which safeguards were 
intimately linked, should be assigned a high place in future programmes if the 
Agency were not to fail, in its noble mission, 
9. lie. SAGANE (japan) stated that Japan would continue to be a staunch 
supporter of the Agency, As a mark of co-operation the Japanese Government 
had requested the Agency to supply three tons of natural uranium for the JRE-3 
research reactor. The agreement providing for the supply of the metal had 
5/

been signed in March 1959 . 


10. The Agency could point to various solid achievements§ the award of 
training fellowships, technical assistance, dissemination of scientific information, 
despatch of fact-finding teams to under-developed areas, compilation 
of a manual on the safe handling of radioisotopes, convening of expert panels, 
organisation of various international scientific meetings, and so on. 
11. The confidence which Japan had always placed in the Agency had been 
abundantly justified, He paid tribute to the wisdom of the Board as well as 
to the efficiency of the Director General and the Secretariat, The Agency's 
scientific prestige had been considerably enhanced by the establishment of the 
Scientific Advisory Committee, 
12* The Japanese delegation endorsed the draft Programme and Budget for 1960-', 
which provided for a reasonable balance between the Agency's various activities, 
within the limited financial resources available to it, Japan endorsed the 
target of *1,5 million recommended by the Board for voluntary contributions to 
the 1960 operational budget, 


13, As the United Kingdom delegate had recalled, implementation of the tech


nical assistance programme, which was financed from the General Fund, must be 


4/ GC(III)/26, paragraph 93. 


5/ IITrCIRC/3, 


6/ GC(III)/75. 



GC(III)/OR„30 
page 5 


7/ 


in accordance with the provisions of Article III.B.3 of the Statute-'. In 


that connexion he shared the view of the delegate of the Union of South 
0/ 


Africa--' who had stated that the Agency should place more emphasis on projects 
which would he of benefit to all llemher States, such as the drawing up of 
health and safety standards and studies on waste disposal,, environmental contamination 
and civil liability, 


14. The Japanese Government congratulated the United States Government on the 
way it was supporting the Agency in connexion with the supply of source and 
special fissionable materials. 
15. . Japan had been happy to note the progress achieved by the Board in the 
establishment of draft rules concerning Agency safeguards. He recalled that, 
at the second regular session of the General Conference, his delegation had 
spoken of the possibility of Member States handing over to the Agency the 
responsibility for applying safeguards under their bilateral or multilateral 
agreements,, To reaffirm his Government's position in that regard, he expressed 
the hope that Japan would soon be in a position to request the Agency in 
agreement with the other countries concerned - to take over the application 
of safeguards under bilateral agreements which Japan had concluded in connexion 
with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
16. The Japanese delegation noted with satisfaction that' the Secretariat, in 
implementing General Conference resolution GC(II)/RES/27, was doing useful 
work by analysing and evaluating the technical and economic factors governing 
the utilization of small and moditirn power reactors. His country attached 
vital importance to the problem of energy supply, because sooner or later it 
would be obliged to use nuclear power for the generation of electricity, 
17. Although Japan enjoyed high levels of development in various respects, 
including certain branches of atomic science such as the application of radioisotopes 
to medicine, agriculture and industry, it was still to be regarded as 
a less developed country in regard to nuclear power. For several years Japan 
had been trying to make up for lost ground, to meet the over-growing industrial 
demand for electric power. 
7/ GC(III)/0E.26, paragraph 91, 
8/ Ibid,, paragraph 74. 



GC(III)/OR.30 
pago 6 


18. The Japanese Atomic Energy Research Institute had spent roughly $40 million 
in throo years to install various facilities such as a 50 kW reactor of the 
water-boiler type and the JRR-2 reactor, moderated by heavy water. Yvith those 
roactorc his country expected to obtain a 10 MW thermal output. The design 
and construction of the JRR-3 research reactor, moderated by heavy water and 
with a thermal output of 10 MW, for which the Agency had supplied natural 
uranium, v/as one of Japan's major efforts in the sphere of basic research. 
The Institute already possessed a 10 000 curie cobalt-60 irradiation facility, 
and would install a high-intensity 25 MeV linear accelerator, together with two 
or three different types of sub-critical assembly, 
19. At tlio same time the Institute was engaged in introducing foreign techniques5 
it was about to acquire a small 12.5 ^ power demonstration reactor 
of the boiling-water type. For industrial purposes, Japan had decided to 
purchase from the United Kingdom a 150 MW power reactor of the improved Calder 
Hall type. 
20. In short, Japan's long-term nuclear power development programme, in which 
Japanese manufacturers were collaborating by combining their resources, had 
made such good progress that in the course of the next four to five years Japan 
would no doubt have made up the leeway between it and the more advanced 
countries, It would then be able to give advice through the Agency to the 
loss developed countries which were launching programmes of the same kind. 
21. Japan was fully aware of the obstacles to the utilization of nuclear energy 
for power generation, such as radiation hazards, waste disposal and the problem 
of civil liability. For the solution of all those problems the Agency would 
be able to offer very valuable assistance, which would be every bit as 
important as its technical assistance programme, The Japanese Government 
would be happy to offer training and research facilities for students and 
scientists who might be assigned by the Agency for study in Japan, 
22. With reference to the problem of nuclear propulsion of ships, Japanese 
exports wore attempting to decide the type of reactor best suited to that 
purpose; work on a Japanese nuclear-powered vessel might soon begin. The 
Agonoy should not lose time in undertaking, in consultation with the other . 
.. 
interested international organizations, the preparation of international health 
and safoty regulations for nuclear propulsion, as well as standards to prevent 

GC(III)/OR.30 
page 7 


the contamination of harbours in the event of a nuclear incident. The 
Japanese delegation formally proposed the convening of a panel of experts to 
study the problems of civil liability for marine reactors, similar to the 
existing panel for land-based reactors, 


23. The Agency could also play an important part in the dissemination of 
scientific information through scientific conferences and symposia. One 
symposium should be devoted to research on fuel cycles, to ensure optimum 
utilization of nuclear fuels, 
24. Finally, he announced that the Japanese Government, wishing to support 
the Agonoy to the best of its ability, intended to make a contribution to the 
General Fund, 
25. Mr. El FASSI (Morocco) pointed out that the world had given the 
Agency the task of organizing a system of documentation, exchange of information 
and experts, research and control which would enable nuclear energy 
production to spread gradually throughout the world and would protect all 
pooplos against radiation. 
26. The General Conference should first look back and see whether the Agency 
had so far discharged its duties well, not in order to criticize its failures 
but to understand better the obstacles to its work. 
27. Certain delegates had deplored the Agency's failure so far to play its 
full part as a broker of nuclear materials. It had been prevented from doing 
so by the supplying countries, which had preferred bilateral agreements 
enabling them to control directly the use of their products. If the large 
producing countries and the less developed countries undertook to channel all 
deliveries of source and fissionable materials through the Agency, one of its 
principal objectives would be reached, 
28. Thoro must, however, be no pessimism. The Agency's achievements were 
already numerous. It had contributed greatly to the training of nuclearonorgy 
specialists5 it had organized conferences and symposia which had 
enabled technicians to compare their experiences and methods5 it was trying 
to protect mankind's health against radiations and to ensure safety. It was 
continuously concerned with certain other important problems, such as waste 
disposal and the transport of dangerous materials. 

GC(III)/CE.30 
page 0 


29. For all those reasons the Moroccan delegation agreed generally with the 
Agency's programme for 1960. It welcomed the establishment of the functional 
laboratory and thanked- the United States, through whose generous gift the 
Ago-ncy would acquire a valuable instrument for research and other work. The 
less developed countries would thus have at their disposal, before their own 
installations came into operation, a complete laboratory for the preliminary 
study of their projects and the training of their specialists, 
30. The way in which the geographical regions were represented on the Board 
of Governors was clearly unfair to Africa. It even seemed doubtful whether, 
whon the United Arab Republic's term of office expired in 1960, a single 
African country other than the Union of South Africa would be represented. 
Ho was glad that Spain, a sincere, friend of the Arab world, had applied for 
one of the vacancies. The Moroccan delegation considered that the General 
Gonforcnco should bring about a more equitable representation of the geographical 
regions on the Board, 
31. The United Arab Republic had presented to the Board a request relating to 
the establishment of a regional radioisotope centre at Cairo. That request 
came within the Arab League's general policy of inter-rcgional co-operation, 
and ho hoped it would be approved. 
32, The Moroccan delegation thanked the Agency for- sending to Morocco in the 
spring of 1959 a technical assistance mission consisting of two experts who 
had examined the prospects for using atomic energy in Morocco. 


33, Throe forms of assistance which the Agency could provide for countries 
in course of development were of major interest 3 prospecting for raw material 
said its extraction and treatment; the installation of snail reactors for the 
training of specialists5 and detailed study of the economics of small and 
medium power reactors under local conditions. 


34. Since 1956 Morocco had been assiduously carrying out a prospecting 
programme to investigate the possibility of exploiting the uranium in Moroccan 
phosphates which contained 150-500 grammes per ton. Annual output might well 
reach 7 000 000 tons, which showed the great importance of the deposits. 
35. Research on the extraction of uranium by chemical processes was already 
being carried out, but was being hampered by two difficulties, lack of 
experience and insufficiency of the information made available by Member States 

GC(III)/OR.3O 
page 9 


which had developed methods of extraction that were economic and did not 
destroy phosphates. The very high, cost of the reagents used should also be 
mentioned. Morocco was planning to submit a request for assistance in that 
sphere to the Agency. 


36, furthermore, Morocco intended., in the near future, 'to build a second 
super-phosphate factory producing uranium as a by-product. Since the second 
United ITations International Conference oh the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
(the second Geneva .conference) had shown that some countries had developed 
reasonably effective extraction methods, Morocco hoped that an Agency mission 
would visit it to advise on hoy/ those methods could be adapted for treating 
Moroccan phosphates. 


37 <• The second subject to which great importance was attached by the 
developing countries was the training of specialists, Nuclear energy might, 
within some ten years, become an economic source of power, used throughout 
the world, and the developing countries were in danger of not having the 
necessary personnel available in time. Fellows from under-developed countries 
after a period of training in foreign laboratories, should be able to continue 
their research in their own countries, while at the same time training other 
specialists. For that reason, the Agency should help Member States wishing 
to install a small experimental reactor on their own territory. 


30. The third subject of major interest to developing countries was the study 
of the economics of small and medium power reactors, with due regard to local 
conditions and the development programmes of the countries concerned. It was 
essential that the Agency should carry out investigations in the less developed 
areas when studying the economics of nuclear power, since it might well be 
that reactors with considerably higher unit costs than ordinary industrial 
reactors were economic in certain remote areas, 
39. In conclusion, he proposed the insertion in the draft resolution submitted 
by Czechoslovakia (GC(III)/89 and; Add.1) of a paragraph (GC(III)/92) 
inviting France voluntarily to renounce the manufacture of nuclear weapons and 
not to carry out any experimental explosions of atomic bombs, "Without 
wishing to go into the political and military aspects of that question, he 
recalled'that France was actively carrying out research on the production of an 
atomic bomb, which was to be tested in the Sahara, namely on Moroccan or 

GC(III)/0It.30 
page 10 


Algerian territory. The harmful effects of atomic bombs were indisputable 5 
he asked therefore that the General Conference request the Director General to 
despatch a mission of technicians immediately to Morocco to study, with the 
local authorities, various arrangements which could be made for rapidly installing 
detection and measurement instruments. 


40< Ho supported the French proposal that the Agency should undertake major 
projects, as o'ther international organs did—' . He felt, however, that before 
thinking of constructing, it was first necessary to refrain from destroying^ 
the Agency's first major project should relate to the widespread detection of 
nucloar radiation and the protection of human life. 


41, Mr. EHABHA (India) made the following statements—' 


"I should like first to extend to you the warm congratulations of my 
Government on your election to the presidency of this Conference. We 
are confident that this General Conference will prosper under your tactful 
guidance. 


"The first General Conference took place- a few days after the first 
earth satellite had been successfully launched. Since then many other 
satellites have been launched by the Soviet Union and. the United States. 
And now, immediately preceding this session, there has been yet another 
dramatic demonstration of scientific achievement in the launching of a 
rocket that has successfully reached the moon. This spectacular feat 
by the USSR is a reminder to us of the immense capacities for human 
betterment which are being opened up daily by the advance of science, and 
which this Agency, among others, has been set up to guide into peaceful 
channels. 


"In the year that has passed, certain activities of the Agency have 
grown encouragingly, and we congratulate all those responsible for this 
success, including the Director General and his staff. The fellowship 
programme is a striking example. From the very beginning the Preparatory 
Commission had recognised that 'assistance to Member States in respect of 
oxchange and training should be a major activity of the Agency in its 


ll/ 


initial years'.—J The first General Conference adopted this 

2/ GC(III)/0E.28, paragraph 38. 
10/ This statement is reproduced verbatim, at the speaker's request, under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 
11/ GO,l/l, paragraph 70. 



GC(III)/OR,30 
page 11 


recommendation but envisaged an expenditure of only about $250 000 for 
1,/ 


tins purpose,—' 


"This recommendation was out of date almost as soon as it was 
adopted. For, in 1958, the Agency had to find some $700 000 for the 
213 fellows who were selected. In the present year, this total has 
been nearly doubled^ 526 nominations have been received and 349 
applicants have been selected, involving an estimated cost of about 
one million dollars. 


"In the draft programme and budget now before this Conference, the 
equivalent of over one million dollars has been set aside for felloYfchips, 
This does not take into account the large number of fellowships 
which have been provided free of cost or below cost by the various Member 
Governments and which are not charged against the Agency's General Fund. 
Thus the Agency's fellowship programme has expanded more than four times 
in two years. This is in5.ood vivid proof of the importance which the 
Agency's training facilities have come to occupy in the atomic energy 
plans of its Members. 


"Similarly, in contrast to the situation at the second session of 
the General Conference, when it was not yet possible to point to any 
technical assistance project which the Board had approved, in the past 
yoar no less than 62 applications for technical assistance have been 
submitted to the Agency and technical assistance totalling $409 150 has 
been approved for seven countries. The majority of the requests have 
related to the use of radioisotopes in agriculture and medicine, thus 
confirming the Agency's view that these particular forms of assistance 
are likely to be of the greatest immediate benefit in less developed 
areas. According to the budget estimates before us, the Agency expects 
to spend the equivalent of some $900 000 during the coming year on 
technical assistance.-^ This is a rapidly growing programme and may 
grow even more rapidly as the benefits of the fellowship programme begin 
to take root in Member States, 


"The Agency has also begun to construct a service laboratory which 


12/ GC;l(s)/HES/6. 
13/ GC(III)/75, "table 53. 


GC(III)/on.30 
page 12 


should be in operation when the next conference convenes. The very 
gonerous and welcome contribution of $600 000 by the United States 
Government has made it possible for the laboratory to be built without 
detriment to the Agency's fellowship or its technical assistance programmes. 
The Austrian Government has been characteristically generous 
in donating the site of the laboratory to the Agency, We should like* 
to express our appreciation to both Governments, 


"\7© must remember that in describing some countries as less developed, 
what wo are primarily concerned with is the low national income per head 
of population. In sufficiently large countries, however, this may be 
coupled with a total production which is quite considerable and varied. 
India, for example, produces considerable amounts of steel, though amounts 
which are small for the size of its population. It produces cars, 
locomotives, aeroplanes and a variety of other things usually associated 
with industrially developed countries. By the end of our Third Five-
Yoar.Plan in 1966, the country will have a self-sufficient industrial 
baso. This technical ability is reflected in the progress of our atomic 
enorgy programme. I will not take your time in repeating what I told you 
hero last y^ar of our programme.—' Y/e have now had a research reactor, 
designed and built by ourselves, but fuelled with enriched uranium from 
the United Kingdom, in operation for over three years, ' As I said last 
year, considerable quantities of uranium ore have been located, and work 
lias now started on mining this ore in quantity. A uranium mill is being 
designed by our own scientists and engineers to produce concentrates 
enough to feed our first nuclear power.station of a capacity of approximately 
250 MW. A small plant has already been constructed to produce 
uranium metal of nuclear grade and the first ingot was produced in 
January 1959. Several tons of metallically pure uranium have been 
produced in the course of the last few months, , A fuel-element facility 
has been built which will be able to produce fuel elements of varied types, 
A fow fuel elements for the Canada-India Reactor have already been 
produced and we expect to provide the first charge of the reactor with 
fuel olements produced at Trombay. All this has been done by our own 
scientists and engineers. A few months ago our staff started design 


14/ GC(II)/OR.21, paragraph 74



GC(III)/OR.30 
page 13 


work on a small plutoniura plant to extract from used fuel elements 


plutonium that can be made into Plutonium fuel elements for use in 


the nuclear power stations which are planned in the second stage of 


our power programme, 


"The Atomic Energy Establishment at Trombay has now a staff of 
over 1 000 scientists and engineers, most of whom were trained in India, 
and the Commission's Training School now turns out about 200 scientists 
and engineers a year for feeding the requirements of our expanding 
programme. Facilities are under construction for using the used fuel 
elements of the Canada-India Reactor as a powerful sotirce of radiation 
for studies in sterilisation, food preservation and for agricultural 
and biological research. The Canada-India Reactor will be completed 
ahead of schedule by the end of the year and is expected to reach 
critieality by about April 1960, This 40 MW reactor will be a very 
powerful research tool with facilities for engineering studies comparable 
with those available anywhere. And as a next step, we have already 
sot up groups which are doing preliminary design work on a prototype 
power station of about 15 M7 using natural uranium and heavy water as 
moderator. 


"Extensive studies of the economics of nuclear power in various 
parts of the country have been made, and a decision has been taken to 
go ahoad with the construction of the first nuclear power station with a 
capacity of about 250 MW based on natural uranium5 this will be located 
on the coast between Bombay and Ahmodabad* 


"Vfe shall be glad to make our extensive facilities available to all 
countries of the region and. beyond - indeed to those who wish to send 
their scientists either for training or -;o~oporative work. In this 
connexion, I am happy to announce that the Government of India has 
docidod to contribute to the General Fund of the Agency a sum equivalent 
to 'p20 000 which will be available for spending in India in any manner 
which the Agency thinks fit, such as in providing fellowships, or in 
acquiring equipment or materials, such as thorium and beryllium, for 
atomic energy work. My Government hopes that this contribution will 
play its part in furthering the objectives of the Agency and the development 
of its programme. 



GC(III)/CB,30 
page 14 


"Ilr. President, we welcome the statement that the recent discussions 
between Professor Emelyanov and Mr, McCone are likely greatly to increase 
and strengthen the Agency as a centre for disseminating information on the 
poaeoful uses of atomic energy. Such a result would carry further the 
progress made in the last year, which has seen nine Agency publications, 
including the tiseful Directories of Reactors and Radioisotopes, and the 
Llanual on the Safe Handling of Isotopes. The Agency's non-technical 
bulletin also made its appearance during the year and will certainly lead 
to an increased and widening interest in the Agency's activities. We 
also .welcome the docision of the Agency to publish a scientific journal 
on fusion. 


"In connexion with the expanding programme of symposia and seminars which 
we welcome - my delegation has a suggestion to offer which we feel 
vri.ll enliance the value of these important meetings for the exchange of 
information and ideas in fields relevant to the Agency's activities. 
This suggestion is that the Board should give immediate consideration to 
siting.as many of these meetings as possible in Asia., Latin America and 
Africa, The advantage of doing this, instead of following the present 
practice of holding virtually all these meetings in ITurope, v/ould be 
that interest in the Agency would be stimulated in the areas I have 
mentioned. Moreover, the present practice throws on the poorer countries 
the main burden of transport costs. This suggestion is in lino with the 
practice followed by most other international agencies, and my delegation 
will, if necessary, introduce a draft resolution on this point in the 
appropriate committee at this session of the General Conference. 


"In establishing international standards, in exploring the problems 
of international law which are raised by the peaceful uses of nuclear 
onorgy and in providing training and technical assistance to Member States, 
the Agency's activities have developed f^iitfully and rapidly. Yet it 
would be unwise to allow our satisfaction with the Agency's work in these 
areas to blind us to another area, perhaps the most important of the 
Agency's work, in which what we have done has fallen below expectations. 
Y/h on the Agency was born the common element in the expectations of most 
licmbors was that the Agency would become a truly effective international 



GC(III)/OR.30 
page 15 


instrument for assisting countries in their power programmes, thus contributing 
vitally to their economic development and to the raising of their 
standards of living. Significantly, the production of electric power is 
the only application of atomic energy that is specifically mentioned in the 
Statute. Authority is, of course, implicitly given by it to promote other 
uses, but this is the use which was clearly foromost in the minds of the 
world's peoples as well as in those of the Agency's founders. Recognizing 
this, the General Conference last year adopted Resolution GC(II)/HES/27 
authorising the Agency to examine the economics of small and medium-scale 
pov/or reactors and to ascertain as specific-ally as possible how nuclear 
power could be fitted into the power programmes of its Member States. 
The Agency's response to this resolution has so far been restricted to 
attempting to ascertain which countries are interested in having such 
studios made. More than twenty countries have expressed their interest 
in having such studies undertaken and this indicates clearly the great 
importance of this aspect of the Agency's work and the basic needs to which 
it answers. The time has clearly come to press those stiidies vigorously 
forward. Mr. President, if I may be permitted to refer to what I said 
in the debate in this room on 22 September 1959 in which Sir John Cockcroft 
and Mr. Goldschmidt also took part, the practical next step in 
meeting the prime needs of Ilember States is to assist States, at their 
request, to work out the economics of nuclear power production in 
specific areas. Here again, we will, if necessary, submit a draft 
resolution to this Conference which will take further the decision 
embodied in resolution GC(II)/RES/27. 

"Mien the Agency was established it was implicitly assumed by many 
of u.s that it would become the principal supplier of source and fissionable 
materials. This assumption ,has failed to materialise. The only supply 
so far ax'rtnged has been that of three tons of uranium notal to Japan. 
Tlio occasion was indeed historic. Unfortunately, history has since shown 
no overwhelming inclination to repeat itself. The total amounts supplied 
hitherto by the Agency should be vievred, I submit, in the light of the 
total annual production of uranium in- the world, which far exceeds 
30 000 tons. The Agency can hardly be considered to have made any 
impression on the uranium business in the world. 17c may well ask why 
this is so. 



GC(III)/OR.30 
page 16 


"The facts of supply have radically changed. New deposits of 
uranium have been discovered all over the world. The output of 
uranium oxide has steadily increased. If the current-year1s estimated 
production, for .example, wore to be used entirely for peaceful purposes, 
it would he sufficient to produce over 100 000 MW of electric power. 
3von with the continuing high rate at which atomic weapons are being 
produced and stockpiled, a surplus of uranium production has developed, 
and there is no doubt that uranium could be made available to the world 
at lower prices than at present. Sir John Cockroft drew attention at 
our discussion on. 22 September 1959 to the effect of the lowering of 
uranium prices on the economics of nuclear power. As soon as nuclear 
weapons tests are finally stopped or.other agreed stops of controlled 
disarmament are achieved, there will be a further effect both on the 
supply and price factors which, would certainly stimulate the more rapid 
dovolopment of nuclear, power in the world, 


"In these conditions governing the supply of uranium, the Agency can 
play a useful and practical role only if it is prepared to offer terms no 
loss advantageous than those of its competitors. If the Agency burdens 
itself with a cumbersome and expensive safeguards system, and one which 
raises difficulties for recipient countries, it can only blame itself if 
these countries turn to other suppliers or prefer to exploit, even at 
greater expense, domestic sources of supply. We realise that the Agency 
has a responsibility for applying safeguards, but it is clear from the 
Statute and from the prolonged discussions which surrounded Article XII, 
on safeguards that that responsibility is to be exercised only 'to the 
extent relevant'. It was only on the basis of this phrase, which was 
incorporated at our suggestion, that many countries were persuaded to 
accept the article at all. In our opinion, 'the extent relevant' for 
source material is simply to require an undertaking from the recipient 
country that the material will.be used solely for peaceful purposes. 
Indeed, uranium can be obtained today with nc more than this condition, 
and it is no use the Agency trying to require more, Nor should we forgot 
the fact that much larger quantities continue to be supplied by 
certain countries to others without even this condition as to its peaceful 
use. 



GC(III)/OR.30 
page 17 


"Another point which WG should like to stress is that, in our 
opinion, safeguards should ho devised in such a manner that even those 
countries which do not require assistance from the Agency would be 
prepared to buy uranium through the Agency,, It cannot he too strongly 
emphasize& that the effectiveness of the safeguards system is a function 
not only of its intensity hut of its coverage. Perfection is sterile 
when it applies to nothing, 


"Ilr. President, as we pointed out at the Conference on the Statute 
of the Agency, the safeguards proposed will create onerous conditions 
for countries which are not in a position to manufacture atomic weapons, 
while leaving unaffected those countries which are either manufacturing 
such weapons or may be capable of doing so. You will pardon me, if I 
recall a sentence from my statement at the Conference on the Statute of 
the Agency held in New York in 1956. I pointed out that the proposed 
system of safeguards was intended, to use an analogy, to ensure that not 
the slightest leakage took place from the sides of a vessel while ignoring 
the fact that the vessel had no bottom. Even today, although, or 
perhaps because, attention continues to be focussed on the sides of the 
vessel, it still has no bottom. 


"Finally, in connexion with safeguards we believe that it is a truism 
that a realistic structure can only be built on the foundation of a wide 
agreement among Member States, We think therefore that it is essential 
that any tentative conclusions reached by the Board of Governors should be 
placed before the General Conference for its consideration before they 
are adopted by the Agency. 


"I'£r. President, some of the facts I have mentioned show that the 
Agency's achievements during the last year are much greater than those 
in its first year. The setting up of a Scientific Advisory Committee, 
with the same membership as that of the Un. ted Nations Scientific Advisory 
Committee, has added great strength to it. But the Agency is 
still in ii;s infancy, and will need the care and help of its Member 
States to grow to its full strength. We on our part will do whatever 
wo can to assist it to fulfil the great role for which it was conceived." 



GC(III)/OR.3p 
page iG 


42. Mr. THIRRIHG (Austria) noted with satisfaction that the Agency had 
begun work on all the activities provided for in its Statute, and that it was 
on the right road tOY/ards achieving its objectives, 
43. Austria was interested in the future of the Agency, not only as the host 
country, but also because it required international help to develop its own 
programme for the peaceful use of atomic energy, 
44* Go-oporation between the Agency and the Austrian authorities was becoming 


increasingly close. An agreement had been concluded between the Agency and the 
Austrian Studiengescllschaft for the joint use of the facilities of both parties 
at Soiborsdorf5 Austria hoped that that agreement would contribute to the 


success of the Agency's laboratory. It v/as to be hoped that the Agency would 
award a substantial number of fellowships for training in that laboratory 


specialists from countries which did not possess such facilities. 


45. In order to extend further its co-operation with the Agency, the Austrian 
Government had informed the Director General that it would be glad, if the 
Agency could supply the uranium needed in future for the "Astra" reactor, 
a 5-12 II\7 installation of the swimming-pool type which was under construction 
at Soiborsdorf and was expected to become critical in March 1960. The 
Austrian Government had invited the Agency to consider the matter and open 
negotiations in due course. He hoped that other Member States would follow 
Austria's example and help to make the Agency the world's atomic bank. 
46. The close contacts which had boen established between the Agency and the 
Austrian universities had resLilted in the award of research contracts to 
various institutes. That co-operation would be further strengthened on 
complotion of the research reactor of the Austrian Universities' Atomic 
Institute, the first stone of which had recently been laid. 
47. The rich resources of the central library of the Vienna Institute of 
Physics, combined with those of the Agency's library and with the future 
laboratories at Seibersdorf, would provide particularly favourable conditions 
for nuclear studies in Austria. Austria intended to make the University of 
Vienna an international training centre for fundamental research in nuclear 
physics,. Fifteen Agency-selected students would be able, without paying 
tuition fees, to take the advanced course in theoretical nuclear physics which 

GC(III)/0E.30 
page 19 


was to be given at the Vienna Faculty of Science by a visiting professor 
remunerated by the Agency| it was important that the agreement between the 
University and the Agency should be concluded as soon as possible. 


48. As delegate of the host country, he wished to thank the Director General 
and all the delegates who had spoken so kindly of Austria, which would continue 
to give the Agency its full support,, 
49. I Jr. CARCANI (Albania) pointed out that the third regular session of 
the General Conference was taking place during the historic days of the meeting 
between the Chairman of the Council of Ministers- of the Soviet Union and the 
President of the United States of America, at a time when international tension 
had begun to relax and a few weeks after the launching of the Soviet moon 
rocket. Those successes opened to the Agency new and even better prospects of 
attaining its objectives., but also made still more urgently necessary the 
achievement of its statutory aims. The peaceful uses of atomic energy were 
of great historical importance, for they postulated peaceful co-existence and 
broad co-operation between States. The cold war increased the danger of a 
world catastrophe and prevented the full realization of the peaceful 
possibilities of atomic energy, but a ban on nuclear and thermonuclear Yveapons 
testing would release considerable resources which could be placed at the 
Agency's disposal. 
50. The Albanian delegation therefore warmly supported the draft resolution' 
submitted by Czechoslovakia on the prohibition of nuclear weapons testing. 
In that connexion he protested against the French Government's intention to 
test its first atom bomb in the Sahara. 
51. The Agency would achieve its objectives provided that it secured the 
participation of all countries5 hence the People's Republic of China - the only 
real China - should be a Member of the Agency. Similarly, the World Federation 
of Trade Unions should be granted consultative status. 
52. Although ho agreed with the remarks made by various delegates on the 
Agency's methods of work, the inflation of the administrative machinery and the 
use of funds and equipment, he did not wish to minimize the results achieved. 
Praise was due to the Agency for the practical measures taken to implement the 
resolutions adopted by the General Conference at its previous sessions, the 

GC(III)/0E.39 


page 20 


exchange of scientists and experts, the dissemination-of scientific knowledge 


on atonic energy, agreements for.the supply of uranium-235s "the examination of 
requests for assistance sent io the Agency by more than,20 countries, etc. 

53. However,.the results achieved wore far from exhausting all the Agency's 
possibilitiesj and Albania, which, wished to see atomic energy used in the 
interests of science and human progress, hoped that- the Agency would discharge 
its duties oven better in the future. 
54. Albania, which was a member of the Joint Nuclear Research Institute of 
Dubna, was having experts trained in the Soviet Union and would thus soon be 
able to.use atomic energy in industry, agriculture and other sectors of its 
economy. 
55. By working effectively to achieve the objectives prescribed in its Statute, 
the Agency would win the confidence of the whole world. That would help it to 
accomplish its main tasks the use of atomic energy exclusively for peaceful 
purposes, for the good of mankind. The Albanian Government was prepared to 
support any proposals which would contribute to that end. 
56. Ilr. CUKHA (Brazil) congratulated the Board of Governors, the Director 
General and the Secretariat on the commendable work they had accomplished in 
spite of all the difficulties that they had had to overcome. In view of the 
world situation at the time when the establishment of the Agency had been 
proposed by the President of the United States of America,- the progress made in 
developing.the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes was certainly a 
matter for satisfaction. The eagerness of all countries for even more rapid 
development was understandable, but the documents submitted by the Director 
General and the Board of Governors amply demonstrated that the Agency was 
sparing no effort to achieve the objectives laid down in its Statute and to 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. 
57- Brazil had already been able to seo how much the Agency's assistance 
helped to strengthen international co-operation, for at its request an Agency 
mission had.come to study its 'national programme for atomic energy development 
on the spot. The very fruitful discussions the mission had had with Brazilian 
scientists and engineers had given it a clear idea of Brazil's needs and 
potentialities and it had given valuable advice on the different projects in 



GC(III)/0E.30 
page 21 


progress; particularly with regard to the kind of assistance the Agency could 
supply. It seemed that such personal contacts were one of the most effective 
ways in which the Agency could draw up a world balance-sheet of atomic energy 
activities and thus assemble the data which would enable it to allocate 
available assistance to the best advantage. In addition, such international 
collaboration should eventually make it possible to distribute between a 
greater nunber of countries the- heavy burden borne by the more advanced 
countries in carrying out the Agencjr's programme. 


58. V/ith the assistance of the Agenc3r, Brazil was establishing a laboratory 
for radiation dosimetry at Rio de Janeiro. The necessary equipment was being 
received and three Agency experts would soon be working on that project in 
collaboration with Brazilian scientists and technicians. 
59. Brazil, undor Article XI of the Statute, had requested the Agency's 
assistance in investigating whether or not the electric power supply in the 
central-southern region of Brazil could be supplemented in the near future by 
nuclear powor. While the Brazilian Nuclear Energy Commission had been 
carrying out a preliminary study, the Board of Governors had considered the 
question and decided to send a special mission to Brazil at the appropriate 
tine. During the recent visit of the programme mission already mentioned, it 
had been suggested that the Brazilian Nuclear Energy Commission should apply 
to the.United Nations Special Fund for the funds needed for the initial capital 
outlay. The Brazilian Government intended to request the Board of Governors 


to support its application to the United Nations Special Fund. 


60, In a spirit of international co-operation, Brazil was determined to make . 
available such means as it could, for the furtherance of the Agency's programme. 
It had accordingly offered the Agency 30 fellowships for the following courses 
(for which students from Portugal "and Latin America-had already been enrolled); 
nuclear engineering, nuclear physics, radiochemistry, and radioisotopes 
methodology. The Brazilian Nuclear Energy Commission had also decided to 
offer, through the Agency, five fellowships which would enable scientists and 
engineers to do reactor research at the Sao Paulo Atomic Energy Institute. 


6l„ In that connexion he stressed that there was already extensive co-operation 
between the Latin American countries in training and research work - including 
the exchange of students, teachers and experts. For example, the Brazilian 



GC(III)/0It.30 
page 22 


Nuclear Energy Commission had organized in Paraguay a course on radioisotope 
applica/bions in medicine and supplied the University of Asuncion with, all the 
necessary laboratory equipment. The experiment had been so successful that 
Brasil was planning, a similar course in radiochemistry and intended to prepare 
a report on the means used and the results achieved for the benefit of any 
countries interested. 


62. The Brazilian Nuclear Energy Commission also intended to carry out a study 
of the genetic effects of radiation in districts with a very high natural 
radioactive level where a, sizable population had been living for many years. 
Brazil was prepared to collaborate with the Agency in that regard as well as 
in other activities such as radiometric surveying by air, for which it had two 
well-equipped companies, and the processing of monazite, with special reference 
to researcli work on the separation of thorium, for which it had suitable 
laboratories and pilot plant facilities. 
63. T7ith the installation of new laboratories which would be attached to the 
research reactor at Sao Paulo, the production of artificial radioisotopes would 
be placod on a more regular basis and short-lived radioisotopes could be made 
available to Latin American countries still lacking facilities for their 
production. 
64. Brazil was confident that the execution of its nuclear development programme 
would contribute to the achievement of the Agency's objectives5 it would 
spare no effort to that end. The development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes should enable all countries to assist and trust one another, and thus 
to banish forever the spectre of atonic war. 
The meeting rose at 12.55 P.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(III)/OR.31 
8 December 1959 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1959 at 3-20 p.m.-


President: 
Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


20 Election of Members to the Board of 1-11 
Governors 


6 Adoption of the agenda and allocation 12 - 15 
of items to Committees (continued) 


10 General debate and report of the Board 16 - 84 
of Governors for the year 1958-59 
(continued) 


Statements by the delegates of the 
United Arab Republic, Romania, 
Indonesia, Tunisia and Spain. 


* GC(III)/88/Rev.2. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2„ 

GC(III)/OR.31 
page 2 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD Op GOVERNORS (GC(III)/77,87) 


1. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference that, in accordance 
with Rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure, the General Committee had determined 
that five elective places had to he filled on the Board of Governors in order 
to ensure that, after the end of the session, the Board should include ten 
Members elected by the General Conference. In its report (GC(III)/87) the 
General Committee had also duly specified each geographical area in respect 
of which an election was required, so as to ensure that after the end of the 
session the Board should include a member elected by the General Conference 
from each geographical area except North America, as provided for under Rule 83. 
In accordance with that rule, elections v/ere now required in respect of 
Eastern Europe, South Asia, the Far East and for two other vacancies, 
2. At the invitation of the President Mr. Svab (Czechoslovakia) and 
Mr. Storhaug (Norway) agreed to act as tellers. 
3. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to elect a Member 
for Eastern Europe. 
4.A-
vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows; 
Number of ballot papers, 63 
Invalid ballots, 10 
Number of valid ballots, 53 
Number of abstentions, IS one 
Number of Members votings 53 
Required majority, .. 27 
Number of votes obtained, 
Bulgaria 49 
Greece 2 
Yugoslavia 2 

Having obtained the required majority, Bulgaria was elected to membership 
of the Board of Governors. 


5. The PRESIDENT then invited the. General Conference to elect'a 
Member for South Asia. 

GC(III)/0K.31 
page 3 


6. A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows; 
lumber of ballot papers,
Invalid ballots;
lumber of valid ballots;
lumber of abstentions;
lumber of Members votingsRequired majority;
lumber of votes obtained; 
63 
1 
62 
lono 
62 
32. 
CeylonThailand '
Philippines 
47 
13 
2 

Having obtained the required majority, Ceylon was elected to membership 
of the Board of Governors. 


7. The PRBSIDB1T then invited the General Conference to elect a Member 
for the Far East, 
8, A vots was taken by secret ballots • 
The result of the vote was as follows; 
lumber of ballot papers; 64 
Invalid ballots; 


lumber of valid ballots; 60 
lumber of abstentions; lone 
lumber of Members voting; 60 
Required majority; 31 
lumber of votes obtained; 
Philippines 48 
Thailand 12 

Having obtained the required majority, the Philippines was- elected to 
membership of the Board of Governors. 


9. The PRESIDE1T invited the General Conference to fill the remaining 
two vacancies on the Board. 

GC(III)/OR.31 
page 4 


10, A vote was taken by secret ballot. 


The result of the vote was as followss 


Number of ballot papers; 66 
Invalid ballots; 2 
Number of valid ballots; '64 
Number of abstentions; None 
Number of Members voting; 64 
Required majority; 33 
Number of votes obtained; 


Mexico 60 
Spain 48 
Yugoslavia 5 
Greece ' 4 
Iraq 2 
Dominican Republic 1 
Israel 1 
Monaco 1 
Pakistan -1 
Thailand 1 
Vatican City 1 
Vict-Nam 1 


Having obtained the required majority, Mexico and Spain were elected to 
membership of the Board of Governors, 


11, The PRESIDENT declared the eleotions concluded. The- newly elected 
Members would, under Rule 84 of the Ru&es of Procedure, held office on the 
Board from the end of the third regular session of the General Conference until 
the end of the fifth regular session. He felt sure they would bear in mind 
their high responsibilities and would servo the interests of all Members of the 
Agency during the" next'-two'years. 


ADOPTION 0, THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS TO COMMITTEES (GC(III)/94, 95) 
(continuedi/) 

12, The PRESIDENT recalled that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
had made a proposal for the inclusion of an additional item in the agenda on 


1/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraphs 1-4. 



GC(ITI)/6R.31 
page 5 


the question of granting consultative status with the Agency to the World 
Federation of Trade Unions, and had accompanied its proposal by an explanatory 
memorandum and a draft resolution (GC(III)/94). 


13. The General Committee had met to consider the proposal and in its report 
(GC(III)/95) had unanimously recommended that the question be included as an 
item in the agenda and that it he allocated to a plenary meeting. The General 
Committee had also requested him., when presenting its report, to inform the 
General Conference that members of the Committee had unanimously expressed the 
view that the draft resolution should be adopted by the General Conference, 
without debate. 
14. He suggested therefore that the item be placed on the agenda and that it 
be discussed in plenary meeting. 
2/ 


15. It was so decided.—7 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958-59 


(GC(III)/73, 85, 89 and Add.1, 92) (continued) 


16. Mr. HAMMP (United Arab Republic) said that the Government of the 
United Arab Republic regarded the Agency as a living organism, whose members 
were obviously affected by happenings and developments occurring outside it, 
especially when those developments, by their nature, touched directly or 
indirectly on the purpose for which the Agency had been created. Bearing in 
mind that the aims and objectives of the Agency were to "accelerate and enlarge 
the -contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world", his Government thought that the Conference should express its views 
on a topic of primary importance which was in the thoughts of all the peoples 
of the world, namely the intention of the Government of France to explode an 
atomic weapon in the Sahara Desert, That intention was not of concern to the 
African Continent a.lone| the far-reaching effects of such an explosion would 
extend to other parts of the world as well. It would, moreover, be in complete 
contradiction with the spirit and purpose of the Agoncy's General Conference. 
That France should insist on such a course of action at a time when the three 
big Powers in possession of atomic weapons were trying to reach an agreement 
on the cessation of atomic tests was indeed surprising. 
2/ The revised agenda was issued as document GC(III)/88/Rev.2„ 



GC(III)/OR.31 
page 6 


17. The concern of the Government and people of the United Arab Republic and 
the alarm evinced by the peoples of Africa in general were no figment of the 
imagination, nor were they inspired by the more desire to make propaganda 
against any particular Government. , The United Nations Scientific Committee 
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation had issued a warning against under-estimating 
the effects of atomic radiation and had stated its conclusion that even the 
smallest amounts of radiation were liable to cause deleterious genetic and. 
perhaps somatic effects. The attitude of his Government on the question of 
atomic explosions was familiar to all present^ it had consistently deplored 
them. It was accordingly logical that it should now deplore the latost move 
by France, which had been denounced by many countries and organizations, 
including the Council of the Arab League and the V/orld Health Organization's 
Eegional Committee for the Eastern Mediterranean. The issue had been brought 
to the attention of the United Nations General Assembly at its current session 
by the Government of Morocco, with the support of its sister States, and his 
object, in bringing up the matter in the Conference, was to arouse the conscience 
of France and all mankind to the seriousness of the proposed stop. 
18. He accordingly urged the Conference to join in denouncing Prance's unfortunate 
intention and unanimously to adopt the amendment submitted by Morocco 
(GC(III)/92) to the Czechoslovak draft resolution (GC(III)/89 and Add.1). 
19. The future of the Agency and its programme would undoubtedly depend, on 
various unforeseen political and scientific developments. His delegation, 
adopting the opposite approach from that of the South African delegation,—' 
believed that the Agency's main role during the first five years of its 
existence was to render technical assistance to the less advanced countries 
and, to a certain degree, to some atomically advanced countries if they so 
desired. That did not mean that the Agency should abandon research, although 
such work would necessarily be limited by the scanty financial resources at 
the Agency's disposal at the present time. Since it was a fact that the Agency 
could not compete for the time being with research carried, out nationally, its 
research activities should be restricted to what was needed to anable the Agency 
to discharge its- basic obligations, the main emphasis being placed on the 
programme of technical assistance. 
3/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraphs 73 and 74° 



GC(iIl)/0K.31 
page 7 


20. On the major issue of Agency safeguards, it was well known that the 
Government of the United Arab Republic would have preferred to have no specific 
provision in the Statute entrusting the task of drawing up safeguards to the 
Board of Governors. Since one had been included, however, it was incumbent 
on Members to make their views on the matter known. From the outset, the 
Governor from the United Arab Republic had urged in the Board that the regulations 
concerning health and safety be kept separate from the regulations to 
guard against the diversion of materials supplied by the Agency to military 
purposes. Despite earlier reluctance on the part of some members, the feeling 
in the Board now was that it was practically and technically sound and politically 
wise not to make the one set of regulations dependent on the other. 
The United Arab Republic also appreciated the efforts of the Board to draw up 
flexible rules. That was a realistic approach. The Conference, as the 
Agency's supreme organ, should, of course, have the final say. 
21. He felt bound to express his dissatisfaction with the way in which the 
question of assisting the less developed countries to build medium and small 
power reactors had been handled in the Board of Governors - a basic problem 
of particular importance with which the Agency should be most concerned in the 
future. The demand for power in the less developed countries was undoubtedly 
on the increase. Annual power consumption in the Egyptian province of the 
United Arab Republic, for instance, had doubled between 1952 and 1958, and it 
was ostimatod that it would continue to grow at an average rate of about 
9.4 per cent per annum for the next 20 years. The welcome innovation of a 
public discussion on the future of atomic energy, held on the first day of the 
Conference, had served to clarify ideas regarding the economics of power 
reactors in less developed countrios| and it had been encouraging to hear 
one of the participants, Professor Bhabha, affirm that the cost of power 
derived from nuclear stations in India would be comparable to, and sometimes 
less than, the cost of power derived from conventional sources. The Board 
of Governors should therefore give more attention to the need of the less 
developed countries for small andvmedium power reactors. 
22. Reference had been made in the 1959 programme to the Agency's regional 
activities. The United Arab Republic attached some importance to such 
collective approaches to common problems by neighbouring countries as a means 

0C(III)/CTL.31 
page 8 


of spreading the benefits of their individual efforts and experience. 
Accordingly the Government of the United Arab Republic had requested the< 
Agency for assistance in establishing a regional isotopes centre in Cairo to 


serve the Arab countries. To speak frankly5 his Government had been struck 
by the political manoeuvres and unprecedented efforts that had been made to 
prevent the Agency from meeting that legitimate request. The Board of 


Governors, in dealing with such requests for technical assistance, was in duty 
bound to confine itself to the merits of each case, provided that the request 
was technically sound and submitted and supported by a group of Governments 


linked by various ties. 


23. Coming to activities in his own country., he reported that the Radioisotope 
Centre in Cairo was now fully equipped to carry out an extensive programme of 
research and train!ng, whose scope would be broadened through the valuable help 
of the Agency, That assistance, the Conference could be assured, would serve 
a very useful purpose. The United Arab Republic was looking forward to the 
time when the Agency would be able to utilize the fellowships offered by its 
Government and he was authorized to state that the number had been increased 
to ten. The nuclear physics laboratory at Inshas would be functioning by the 
end of the year. It was fully equipped with up-to-date apparatus and was 
regarded as a self-contained laboratory for training and research. A special 
research programme was planned, using a 2,5-MeV Van de Graaff generator which 
had now been completely assembled. 
24. The research reactor was expected to be in operation by the end of 1960, 
local problems connected with its construction having been satisfactorily 
solved. 
25. In view of the Republic's need for a radiochemical laboratory, it had been 
decided to establish a semi-hot unit, equipped with up-to-date apparatus for the 
analysis of ores, target materials, etc. The programme of nuclear-chemical 
industrialization contemplated for the near future included the manufacture 
of heavy water as a by-product, and the production of thorium, uranium and rare 
oarths through a pilot plant for monazite processing,. 
26. The results so far obtained from the extensive geological survey undertaken 
throughout the United Arab Republic were encouraging. 

GC(III)/OR.31 
page-9 


27. The United Arab Republic had repeatedly manifested its interest in, and 
support for, the Agency. As a mark of that support, his delegation was 
authorized to' pledge an increased contribution, 
28. The Government of the United Arab Republic welcomed international 
scientific co-operation, either through the Agency or by bilateral agreement, 
provided it was proffered in good faith. Bilateral agreements wore a useful 
complement to the Agency's function of promoting and developing the use of 
atomic energy for the benefit of mankind, 
29. The United Arab Republic wished again to stress its support and faith in 
the Agency and its hope that the Agency would continue te give valuable 
assistance to Member States. 
30. Mr. WOVACU (Romania) considered that to appreciate the Agency's 
activities at their proper value it was necessary to make due allowance for 
the difficulties it was encountering during its early stages. The choice 
confronting humanity was, essentially, between using atomic energy in the 
interests of progress and civilization and using it for destructive purposes. 
To pay attention only to its peaceful uses and ignore its military uses would 
be to live in a fool's paradise, indeed, it could be stated with certainty 
that until nuclear tests and the production of nuclear armaments had been 
prohibited, the Agency would be unable successfully to achieve the objectives 
set forth in its Statute. It was therefore the duty of the Agency to 
participate actively in measures to prohibit nuclear weapons and it was to be 
regretted that so far it had failed to do so. 
31. During the past year the Agency had achieved results which were worthy of 
mention. The fellowships programme, for instance, was greatly appreciated by 
many States, as could be scon from the fact that the number of requests for 
fellowships received by the Agency had, in fact, more than doubled by comparison 
with 1958. Convinced that the Agency's fellowship programme played a positive 
role in training staff and in promoting the exchange of experience in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, the Romanian Government, as early as 1958, had 
offered a number of fellowships to the Agency for the training of specialists 
at the Physics Faculty of the University of Bucharest, the Nuclear Technology 
Department of the Bucharest Polytechnics Institute and the Atomic Physics 
Institute of the Academy of Sciences of the Romanian People's Republic. His 

GC(III)/QR.31 
page 10 


Government was also anxious that young Romanian technicians should receive 
specialized.training in nuclear research institutes abroad, with the aid of 
fellowships granted by the Agency. 


32. Another successful achievement that was worthy of mention was the 
successful, though somewhat tardy, conclusion of the first official agrees 
ments relating to the supply of special fissionable materials.—' It was, 
however, regrettable that those materials had. not yet been put at the disposal 
of the countries which most needed them, 
33. His Government also appreciated the value of the programme of conferences 
and. symposia. That programme had met with a wide response among specialists. 
In his delegation's view, it should be continued in future in the form of small 
meetings on well-defined subjects. 
34. An important service provided-by the Agency which should be widely 
developed in future was the supply of technical information and documentary 
material. The directories of isotopes and reactors it had published had 
proved useful to specialists in Romania. 
35. Other programmes could also be quoted to show that the Agency had been 
quite active. Unfortunately, such successes were marred by the tendency already 
pointed out in 1958, but which had recently become more marked - to 
encourage a dangerous policy of discrimination which jeopardized the universality 
of the organization. 
36. Constantly growing as the membership of the Agency undoubtedly was, its 
activities could, not attain their full effect so long as certain States, and 
among them one of the great Powers of the world, the People's P.epublic of 
China, were still prevented by Western obstructionism from taking par.t in the 
Agency's work. 
37. The same discriminatory policy was followed in according consultative 
status to non-governmental organizations. Such status had, for instance, 
been granted to two international trade union organizations, but refused to 
another, the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), which had the largest 
membership of the three, on the ground that WFTU was campaigning for the 
prohibition of atomic weapons. As if such action were contrary to the 
objectives of the Agency! 
4/ INFCIEC/5. 



GC(III)/OR.31 
page 11 


38. Furthermore, notwithstanding the objections raised- in 1953 by the delegations 
of many States, an attempt was being made to admit to consultative status 
organizations such as the European Atomic Energy Community (SURATOM),which was 
closely linked to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization bloc and whose essential 
objective was to further the development of atomic energy for military purposes. 
39. Another hotly debated issue which had now become of even more topical 
importance was the question of safeguards. Under Article XII of the Statute 
the Agency was called upon to take steps to ensure that fissionable material 
made available to beneficiary States was not used for purposes other than those 
set forth in the Statute and, in particular, that it should be used only for 
peaceful purposes, 
40. The recommended control measures would rather have the- effect of transforming 
the Agency from a body providing assistance into a control organ, which 
would be a perversion of its proper statutory functions. The application of 
inspection and control measures to States in receipt of assistance, namely the 
less developed countries, could only load to infringement of the sovereign rights 
of such States. Moreover, such measures could not but retard the rate'of 
development of the peaceful nuclear industries in the less developed countries. 
41. An attempt was being made to rush the adoption of the safeguards and control 
system through the Board of Governors, although it vrould be more natural and more 
in conformity with the Statute for a question of such importance to be submitted 
to the General Conference for its .approval, 
42,' So far, not a single gramme of the more than 5 tons of fissionable material 
at the Agency's disposal had been allocated, despite the creation of an exaggeratedly 
large safeguards service within the Secretariat, and pressure was 
now being applied to 'ensure that an insufficiently prepared system of safeguards 
should be hastily adopted. It could be asked in whose interest that 
policy was being followed. There could be no doubt that it did not benefit 
the less developed countries, which constituted the majority of Member States, 


430 It had been demonstrated in practice that a State receiving assistance could 
not genuinely develop its nuclear industries unless the relevant contracts were 
concluded on the basis of equality and mutual respect. In that regard it might 
be instructive to recall the agreement on technical and scient'ific co-operation 



GC(III)/QR.31 
page 12 


concluded in 1955 between the Romanian People's Republic and the USSR, which 
had permitted Romania to establish its own centre, devoted, to practical and 
research work on nuclear energy. 


44. During recent months Romania had had a number of successes in developing 
research and the practical applications of atomic energy. For example, the 
capacity of the reactor operating at the Atomic Physics Institute had been 
raised from 2 000 to 3 000 lcAr and in August 1959 & 30 MeV betatron accelerator, 
entirely designed and built in Romania, had been put into service at the same 
institute. Recently, various types of nuclear research apparatus, such as 
neutron crystal spectrometers, beta ray spectrographs, para-magnetic resonance 
spectrographs, electronic calculating machines, hodoscopes, output-measuring 
instruments, application counters and so on, had also been constructed under 
the same conditions for use, in conjunction with the reactor, in neutron physics, 
the physics of atomic nuclei and work on the applications of radioisotopes. 
45. The reactor produced radioactive isotopes to meet the requirements of 
the Institute and for industrial purposes, and the construction of a specialized 
laboratory for the preparation of radioisotopes was under way. The application 
of radioisotopes to the petroleum industry and in metallurgy, agriculture, 
medicine, etc. was continuing to develop, A number of now radioisotope 
laboratories had been sot up and the results of the research undertaken at 
the Atomic Physics Institute had been published by specialist reviews in Romania 
and abroad and had been presented at international congresses. The relations 
between the Institute and similar institutes abroad were expanding and recently 
an international symposium on cosmic rays had been organized. 
46. At the present session of the General Conference an appeal'had been made 
to Member States to offer their assistance to the Agency in the form of cash 
contributions, special fissionable materials,, specialized equipment and apparatus, 
fellowships, etc. As far as its resources allowed Romania had already offered 
such assistance to the Agency at the time of the first session of the General 
Conference but regrettably that offer had not yet been taken advantage of, 
Romania was prepared to make every effort to increase assistance to the Agency, 
provided that it could have some assurance that its offers would be put to 
proper use. 

GO (ill)/OK.31 
page 13 


47* In strict logic, the Agency's statutory responsibilities with regard to 
safeguards entailed the conclusion of an international agreement prohibiting 
nuclear weapons and nuclear weapons tests, thus ensuring that all special 
fissionable materials, the hulk of which were at present diverted to military 
programmes, would he used instead for peaceful purposes. 


48. There could he ample scope for international co-operation in the use of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes if, but only if, practical measures were 
taken to reduce armaments and to prohibit atomic weapons, and if an atmosphere 
of growing international confidence was created. 
49. The Romanian delegation therefore believed that the total prohibition of 
nuclear armaments continued to be the greatest and most urgent necessity of 
the present age. The conclusion of an agreement on the prohibition of all 
types of nuclear weapons and their elimination from national armaments would 
remove all obstacles to the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes 
by diverting enormous resources from arms production to the production of 
material goods, 
50. For those reasons the Romanian delegation warmly supported the draft 
resolution submitted by the Czechoslovak delegation, which reflected the 
ardent hopes of peoples throughout the world. 
51. The Romanian delegation wished to assure the General Conference that it 
would never cease to approach the Agency's problems in a spirit of co-operation 
and that, for its part, Romania would do everything in its power to ensure that 
humanity's faith in the achievements of atomic energy would not be in vain. 
52. Mr. SUP JARWO (Indonesia) congratulated the President on his election^ 
his able guidance would undoubtedly lead the Conference to success in its work, 
53. Albeit still in the early stages of its existence, the Agency, it was 
plainj had made a good start in its work. The high expectations evinced by 
Member' States at its inception had laid a heavy responsibility on the Board of 
Governors-and the senior members of the Secretariat, which they had discharged 
most commendably. Despite the inevitable difficulties attending the first 
year of' the Agency's existence, he was unable to accept the view of the South 
African delegate that there had been something in the nature of a crisis of 

GC(III)/OR.31 
page 14 


5/

confidence at that timo.^ The Preparatory Commission had provided a sound 
basis for the immediate tasks, which had enabled the Agency to make rapid 
progress in its second year in both its administrative and. operational sectors, 


54. In the past year requests for technical assistance had flowed in, 
especially from the less developed areas.- The technical assistance mission 
which had visited his country early in the year had done useful work in advising 
on many aspects of Indonesia's programme for the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy,- As a result of that visit,.Indonesia had submitted specific requests 
for technical assistance, starting in 1960, many of which had already received 
the Board's approval. Ho trusted that the remainder would eventually be..given 
similar favourable treatment, 
55. The number of fellowships made available directly by or'through the Agency 
had increased, and that practical and fruitful form of assistance to countries 
which were lagging so far behind in the utilization of atomic energy deserved 
grateful recognition. 
56, It was not his intention to review in detail the achievements of the Agency 
in the past yoar^ as described, in the reports before the Conference, those 
achievements were not unimpressive. The Board of Governors had. shown initiative 
and vision in discharging its functional responsibilities and his delegation 
was happy to have contributed to its work. 


57. Indonesia believed that the future success of the Agency in its worldwide 
mission would depend greatly on how much the common people understood and 
knew of the benefits to be derived from the utilization of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes. It accordingly welcomed the Board's proposal that a worldwide 
campaign should be instituted, in conjunction with the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, to give information and 
instruction on those matters. The two agencies were to publish a textbook 
for the purpose, designed for use in secondary schools throughout the world.. 
It was to be hoped that as many Member States as possible would support the 
campaign and that the two agencies might find it possible to give material 
assistance towards having the textbook translated, adapted for use in individual 
countries and further distributed. 
5/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraph 64. 



GC(III)/0E,31 
page 15 


58, The Indonesian delegation was also convinced of the usefulness.of the 
Agency's publications'programme, including the non-technical bulletin. The 
spreading of information in that way was indeed essential for the achievement 
of the Agency's objectives. A useful purpose was also served by the organizing 
of conferences, seminars and symposia, on specific aspects of atomic energy. 
In such work, special attention should be paid to efforts for promoting the 
speedy development of programmes in the less advanced countries, not only in 
the national interest but for the sake of fruitful co-operation with the more 
advanced countries as well. In-addition, every effort should be made to assist 
the less advanced countries in spreading the, use of radioisotopes in medicine 
and agriculture. It was apparent, too, that those countries would greatly 
benefit from small or medium-sized reactors^ the study which the Agency was 
therefore undertaking in pursuance of resolution GC(II)/27 was therefore most 
commendable, 


39. It was vital for the Agency to find the best means of meeting the needs 
of the less developed countries in order that they might share in the benefits 
to be derived from the exploitation of atomic energy. He entirely agreed with 
the Director General that a dangerous situation might arise if the development 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy led to a broadening, rather than a 
6/ 


narrowing, of the gap between the advanced and the less developed countries.—' 
That was a danger that must be obvious to all, in view of the enormous scientific 
and technical advances made in the last few years by the advanced countries 
and the practical difficulties encountered by the Agency in discharging its 
functions. The fundamental difficulty seemed to lie in the statutory organization 
of the Agency itself, in the fact that its operational activities had 
to be financed from the General Fund, which was fed by voluntary contributions. 
That arrangement had not worked well. Ho was in full agreement with the 
South African delegate that the system of financing would become Increasingly 
unsatisfactory as the operational programme expanded,-*-' The basic problem 
was that contributions wore not forthcoming to meet the demands, as was amply 
illustrated by the fact that out of US $1.5 million pledged for 1959, only 
about $1.1 million had been received by 30 June 1959. The prospects for 1960 
wore no more encouraging. According to an estimate made by the Secretariat, 
the Agency would in 1960 require budgetary appropriations of $1 450 000 for 
fellowships and training and $1 110 000 for economic, technical and research 

6/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraph 15. 
7/ Ibid., paragraph 71. 



GO(III)/OR.31 
page 16 


assistance,, if the requests received from Member States were to be mot. Those 
figures represented an increase of more than 100 per cent as compared with the 
1959 estimated programme for the two item's, thus reflecting the greatly increased 
interest of Member States, Unfortunately, there seemed no likelihood 
that the Agency would be able to meet those encouraging requests and the Board 
of Governors had had no choice but to reduce the estimate to $2 million, including 
the expected contribution of $600 000 from the Expanded Programme of 
Technical Assistance, 


60. Unless some way could be found to resolve the problem of the General Fund, 
the Agency would face greater difficulties in the future and its proper functioning 
would be seriously endangered. Obviously, much would depend on the 
attitude of the advanced and rich Powers. 
61. His delegation had greatly appreciated the importance laid by the United 
States on the Agency's operational programme, with particular reference to the 
needs of the loss developed countries, including small and medium-sized power 
reactors. It particularly welcomed the United States stand regarding the 
need for providing the less developed countries with adequate equipment to 
ad^nco their nation* prog™-,..^ 
62. His delegation looked forward to the time when a programme commensurate 
with needs would be irnplomcntod and hoped that the present situation, which 
unavoidably entailed limitations on the provision of necessary equipment to 
accompany technical assistance, could be alleviated, as soon as possible. For 
that purpose, combined efforts would be needed and the Indonesian delegation 
welcomed the .joint statement issued by the Chairman of the United States 
Atomic Energy Commission and the Head of the Central Atomic Energy Utilization 
Board of the USSR on 15 September 1959, as likely to inaugurate closer and 
more fruitful co-operation between the two big atomic Powers in utilizing 
the Agency more effectively. It was undeniable that the success of the Agency 
depended greatly on co-operation and understanding between the United States 
and the USSR. 
63. The complaint had been made that there were not enough scientists . 
available for the Agency's increasing work. In his view the real difficulty 
8/ 0C(III)/0H.28, paragraphs p, 15 and 16. 



GC(III)/OR.31 
page 17 


was that many scientists were engaged in work on atomic energy which was still 
beyond the scope of the Agency. As the United States delegate had said, there 
existed a wealth of scientific and technical ability on which the Agency could 
draw for the benefit of all Members. It would indeed be sad if the Agency wore 
unable to advance its work for peace because of lack of scientific staff. 


64. Another matter that had unfortunately become a problem was the question of 
safeguards against diversion to military purposes of materials supplied by the 
Agency. His delegation accepted that it was reasonable in principle to establish 
safeguards, in conformity with Article XII of the Statute. The assistance 
provided by the Agency was designed exclusively for peaceful purposes. No 
diversion to military uses could be tolerated and accordingly there must be 
some control. The point at issue was how and to what extent the Agency should 
oxercise that control. Article XII stated that control was justified only to 
the extent relevant to the project or arrangement. It was undeniable that 
undue and rigid control would servo no useful purpose. The Member States 
requesting the Agency's assistance wore capable only of using atomic energy for 
peaceful programmes. There was no urgent need for the type of rigid control 
advocated by some Members of the Agency. Furthermore, any country intending 
to produce atomic or hydrogen bombs would not turn to the Agency for help.. 
65. If the Agency applied rigid controls on materials it supplied for peaceful 
programmes, an anomalous situation would results countries operating atomic 
energy programmes for peaceful purposes would be strictly controlled, Tirhcroas 
bomb-producing countries wore entirely free of control. For that reason ho 
could not support the Director General's contention that the proposed system 
of safeguards would cause no difficulty to a, country having only peaceful 
intentions, and that it would be troublesome only to a country which v*rishod 
to cheat .^ 
66. Taking a realistic viow, the Indonesian delegation vrould maintain its 
stand that control should be applied only as a matter of principle and only 
to the extent relevant to the project. It should not be overlooked that, as 
the delegate of France had pointed out,—' the question of control was not a 
technical matter alone, it had psychological and political angles as well. 
Once mutual confidence among Members of the Agency had improved, the problem 
of control would solve itself in a satisfactory way. 
9/ GC(III)/OR,26, paragraph 25. 
10/ GC(III)/0H.28, paragraph 31. 



GC(III)/0E.31 
page 18 


67. Working relationships and close contacts between the Agency and its 
Members,, in particular those from less developed areas, should he encouraged 
and stimulated. The countries far distant from the Agency's He&dquarters 
Yircre at a disadvantage in those respects and stops should ho taken to mitigate 
that disadvantage. 
68. In conclusion, he reiterated the faith of his Government in the principles 
and purposes of the Agency. Svory effort should he made to encourage cooperation 
in carrying out the- Agency's great and nohle task. Advantage should 
ho taken of the present opportunity for relaxing international tensions in order 
to work for the Agency's harmonious growth, A han on nuclear tests - which 
now seemed a possibility - would open new prospects for achieving the Agency's 
goals. 
69. Mr, El AHNABI (Tunisia) remarked that significant progress had been 
made by the Agency since its inception. The publications issued^ including the 
Directory of Radioisotopes;, the Manual on the Safe Handling of Radioisotopes 
and the Directory of Nuclear Reactors, wore of considerable scientific importances 
the non-technical bulletin had appeared and regulations were being drawn up in 
connaxion with the handling of radioisotopes, waste disposal and civil and State 
responsibility for nuclear hazards. 
70. He had been very glad to note that three suggestions made by Tunisia had 
been followed up. The Conference on the Disposal of Radioactive 'Taste which 
would be held in Monaco would offer a good example of collaboration with other 
international organizations. Again, the Secretariat was now carrying out an 
investigation into the economics of small reactors. And lastly, the Agency's 
laboratory Yrould lay down standards for the measurement of radioactivity. 
71. Ho agreed with a number of suggestions which had been made by the United 
States delegate.—' In particular, ho felt that greater use could be made of 
the mobile radioisotope laboratories if the transport and other costs could be 
roduced. The Agency had not yet set up a service which could advise on radioisotopes 
and reactors - a service which could be of the greatest assistance to 
the smaller countries. An arrangement should he made to publish results 
ll/ Ibid., , paragraphs 1-28. 



GC(III)/0fi.31 
page 19 


obtained by national research, laboratories in order to keep Member States 


informed and avoid unnecessary duplication. It would also be helpful to have 


quarterly reports on new developments in connexion with reactors and radio


isotopes. Many countries were installing their first reactors and the Agency 


should circulate suitable information to enable them to guard against the 


dan ge r s invo 1 ve d. 


72. Reference had already been made to the lack of applicants for the fissionable 
materials the Agency had at its disposal, Tunisia intended to install 
one French and one United States reactor and would be applying for ton kilogrammes 
of enriched uranium. He hoped that the regulations attaching to the 
provision of that uranium would be flexible and not unnecessarily complicated, 
73. Tunisia had intended to experiment with the production of electricity from 
nuclear sources, but meanwhile new supplies of gas and petrol from the Sahara 
had modified the supply position. It had been decided not to do anything 
further until more information was available from the Agency about the economics 
of small reactors. There wore many industrial processes also in which the heat 
from reactors might be employed, and information about the economics of such 
processes would be very welcome. 
74* Some reference had been made to the fact that the Agency had not succeeded 


in enlisting the services of outstanding scientists. He would suggest in that 
respect that it might follow the example of commercial firms and arrange con


tracts by which the services of such scientists could be obtained on a consul


tative basis. 


75° Ho folt quite sure that the proposed regional radioisotope centre for the 
Middle East would be of the greatest benefit to the area in question. Unfortunately, 
because of unsatisfactory communications, that centre could not 


serve North Africa and the Agency should seriously consider providing a similar 
centre for~ North Africa. 


76, He also wished to suggest that it might be necessary to increase the member


ship of the Board of Governors, At present one scat was allocated to Africa 
and the Middle Eastf South Africa as a producer of uranium had a separate seat. 


Since the Agency had been set up, a number of countries had achieved independence 
and there would be others shortly. Ho did not wish to introduce a formal 
resolution but suggested that consideration should now be given to the idea 
of providing separate seats for North Africa and the Middle Sast. 



GC(III)/GR.31 
page 20 


77° The elimination of radioactive waste was a problem which was not confined 
to nuclear reactors. Since 1945 there had been hundreds of atomic explosions. 
No procedures had been laid down for the elimination of wastes deriving from 
those explosions and nothing exact was known about the possible dangers involved. 
The intention of the French authorities to explode an atomic bomb in 
the Sahara had caused considerable emotion in the Forth African countries. He 
could understand the technical reasons which prompted the French authorities to 
plan that explosion but felt they might be more than offset by the psychological 
effects on countries which wore friendly to Prance, especially now that there 
was a prospect of a lessoning of political tension in Forth Africa, as a whole. 
After all the explosions which had taken place, there was little to be learned 
about atomic explosions in the atmosphere. Great interest had been expressed,, 
however, at the 1958 Geneva Conference in the possibility of utilizing underground 
explosions for such purposes as the preparation of the beds of canals. 
Ho would suggest to the French delegation that they put forward to their own 
authorities the possibility of exploding the French atomic bomb underground 
rather than in the atmosphere above the Sahara dosert. 


78. Mr. de ERICE (Spain) congratulated the President on his election and 
said that Spain would continue to collaborate wholeheartedly with the Agency. 
The Agency was far from perfect but most of its defects wore those which had to 
be expected in any new and growing organization. He wished to express his 
gratitude to all who had voted for the election of Spain to membership of the 
Board of Governors. 
79. Spain placed the greatest hopes in the development of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes. In spite of a great increase in hydroelectric output in 
recent years, its needs wore far from satisfied,, and atomic energy might provide 
the solution. There were uranium ore deposits in Cordoba and Salamanca, and 
processing plants were being set up to deal with them. The sale of uranium 
ore was completely free, and the national atomic energy authority was in the 
same position as any other prospective buyers in that respect. A pilot plant 
had been set up at the Moncloa centre for the preparation of uranium concentrates, 
salts and metal, and various processes had. been tried out for the production of 
nuclear-pure uranium. 'In October 1959 a now plant would go into operation 
in Andujar for the preparation of uranium concentrates. In the initial stages 

GC(III)/0E.31 
pago 21 


it would treat 200 tons of ore daily and have an annual production of 70 tons 


of contained. urn,nium. Uranium oxide was being produced on a small scale in 


laboratories and. fuel elements containing enriched uranium wore also being 


produced. 


80„ In October 1953, a 3 000 k'.7 swimming-pool reactor at Moncloa had reached 

criticality. Sinco February 1959 it had been functioning at its full output. 


The building of a doublc--purposo reactor was also being studied. It would 


have an output of 30 1-IeV and also serve for neutron flux experiments. Prelim


inary work had bec-n done in co-operation with throe companies selected from 


among fourteen European and American companies and it had been decided that 


the most suitable tjpc would be a reactor moderated with heavy water and cooled 


by organic liquids, using natural uranium oxide fuel together with rome 20 per 
, cent enriched, uranium elements. 


81c Spain was co-operating in atomic energy matters with the appropriate organ 
of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation, 

82. Spain had offered fellowships to the Agency, a number of which had been 
taken up ~QJ Latin American citizens„ In addition to the benefits of the 
fellowship programme as a whole, it was worth remembering that the exchange of 
students and. experts was helping to create a body of scientists who knew and 
could collaborate with each other in practically all countries throughout the 
world. The programme was thus contributing to international collaboration in 
the very broadest sense. 
83. His Government believed that more could be done in connexion with technical 
assistance, in spite of ire obvious budgetary difficulties. He suggested that 
the Agency migb/o create technical assistance funds under which technical assistance 
would, as at present, be made available to the less developed countries 
but, in additionj assistance could be given to countries which wore more advanced 
but still unable to finance particular development programmes. If the 
Agency wore not itself able to provide the necessary funds, it might help the 
countries in question to obtain loans from third parties. 
84. He was fully in agreement with the suggestions which had been made by 
the delegate of the Union of South Africa in connexion with the proposed 

GO(III)/OR.31 
page 22 


12/ 


modification of the Statute^—' he also supported the suggestion just ma do 
by the delegate of Tunisia with regard to modification of the Board's membership. 
He was not, however, in a position to make a specific proposal himself 
at that time 


The meeting rose at 6 p.m., 


12/ GC(III)/OR.26, paragraph 72. 



INTERNATIONAL 

Distr. 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY GENERAL 

GC(III)/OR.32 
9 December 1959 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 28 September 1959, at 9.50 a.m. 


President: 
Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


10 
General debate and report of the Board 1-54 
of Governors for the year 1958-59 
(continued) 


Statements by the delegates of Greece, 
China, Portugal, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Sweden, Iraq, and Denmark 


23 
Opening date of the fourth regular session 55 - 56 


Tribute to the memory of the Prime Minister 57 - 58 
of Ceylon 


* GC(III)/88/Rev.2. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2. 

GC(III)/OR.32 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE TEAR 1958-59 
(GO(III)/73, 85, 89 and Add.1, 92) (continued) 


1. Mr. SPANIDIS (Greece) congratulated the President on his election 
and thanked those delegates who, on the proposal of Sweden, had elected a 
representative of Greece as Vice-President of the General Conference, Ho 
noted further that the work and efficiency of the Board of Governors had led 
to notable progress in such matters as safeguards, technical assistance and 
health and safety.and that two'years after its establishment the Agency had 
already largely achieved its initial ohjectives, 
2. During the past year Greece had received technical assistance from the 
Agency, including valuable expert advice on a number of projects. In the 
spring, very fruitful discussions had been held with the Greek authorities 
during the visit of the Director General and members of the Secretariat to 
Greece. The Agency had also sent its mobile laboratory to the Radioisotope 
School in Athens and many students had thus been able to acquire considerable , 
practical experience on the spot. Greece had been one of the first countries 
to make use of the mobile laboratory and it was highly desirable that other 
llenbor States should have an opportunity of doing so. 
3. It was encouraging to note that the Agency was considering the possibility 
of establishing regional centres for,training in the use of radioisotopes and 
there was every reason to believe that it would carefully consider the proposals 
made on that subject in due course. Greece believed that the exchange 
of information and scientific data was extremely useful and had noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency was organizing numerous scientific and technical 
conferences and meetings. It earnestly hoped that a symposium on the use of 
radioisotopes in dating would be included in the 1960 programme and was prepared 
to make all the necessary arrangements for holding such a symposium in Athens. 
Greece also attached great importance to investigation of the prospects of 
using nuclear power in the less developed countries and hoped that a team of 
Agency experts could be appointed to carry out such an investigation .in the 
near future. 
4. In view of the nature of the Agency and its objectives, Greece believed, 
as did many small countries, that political considerations ought to play'only 

GC(III)/0E.32 
page 3 


a minor part in the Agency's decisions- For its part, "Greece had'complete 
confidence in the future of an organization which was working exclusively in 
the cause of peace and in which millions of human beings placed their hopes of 
improving their living conditions and combatting poverty. 


5. Mr. HUANG (Hepublic of China) said he was glad to note that, under 
the wise guidance of the Chairman of the Board of Governors and the Director 
General, the Agency had made notable progress on the lines recommended by the 
General Conference at its second session. In particular, much had been achieved 
in the provision of technical.assistance, some fifty experts and three preliminary 
assistance missions having been sent out. 
6. China had been happy to receive one of those missions, whose competence 
and wise advice on health physics and the eoonoraic and technical aspects of 
reactors had been much appreciated in Taiwan. 
7. He then referred to what was being done in Taiwan to develop the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. Hospitals, agricultural colleges and industrial firms 
were deeply interested in the uses of radioisotopes. The Taiwan National 
University Hospital was using a cobalt-60 unit of 1 000 curies for the treatment 
of cancer cases and iodine-131 for studying goitre. The results obtained had 
been reported at a meeting of the second United Nations International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy (the second Geneva conference). Tests 
wore being made, with the aid of radiophosphorus, on the use of.fertilizers in 
boot and sugar-cane growing, and experiments and research were also being 
carried out on mutations in rice, potatoes and the soya bean. 
8. Electric power production had been increased by 20^ in Taiwan during the 
past few yearsf it had now,reached 340 kWh a head annually - a figure second 
only to Japan in the Ear East. Since conventional power resources wore limited, 
it was expected that they would have to be supplemented by nuclear power within 
ten years, and to that end the Taiwan Power Company had sent young engineers 
abroad to be trained in nuclear technology. 
9. The Nuclear Science Institute of the Tsing-Hua National University already 
possessed a well-equipped .laboratory, the facilities of which included a 3 KoY 
van do Graaff accelerator and a 1 000 kW swimming-pool reactor which was expected 
to become critical at the beginning of 1960. 

GC(III)/OR.32 
page 4 


10. Tlic Chinese authorities were also taking part in research organized on 
an international scale. A study on fall-out was being carried out jointly 
with the Health and Safety Laboratory of the United States Atomic Energy Commission 
and similar arrangements might perhaps be made with the Agency. An 
engineer from the Taiwan Power Company, who had been trained in the United 
States, had been lent to the Japanese Atomic Energy Commission and the Nuclear 
Science Institute of the Tsing-ITua National University was to take two young 
scientists from the Philippines for instruction in the working of its reactor. 
When the laboratory was fully equipped the Institute might perhaps arrange 
training courses for research workers from other countries. 
11. Science and technology knew no frontiers and must not be the monopoly of, 
anyone. China, a country with an ancient culture, was a newcomer in science, 
but in concert with other countries it would take all the necessary stops to 
expand the fruitful international co-operation which had been established under 
the auspices of the Agency. 
12. "Mr. EONTES (Portugal) referred to the friendship which had linked 
Japan and Portugal for many centuries and congratulated Mr. Puruuchi on his 
eloction as President of the General Conference. 
13. Although the past year could still be regarded as a starting period, the 
Agency had already gone a long way towards achieving its initial objectives, 
in particular in the production of radioisotopes and their use in industry, 
agriculture, medicine and research and in the study of the technical and economic 
aspects of the production of nuclear power. In addition, the work undertaken 
on such matters as technical assistance,, fellowships, research contracts, the 
publication of scientific and technical information manuals, the drafting of 
rules and recommendations and the organization of scientific conferences and 
symposia contributed effectively towards achieving the Agency's statutory 
objectives. 
14. The Portuguese Nuclear Energy Commission had started building a nuclear 
research centre and had just completed a physics laboratory, the equipment of 
which included two particle accelerators - one a 2 million volt van de Graaff 
and the other a 600 000 volt Cockroft-Walton machine. Thanks to the valuable 
assistance of the United States, Portugal, within a few months, would have a 
1 1-117 swimming-pool reactor running on 20^ enriched uranium fuel elements. 

GC(III)/OR.32 
page 5 


Tlio centre would also include a pilot plant for producing pure uranium metal; 
and a chemical and metallurgical laboratory. The auxiliary installations had 
already been completed. If everything went according to plan, the various 
installations at the centre should he in full operation during the second half 
of 1960, and Portugal's need for fellowships and specialized technical assistance 
would then he increased* 

15. Prospecting for uranium ores - another activity which the Nuclear Energy 
Commission had been carrying on since its establishment - was practically 
finished in continental Portugal, but was to be continued in the Portuguese , 
overseas provinces. Radioisotopes were being increasingly used in medicine, 
agriculture and industry. 
16. After 1960, when the nuclear research centre would be completed, Portugal 
would be able to strengthen its scientific and technical ties with the Agency, 
ITuclcar power generation was still being considered as a future need, but 
despite over-increasing use of hydro-clcctric resources and the rapid growth 
of electricity consumption, Portugal did not, for the time being, need to build 
nuclear power stations. 
17. Portugal had always given the Agency its sincere co-operation and would 
not fail in the future to associate itself with the Agency's continued endeavours 
to achieve its main objective, namely to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. 
18. Mr. SEVCHMKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) observed that 
in the period from 1 January 1958 to 30 June 1959 the Agency's activities had 
expanded, At first the Agency had dealt mainly with administrative matters 
and all its activities had been largely dominated by administrative considerations, 
but in 1958-59 the Board of Governors and the Agency had had to settle 
a number of questions directly concerned with operationss the Agency had given 
technical assistance to various countries, helped Japan to procure three tons 
of tiranium, awarded 165 fellowships, selected 349 fellows, issued most successful 
publications, etc, 
19. In the matter of technical assistance to the less developed countries, the 
Agency's operations were still inadequate. The use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes was developing so fast in several countries that if the Agency drew 

GC(III)/OR.32 
page 6 


on their experience, it would be perfectly capable of providing the less 
doveloped countries with considerable practical assistance in the uso of radioisotopes 
and radiation sources in industry, agriculture and medicine., and even 
assistance in the generation of electricity and industrial heating. 


20. The Byelorussian delegation considered that the Agency should speed up 
its operations and make unceasing efforts to achieve the main objective prescribed 
in its Statute, namely "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world", above all 
in the economically less developed countries which had the greatest need to 
make use of the recent advances in nuclear science and engineering. 
21. It was regrettable that international collaboration on atomic energy was 
i 


artificially restricted because, for reasons which were well known, several 
countries, in particular the People's Republic of China, were not talcing part 
in the Agency's work. Certain Western States had imposed on the Board of 
Governors, in violation of the Statute, an arbitrary decision to provide technical 
assistance to the supporters of Chiang Kai-Shek. The provision of such 
assistance to the politically bankrupt rulers of Taiwan could merely serve to 
complicate the Agency's work, since only the Central People's Government of the 
People's Republic of China could represent China. 


22. . Discrimination had also been shown in the Board's unfair decision concerning 
the World Federation of Trade Unions (WTU). The discriminatory nature 
of that decision was shown by the fact that the Board, after refusing to grant 
WTU consultative status with the Agency, had granted consultative status to 
the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the International 
Federation of Christian Trade Unions, 
23. The Byelorussian delegation agreed with the criticisms which had been nadc 
regarding the defective methods of work which had been used for the Agency's 
operations in the recent past. It was stated in the Programme and Budget for 
1960^ that "1960 should be a year of consolidation during which working procedures 
should be tested and refined ...." Consolidation and further refinement 
of- tested methods of work was certainly useful and necessary, but 1960 
should not be used for consolidating methods which wore defective and discriminatory. 
It wont without saying that if such methods were adopted;, 
1/ GC(III)/75, paragraph 14. 



GC(III)/0E.32 
page 7 


international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy would suffer 


gravely. Any further expansion of co-operation must he based on the principles 


of universal non-discrimination and peaceful co-existence of all States, what


ever their social and economic structures. 


24. Nothing - could do more to promote the expansion of international co-operation 
than the conclusion of an agreement to prohibit nuclear weapons and eliminate 
thorn from national armaments. 
25' Mention should be made of the considerable importance of the exchange of 
visits between the leaders of the Soviet Union 'and the United States of America, 
which would make it possible to end the cold war and prepare the way for improved 

international relations. 


26. Nothing would contribute as'effectively to the expansion of the Agency's, 
activities as the complete and general disarmament proposed-by Mr* -Khrushchev, 
President of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, in his speech to the 
General Assembly of.the United Nations. Universal and complete disarmament 
and the prohibition of atomic weapons would greatly further the Agency's activities 
and enable it to, perform its statutory functions, for it would be able to 
draw on large material and scientific resources and use them to increase material 
v/oll-being, 
27. He regretted that the Agency had so far remained completely silent on that 
question and that its programme of work made no reference to the part it should 
play in the campaign to ban atomic-weapons. Nor had the Agency come out in 
favour of the cessation,of atomic, and thermonuclear weapons tests whioh all man~ 
kind was demanding in its anxiety over-the.growing threat of ionizing radiations 
and the disastrous consequences of-a nuclear war. 
28. Such indifference could not be justified by arguing that the Agency was 
required to deal with purely technical matters and not with political problems. 
That argument could not be taken into consideration for it was well known,that 
on several questions, such as the admission of the Chiang Kai-Shek clique, 
South Korea and South Viot-Nam to membership of the Agency, arid the refusal to 
grant WTU consultative status,.the Agency had taken discriminatory decisions 
dictated tj purely political considerations. 

GO(III)/OE.32 
page 0 


29- Some people were trying to seal off the Agency's work on the peaceful uses 


of atomic energy from questions relating to nuclear disarmament and the prohibition 
of atomic and thermonuclear weapons tests. But the two matters could 
not be isolated from one another for, under Article HT.B.l of the Statute, 
wore not the Agency's activities directly linked with United Nations-.activitiog 
relating to disarmament, 


30. In view of those considerations, the Byelorussian delegation supported the 
Czechoslovak draft resolution (GC(III)/89 and Add.1) and urged the General Conference 
to adopt it unanimously. 
31. Ho felt sure that the Agency would do everything it could to place all the 
great scientific and technical achievements and.discoveries in nuclear energy 
at the service of peace, progress and the well-being of all nations, 
32. Mr^ CEDERWAL1 (Sweden) pointed out that at the second session of the 
General Conference the Swedish delegation had stressed the importance, of an 
empirical approach to the development of the Agency's activities and of undertaking 
only tasks for which there was an actual need among Member States and 
2/ 


which were not already being carried out by other bodies.—' That prudent 


approach was still required in order to get the best results from available 


resources. 


33- The Swedish delegation was glad to note that the Agency had, in general, 
lived by that rule during the past year, and that the draft programme for 1960 
was, by and large, a sensible one, paying hoed to current realities rather than 
past expectations, The proposed budget reflected a stabilization of the 
Agency's work. As the Secretariat gradually became more experienced, the 
Board of Governors should be able to concentrate most of its attention on the 
drafting of general directives. Ho would therefore confine himself to mentioning 
a few of the spheres in which the Agency could prove its usefulness. 


34" The first was the drafting of guiding principles, regulations and conventions 
relating to legal problems and to health and safety techniques. For 
example, the work being done on the transport of fuel elements and on civil 
liability promised to be of value to all Member States. Another subject to be 


2/ GC(II)/OR.17, paragraph 20. 



GC(III)/0E.32 
page 9 


considered in that light was the nuclear propulsion of ships. In such natters, 


joint action was important to facilitate development of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. In other matters, such as the disposal of radioactive waste 
and reactor safety, the drafting of rules- should prevent the estahlishmcnt of 
had practices and maintain the good safety record which was happily being built 
up in the nuclear industry. 


35* A second sphere was that of advice and assistance to less developed countries. 
Although that work was primarily of benefit to a particular category 
of Hember States, the Swedish delegation gladly supported it. Use of atonic 
energy was not, however, an end in itself and the need for it could ho judged 


only by considering the totality of economic and human resources in a particular 
area, together with the total funds available for technical assistance. Close 


co-ordination with other agencies and institutions, which the Agency's parti


cipation in the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance would ensure, was 
therefore very important. Within that framework the Agency's advisory missions 
and experts would he of value whether or not their activities resulted in spectacular 
projects. A candid exchange of information on the cost of nuclear 
power was of groat value to all Members, 


36. A further type of activity was the organizing of conferences and symposia 
on clearly defined scientific and technical subjects. The Swedish exports who 
had attended such meetings arranged by -the Agency wore well satisfied with the 
choice of'subjects and the assistance provided by the Secretariat. However, 
oven there an clement of caution was necessary and one must not assume that an 
atomic export could spend his whole career running from one conference to 
another. 
37* As an indication of its support for the Agency's work the Swedish Government 
had made a voluntary contribution of $15 000 to the operational budget fop 
1959. A contribution of the same amount had already been proposed by the 
Swedish authorities for 1960, 


38* The Swedish Government would judge each now proposal on its merits, the 
criteria being its usefulness cither to all.Member States or to the less developed 
countries. The more the Agency's deliberations could be concentrated on such 
issues and the less political considerations were allowed to influence thorn, the 
more rapid the success of the Agency would be. 



GC(III)/OR.32 
page 10 


39o Mr. HASANI (Iraq.) said that the Board's annual report to the General 
Conference (GC(III)/73) showed how much the Agency's work had done to fostor 
technical research and economic development in Member States, 


40. Iraq, conscious of the constructive contribution that tracer techniques 
could make towards the development of medicine, industry and agriculture, had 
initiated a long-term programme to meet the requirements of research into tracer 
techniques and their application. That programme covered specialist training 
in basic and applied nuclear science, the establishment of a training and 
research centre, the installation of a research reactor and expansion of the 
existing medical radioisotope centre. 
41. Since the Agency's principal objective was to foster the use of atomic 
energy for the benefit of mankind and not for its extermination, it was most 
regrettable that one of its Member States was at present preparing to make a 
nuclear weapon test. Iraq therefore appealed to all Members to support tlio 
call of Morocco for the cessation of nuclear weapon tests.—' 
42. Iraq was among those States who considered that the provisions for the 
representation of Africa and the Middle Eastern area needed revision. It was 
discussing the issue with the countries concerned, and a joint draft resolution 
on the subject would be submitted in due course. 
43, Mr. BJERGE (Denmark) said that, after, an initial period in which the 
Agency had necessarily had to devote much effort to organizing its work, it 
could now devote its efforts to activities directly related to its noble aims. 


44. Denmark owed its thanks to the Agency for granting fellowships to some of 
its nationals. Also through the Agency's help, one of France's experts in 
non-ferrous metallurgy had made an analysis of the Danish educational and 
research facility needs in that respect and Denmark had also received expert 
assistance from the United States in connexion with non-ferrous metallurgy. 
45. He would like to comment on three aspects of the Agency's work. First, 
the establishment and administration of safeguards was one of the statutory 
functions of the Agency, and the Board of Governors was making real progress 
in the mattery its endeavours enjoyed the Danish Government's full support. 
There would be a long and difficult way to go. before security against diversion 
3/ GC(III)/0B.30, paragraph 39. 



QC(III)/OR.32 .' ' 


page 11 


of fissionable material was obtained. That security, how ever ,;.w.as of such 
vital interest to all States that the problem's ought to be solved in an undogmatic 
way. Denmark depended for uranium entirely on delivery from outside, 
and found it a little 'difficult fully to understand some countries* anxieties 
about the application of safeguards. It had never regarded its bilateral 
agreements as contrary to the concept of sovereignty,, and would welcome the 
establishment'of any reasonable control system- on a wider1basis. 

46. The whole matter was, of course, closely bound up with the question of 
the future position of the Agency as a supplier of fissionable materials. The 
uncertainty in that respect need not delay action, however. In his Government's 
view, it was not impossible to envisage a future system by which nuclear 
materials would be bought in the open market but subjected by mutual consent 
to Agency safeguards. 
47- Secondly, the Danish Government wholeheartedly supported the Agency's 
technical assistance activities. Yerj few countries were really advanced with 
regard to atomic energy, and nearly all countries might have good reason for 
recourse to Agency assistance. 

48. A third aspect of the Agency's activities was its work on legal problems 
concerning reactor safety, transport of radioactive matter, waste disposal, 
civil liability and other problems of world-wide interest. Denmark, a small 
country surrounded by shallow sea, was necessarily directly.-.conc.er2iSd_iii.-i.that • 
side of the Agency's work. It would also be keenly interested in^studies of 
the legal aspects of the nuclear propulsion of shipping. 
49- In regard to the Agency's structure, a question touched'on by other speakers 
in the debate, he thought it better not to formulate strict rules but rather to 
hope for the growth of a tradition which struck a suitable balance between the 
functions of the Director General. and Secretariat'and- those-of- the.-Board... The 
smaller countries would not find it at all easy to. sit on„the Board if it met 
too often, and would find it difficult to send their leading authorities on 
atomic energy as Governors'or advisers. " Yet the Agency's.organs-must keep in 
touch with the technical and scientific efforts of Member States. '•'•" 


50. As the Agency's activities became based on a steadily developing tradition, 
tiles'- should to a corresponding degrees ease to^-ref lect -the- political—difficulties 
vhic£i now dominated the world, thereby enabling the Agency to devote all its 
offorts to the aims set out in its Statute. 

GC(III)/OR.32 
page 12 


51. The PRESIDENT noted that the list of speakers in the general debate 
was exhausted. However, the Conference had still to decide the procedure for 
discussion of the draft resolution presented during the general dehate by the 
Czechoslovak delegation (GC(III)/89 and Add.1). Under normal procedure - as 
for instance that followed by the General Assembly.of the United Nations --a 
draft resolution introduced during the general debate should he referred to 
the General Committee, which, under Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure, would 
have to determine the item of the agenda under which that draft resolution could 
be considered or whether the inclusion of a new item was necessary, and submit 
an appropriate recommendation to the General Conference in plenary meeting. 
The intention to follow that normal practice with respect to any questions 
arising in the general debate was also borne out by the annotation to item 10 
of the provisional agenda—' , 


52. There seemed, however, to be a practical reason for adopting a simplified 
procedure in the present instance, without creating in any sense,a precedent. 
Since the Conference had little time in which to finish its work, it might conveniently 
dispense with scrutiny by the General Committee and examine the draft 
resolution and the amendment to it (GC(III)/92) directly in plenary meeting. 
53. He therefore proposed that the texts be examined at the next plenary 
meeting. 
54. It was go decided, 
OPENING MTE OF THE FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


55. The PRESIDENT reported that the General Committee had recommendod 
that Tuesday, 20 September 1960, be fixed as the opening date of the fourth 
regular session of the General Conference. 
56. The recommendation of the General Committee was adopted. 
TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF SHE PRIME MINISTER OF CEYLON 


57. The PRESIDENT invited delegates to observe one minute's silence in 
memory of Mr. Bandaran^ike, Prime Minister of C-eylon, who had died in tragic 
circumstances. 
58. All; present stood in silence for one minute. 
The meeting rose at 11,5 a-.m. 


Aj GC(III)/72. 


INTERNATIONAL 

Distr.


ATOMIC 
ENERGY AGENCY 

GENERAL 


GC(III)/OR.33 
9 December 1959 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna;, 
on Thursday, 1 October 1959, at 4,35 p,m, 


President: 
Mr, FURUUCHI (Japan) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


11 
The Agency's annual report to the United Nations "1 - 7 
General Assembly for 1958-59 


21 
Election of members of the Agency's Staff Pension 8-10 
Committee 


22 
The Agency's annual report to the Economic and 11 - 14 
Social Council of the United Nations for 1959-60 


15 
Rules regarding the acceptance of voluntary con— 15 - 17 
tributions of money to the Agency 


16 
The Agency's accounts for 1957-58 18 - 20 


18 
The relations of the Agency with the specialized 21 - 23 
agencies 


19 
Representation of intergovernmental organizations 24 — 27 
at the fourth regular session 


The principles to govern the provision of technical 
assistance by the Agency 28 - 30 


24 


* GC(III)/88/Rev.2. 
N,B. 
The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2, 



GG'(III)/OR,33 
page 2 


THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORT TO THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY FOR 
1958-59 (GC(III)/74) 


1. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to examine the Agency's 
annual report to the United Nations General Assembly for 1958-59 (GC(III)/74). 
2. Mr. ZAMYATIN (Unio n of Soviet Socialist Republics) had no objection 
to approving the report as a whole. Nevertheless, as several chapters of the 
report testified,, certain Western Powers had tried to use the Agency's work 
for political ends. For instance,, in spite of the objection of several 
members of the Board, the United States delegation had imposed on the Board 
the despatch of a mission'to Taiwan. That decision was clearly an abuse of 
the funds allocated to the Agency's technical assistance programme, 
3. Furthermore, contrary to the provisions of resolution GC(II)/RES/21, 
adopted by the General Conference at its second regular session, the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) had been invited to send observers to the 
third sessi on although, as the members of 'that organization themselves ad*^ 
mitted, it dealt with the use of atomic energy for military as well as for 
peaceful purposes. That invitation was a flagrant violation of the provisions 
of the Statute, 
4. There was also' a regrettable tendency to unjustified expansion of the 
regular .budget and the staff,. In the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee 
that observation by the USSR delegation had been supported by several 
other delegations^ who rightly considered that the Agency should avoid any 
excessive increase in the administrative expenses which were a heavy charge 
on countries contributing to the Agency budget, 
5. The USSR delegation felt sure that during the coming year the Secretariat 
and the members of the' Board of Governors would do everything in their power 
to prevent a certain group of Western Powers from using the Agency for political 
purposes, 
6, The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution reproduced in 
paragraph 3 of the proposal by the Board of Governors contained in its covering 
note .to .the report. . 


1. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously, 

GC(III)/OR.33 
page 3 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


8. The PRESIDENT said that Mr. Barton (Canada) and Mr, Rajan (India), 
members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee; and Mr, Polaszcek (Austria), 
alternate, whom the General Conference had elected in 1958 , v/ould not ho 
able to continue in office for the full period which would end with the opening 
of the fourth regular session. Before proceeding to new elections, he would 
like to express the gratitude of the General Conference for the work which they 
had accomplished. 
9* It had been proposed to elect in their place Mr, Pardo (Argentina) and 
Mr, von Hirschberg (Union of South Africa) as members of the Committee, and 
Mr. Pahr (Austria) as alternate. 


10. Mr. Pardo (Argentina) and Mr. von Hirschberg (Union of South Africa) 
were elected members and Mr, Pahr (Austria) alternate member of the Agency's 
Staff Pension' Committee. 
THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORT TO THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS FOR 1959-60 (O0(III)/78) 


11. Mr. SVAB (Czechoslovakia) recalled that, at the second regular 
session,his delegation had raised, in the Administrative and Legal Committee, 
the question of the respective competence of the General Conference and the 
Board of Governors with regard to the presentation of reports to the various 
organs of the United Nations, It held that the proposal to delegate the 
General Conference's authority in that matter to another organ, the Board of 
Governors, was contrary to the provisions of the Statute. That practice 
might destroy the balance between the powers of the Agency's two principal 
organs which had been achieved after arduous negotiations and was one of the 
primary conditions for the Agency's successful functioning, 
12. His delegation refrained from opposing the adoption of the draft resolution 
reproduced in paragraph 3 of the proposal by the Board of Governors (GC(III)/78)" 
in order to permit the Agency to submit its report to the Economic and Social 
.Council in good time, but only on the understanding that that measure would 
not constitute a precedent. The General Conference should not take a decision 
of that kind without careful examination in each case. 


1/ GC(II)/OR,22, paragraph 30, 



GC(III)/0H.33 
Pago 4 


13. The PRESIDENT put the draft resolution to the vote. 
14. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
RULES REGARDING TILii ACCEPTANCE OF VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS OF MONEY TO THE 
AGENCY (GC(III)/96) 


15. .Mr. TACAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee,, presented the Committee's report on item 15 of the agenda 
(GC(III)/96). 


16, The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
paragraph 3 of the Committee's report, 

17. The draft resolution was adopted by 48 votes to none with 9 abstentions, 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1957-58 (GC(III)/97) 


18. Mr. TACAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee^, presented the Committee's report on item 16 of the agenda 
(GC(III)/97). 
19- The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
paragraph 3 of the Committee's report, 


20, The draft resolution was adopted unanimously, 


THE RELATIONS OF THE AGENCY WITH THE SPECIALIZED AGENCIES (GC(III)/99) 


21, ,Mr, TACAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on item 18 of the agenda 
(GC(III)/99). 


22, The PRESIDENT drew attention to the recommendation in paragraph 2 of 
the Committee's Report that the Director General should be authorized to make 
such purely formal modifications in the text of the relationship agreement 
between the Agency and the International Civil Aviation Organization as might 
be necessary to achieve conformity between the texts as approved by the Council 
of the Organization and the General Conference respectively. He then put to 
the vote the draft resolution contained in paragraph 3 of the Committee's' reportf 


23, The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 



GC(III)/OR,33 
page 5 


REPRESENTATION OF INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS AT THE FOURTH REGULAR 
SESSION (GC(III)/98) 


24. ,tr„ TACAR (Turkey), Repporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on item 19 of the agenda 
(GC(III)/98). 
2/ 


25. Mr. SVAB (Czechoslovakia) made the following statement%-* 
"The Czechoslovak delegation fully supports the co-operation of the 
Agency -with those intergovernmental organizations whos© work is connected 
.with the uses of atomic oneTgy fox exclusively peaceful purposes. The 
Czechoslovak delegation therefore agreed at the second regular session 
of the General Conference with the draft resolution which authorized the 
Board of Governors to invite intergovernmental organizations concerned 
with peaceful uses of atomic energy in accordance with the Agency's 
objectives laid down in its Statutef to he roprosentod by observers at the 
third regular session of the General Conference,-' The Czechoslovak 
delegation regrets that the Board of Governors, under pressure from some 
of its members5 decided to invite EURATOM to send observers to this third 
session of the General Conference, Since EURATOM is an organization 
whose activities are not devoted exclusively to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, this decision of the Board constitutes an abuse of its 
powors and a violation of the Statute, 

26. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
paragraph 3 of the Committee's report (GC(III)/98). 
27. The draft resolution was adopted by 56 votes to none with 1 abstention. 
THE PRINCIPLES TO GOVERN THE PROVISION OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE BY THE AGENCY 
(GC(III)/IOO) 


28. , Mr. TACAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal Committeoj 
presented the Committee's report on item 24 of the agenda (GC(III)/l00). 
29. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in paragraph 
3 of the Committee's report, 
30. Thp draft resolution was adopted unanimously, 
The meeting rose at 5.15 P.m. 


2/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure, 


3/ GC(II)/RES/21. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(III)/OR.34 
9 December 1959 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY- FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 2 October 1959 at 10.40 a.m. 

President: 
Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 1-56 
Governors for the year 1958-59 (continued) 


* GC(III)/88/RBV,2. 
N.B. 
The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2. 

GO(III)/OR.34 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AED REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958-59 
(GO(III)/73. 89 and Add.1, 92) 


1. Mr. PETRZBLKA (Czechoslovakia), summing up the reasons prompting his 
delegation to submit its draft resolution (GC(III)/89 and Add.1)., said that 
mankind had so far failed to make full use of nuclear energy for peaoeful 
purposes and that great efforts and considerable resources were being devoted 
to the development of now nuclear weapons. The atmosphere, the surface of the 
earth and its waters were being contaminated by the radioactive products of 
nuclear explosions, bringing new and potentially unknown dangers for present 
and future generations, 
2. His delegation believed it was the duty of the General Conference to 
change that state of affairs. The most urgent task today was to make effectivea 
total prohibition of nuclear weapons and the destruction of existing stockpiles. 
The first step in that direction would be the signing of an agreement 
on the total and permanent suspension of test explosions of nuclear weapons, 
a matter which had been under discussion in Geneva for a year past between 
representatives of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States 
of America, 
3. The Czechoslovak Government welcomed the new Soviet proposals for general 
disarmament, at present under-consideration by the United Nations General 
Assembly5 in its view, acceptance of those proposals might well become a 
decisive landmark in the history of international relations and might finally 
restore lasting peace to the world. 
4. The Czechoslovak draft resolution was essentially a means of implementing 
Article III.B.l of the Statute. 
5. The first personal exchange of views between the Chairman of the Council 
of Ministers of the Soviet Union, Mr. Khrushchev, and the President of the 
United States of America, Mr. Eisenhower, had already improved the international 
atmosphere. The world had hailed with satisfaction the Washington 
communique to the effect that agreement on the question of general disarmament 
had been reached between the heads of government of the Soviet Union and the 
United States of Amerioa. 

GO(III)/OE.34 
page 3 


6. It was gratifying to see that the United Nations General Assembly was 
dealing with, the question of disarmament. That was an additional reason why 
the Agency should contribute to a constructive solution of the problem. 
Indeed it was its duty to do so under the provisions of Article III.33.1 of 
the Statute, and particularly under Article VIII of the Agreement governing 
the Relationship between the Agency and the United Nations. Paragraphs 2 and 
3 of the operative part of the draft resolution accordingly expressed the 
hope that the General Assembly of the United Nations would undertake effective 
measures to ban nuclear "weapons and with those measures would enable atomic 
energy to become a source of benefit and prosperity to mankind. His 
delegation was convinced, and trusted that all other delegations were convinced 
too, that it was the duty of the General Conference to express such a hope, 
Some delegations, however, had expressed doubts as to the propriety of 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the draft resolution. While his delegation did not 
share those doubts, in its anxiety to do everything to further the work of 
the Conference it wished formally to withdraw the two paragraphs in question. 


7. After announcing some drafting changes to paragraph 1 of the operative 
part of the draft resolution, he said that his delegation welcomed the amendment 
submitted by the delegation of Morocco (GC(III)/92) and would vote for 
its adoption. 
8. Mr. HAYMgRLE (Austria) said that while his country wanted to do 
everything to further nuclear disarmament and in particular to stop test 
explosions, it was of the opinion that the Czechoslovak draft resolution went 
beyond the Agency's terms of reference. The United Nations General Assembly, 
which was the body competent to deal with that problem, would be discussing 
nuclear disarmament. ,Jhatever the Conference did would in any case be a 
duplication and might perhaps even prove harmful. 
9. He asked the Czechoslovak delegation to reconsider the matter and not to 
press for a vote on the resolution. 
The meeting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and resumed at 11.45 a.m. 


10. Mr. PETRZ3HLKA (Czechoslovakia) said he was unable to accept the 
reasons advanced by the Austrian delegation for asking him to'withdraw his 
draft resolution. Prom the beginning, the Agency had been under an obligation 

GO(III)/OR.34 


page 4 


to further the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes alone. His 
delegation's draft resolution in no way duplicated the activities of the 
United Nations'General Assembly and there was no need to fear that the Agency 
would he taking a false step in adopting it. 


11. Mr. NOVIKOV (Union of Soviet, Socialist Republics) said he was 
surprised by the Austrian delegate's statement. Since the beginning of 195^ 
the President of the Austrian Federal Republic had more than once appealed 
for the prohibition of nuclear v/eapons and the cessation of nuclear weapon 
tests. He had also helped to make' it possible to held in Austria a large 
conference of atomic scientists, at which the dangers of atomic weapons and 
of testing them had been carefully reviewed. Apparently, therefore$ the 
President of Austria was actively in favour of banning atomic weapons and the 
testing thereof. The statement just made by the Austrian delegate did not . 
therefore seem to be in full accordance with the official policy of the 
Austrian Government. 
12. It was singular that during the preceding few days similar opinions had 
been expressed by the United States delegation. He had also been approached 
by other Western delegations who had asked him to try and persuade the 
Czechoslovak delegation to withdraw its draft resolution. It was therefore 
difficult to judge whether the Austrian delegate's speech represented his 
delegation's honest opinion or whether it had been made under pressure - in 
particular, pressure from the United States delegation. 
13. How did the Western delegations justify their attitude, They said that 
the question was to be considered by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations and that, since the Agency was really a technical and not a political 
organization, the question was none of its concern. The Soviet Union 
delegation did not agree, Kany considerations could be adduced in support of 
its point of view, but in the- first pla.ee, he wished to quote a number of 
extracts from President Eisenhower's speech of 8 December 1953 before the 
General Assembly of the United Nations, when he had proposed the establishment 
of an international atomic energy agency^. 
l/ United Nations document A/PV.47O. 



GC(III)/0E.34 
page 5 


14. On that occasion, President Eisenhower had attempted to describe the 
dangers and the potentialities of atomic energy as he saw them from the 
American standpoint. He had pointed out that since the United States had set 
off the biggest atomic explosion on 16 July 1945, i"t had made a further 42 test 
explosions. The atomic bomb,, he had continued, was more than twenty-five times 
as powerful as the weapons existing when the atomic age commenced, whilst the 
hydrogen bomb was equivalent to millions of tons of trinitrotoluene. 
15. The United States, President Eisenhower had continued, had a stockpile of 
atomic bombs which was increasing every day and which exceeded by many times 
the total equivalent of all the bombs and shells used in the whole of the 
Second World Warv one air group, either land- or sea-based, could drop on any 
chosen target a load of bombs exceeding in power all the bombs dropped on 
Britain during the whole of the Second World 7/ar. So great had been the 
development of atomic weapons that for the United States forces they had almost 
come to be conventional weaponsy the ground, sea and air forces and the marine 
corps could all use them. 
16. But, the President had gone on, the United States no longer had a monopoly 
of atomic strength. Although the United States had a great quantitative 
advantage, present-day atomic realities included two facts of even greater 
significance. In the first place, the knowledge which was at present,the 
property of a few nations would eventually be shared by other nations,, 
possibly by all. In the second place, even a vast superiority in the number of 
bombs, and the consequent ability to inflict devastating retaliation, could 
not prevent frightful material destruction and loss of life as a result of 
surprise aggression. 
17* The free world, to use President Eisenhower's words, at least dimly aware 
of the dangers, had naturally embarked on a large programme of warning and 
defence systems and, if an attack were launched against the United States, it 
would be able to reply in kind. But that, he had said, was not the essence of 


the problem, which was rather how atomic energy could be applied in the service 
of humanity. Atomic energy must be put into the hands of those who would know 
how to strip it from its military casing and adapt it for the arts of peace. 


18. Thus President Eisenhower, in his speech proposing the establishment of 
an international agency for the peaceful uses of atomic energy, had taken as 

GC(III-)/OR.34 
page 6 


his basic theme the dangers for the whole world of an atomic war, adding that 
it was not enough to prohibit atomic weapons. They must he taken out of the 
hands of the soldiers and handed over - to us, to the Agency - for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. It was difficult to understand the grounds 
for differences of opinion as to whether the General Conference was properly 
authorized to discuss the matter. 


19. President Eisenhower had also said that the United States knew that if 
the trend of atomic military build-up were reversed, the greatest of 
destructive forces could be developed into a great been to all mankind. The 
United States knew, too, that peaceful power from atomic energy was not a 
dream of the futures its capabilities had already been proved, wlio could doubt 
that if the entire body of the world's scientists and engineers had adequate 
amounts of fissionable material with which to tost and develop their ideas, 
those capabilities would rapidly be transformed into universal, efficient and 
economic usage, 
20. Speaking as a representative of the Soviet Union, he could not but 
subscribe to the words of President Eisenhower. All who were genuinely 
interested in the cause of peace and the peaceful development of atomic energy 
must surely also subscribe to them. And those words meant that the success 
of the General Conference and its work to promote the Agency's activities 
depended on the prohibition of atomic weapons and the cessation of atomic 
tests. 
21. In conclusion ho cited a further extract from President Eisenhower's 
address in which the latter had said that he would be prepared to submit to 
the Congress of the United States, and with every expectation of approval, any 
plan that would, first, encourage world-wide investigation into the most 
effective peace-time uses of fissionable material; second, begin to diminish 
the potential destructive power of the world's atomic stockpiles; third, allow 
all peoples of all nations to see that in the present enlightened age the 
Great Powers, both of the East and the West, were interested in human 
aspirations first rather than in building up the armaments of war; and, fourth, 
would open up a new channel for peaceful discussion and initiate at least a 
now approach to the many difficult problems that must be solved in private ' 
and public conversations if the world was to shako off the inertia imposed by 
fear and make positive progress towards peace. 

GC(III)/OR.34 
page 7 


22. As could be seen, President Eisenhower, when speaking in favour of 
setting up an international atomic energy agency, had coupled together the 
prohibition of nuclear weapons and the widespread use of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes. Clearly, what President Eisenhower had had in mind was to 
ban the use of atomic energy for military purposes and to use it for fe,r~ 
reaching programmes directed to peaceful ends. 
23. Six years had passed, and the production of atomic bombs had continued. 
Speaking on 18 September 1959, also before the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, Mr. Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet 
Union, had pointed out that if all the means of destruction which had been 
available to mankind in the past were massed together, their destructive 
capacity would amount to an insignificant part of what vra.s now available 
to two or three Great Powers, thanks to their possession of nuclear weapons. 
As the leader of the Indonesian delegation had pointed out, the stocks of 
atomic and hydrogen bombs which had been built up over the past six years 
J2/ 

were sufficient to destroy all life on earth many times over,- The Soviet 
Union did not'share the pessimistic view of those who considered the outbreak 
of nuclear war would necessarily result in the destruction of all life on 
earth, but there was no doubt at all that it would result in the deaths of 
hundreds of millions of human beings, not to speak of the damage it would 
cause to future generations. 

24. As the landing of a Soviet rocket on the moon had shown, the power of 
rockets and the technique for controlling them had reached such perfection that 
it was now possible to deliver an atomic or hydrogen bomb of any capacity with 
almost complete accuracy to any part of the world. If it was borne in mind 
that in future wars there would be no distinction whatever between front and 
rear, between the armed forces and the civil population, it could easily be 
seen that the problem of prohibiting atomic and hydrogen weapons affected the 
vital interests, in the strictest sense of the word, of all who lived upo'n the 
earth. 
25. During the general debate a number of delegations had drawn attention to 
the close relation between the prohibition of nuclear weapons tests and the 
2/ GC(III)/0E.25, paragraph 4. 



GC(III)/OR.34 
page 8 


Agency's future activities and had pointed out that the expansion of the 
Agency's technical assistance programme in particular depended directly on the 


cessation of such tests and the relaxation of international tension. The 
absence of any agreement to prohibit nuclear weapons or nuclear weapon tests 
was the main obstacle to the transfer of material, scientific, technical and 


other resources from armaments to peaceful utilization. 


26. All that he had said showed that the Czechoslovak draft resolution which 
invited the Soviet Union; the United Kingdom and the United States to intensify 
their efforts for an early conclusion of an agreement on the cessation of 
nuclear weapon tests as an important step towards the complete prohibition of 
such weapons was entirely in accordance with the spirit of the Statute and was 
designed to create more favourable conditions for the peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy. 
27. The recent talks at Camp David between the Chairman of the Council of 
Ministers of the Soviet Union and the President of the United States had. marked 
a substantial step forward towards the relaxation of international tension. 
The General Conference would make its own small contribution by adopting the 
draft resolution which was before it. During the past few days a number of 
delegates had expressed to him their concern lost the number of States possessing 
nuclear weapons should increase. They had rightly pointed out that the 
more nuclear Powers there were with atomic and hydrogen bombs, the harder it 
would be to reach agreement en the cessation of nuclear weapon tests and the 
less prospects there would therefore be of expanding the work of the Agency. 
The Soviet Union delegation considered that it had long since become imperative 
to put a stop to the use of atomic energy for military purposes and accordingly 
hoped with all its heart that the General Conference would adopt the Czechoslovak 
draft resolution which urged the three Powers that at present possessed 
nuclear weapons to stop testing them, 
28. Mr. OEDERWALL (Sweden) made the following statement ^ 2 
"The delegation of Sweden finds itself in much the same position 
as .the delegation of Austria, and I should like on its behalf 


2J This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 


GC(III)/ORo34 
page 9 


wholeheartedly to endorse what the distinguished delegate of Austria 
just said. 


ir;re warmly appreciate and fully share the sentiments expressed 
in the resolution proposed hy the delegation of Czechoslovakia. The 
people and Government of Sweden would certainly welcome any steps or 
agreements which could lead to a relaxation of world tension, an improvement 
in the political climate and a limitation or reduction of 
armament So This has been repeatedly stated in what we regard as 
proper places for such discussions„ The delegate of Austria has referred 
to the initiative taken hy the representative of Sweden together 
with those of certain other countries in the United "Mations, an action 
parallel to the Czechoslovak proposal. There can, therefore, be no 
doubt or possible misunderstanding about our position with regard to 
the substance of the proposal. 


"On the other hand, the purpose, as we see it, of the International 
Atomic "Tnergy Agency is to carry out non-political tasks as defined in 
its Statute. A few days ago I had the opportunity of restating in the 
general debate the view of my Government that the best way to ensure 
the success of this Agency is to keep its field of action restricted 
to matters of an essentially non-political nature-^„ Other interventions 
in the general debate and in the committee discussion on the 
programme and budget of the Agency have shown that this view is widely 
shared. Indeed all delegations seem to agree that this is essentially 
a technical Agency, concerned with one great tasks how atomic energy 
can best be utilized for peaceful purposes. 


"It goes without saying that this task Y/ould be facilitated if 
international tension were relaxed and, consequently, greater resources 
became available for efforts in the non-military field. The same is 
true with regard to the tasks of other international organizations having 
thgir terms of reference in the technical and not in the political field; 


4/ GC(III)/OR.32, paragraph 32. 



GC(III)/OR.34 
page 10 


They would doubtless all benefit from a stabilization of the inter


national political situation. Tot none of them and, I submit, not the 
International Atomic Energy Agency either, should directly occupy itself 
with political issues, 


"I do not wish to enter into any discussion with the distinguished 
delegate of Czechoslovakia about the juridical details of the matter. 
Since, however, he has referred to the agreement for co-operation 
between this Agency and the United Nations, I should like to point out 
that, as far as I understand, Article 1.3 of that agreement is the one 
relevant to this issue. It reads in parts 'The Agency recognizes the 
responsibilities of the United "Rations in accordance with the Charter, 
in the fields of international peace and security'. My understanding 
is that this text is intended to mean that the Agency's tasks are of a 
non-political nature. 


"Mr. President, I want to emphasize - with reference to the statement 
just made by the distinguished delegate of the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics - that this position of a delegation representing 
a politically non-committed country has been taken entirely on its own 
behalf and without any kind of pressure from any quarter. I know that 
this is true also for the delegation of Austria. 


"Our position can be thus summed up: On the one hand, we fully 
sympathize with our Czechoslovak colleagues with regard to the desires 
and hopes expressed in their draft resolution. On the other hand, wo 
feel that it would be inappropriate for the Agency to take action on 
the substance of the matter, at any rate at this juncture, in view of 
the fact that our Governments deal with it elsewhere and that this 
Agency has a non-political purpose. 


""Prom these considerations, Mr. President, I draw the same conclusions 
as the delegate of Austria. At the outset of our discussion, I 
would have liked to join him in his appeal to the delegation of-
Czechoslovakia to accept, in the spirit of co-operation and conciliation 
which has marked this General Conference, the expressions of 
sympathy for the sentiments behind its proposal and not to pursue the 



GC(III)/OR„34 
page 11 


matter further. It now appears that the Czechoslovak delegation 
wishes to press for a decision on its proposals 


"Therefore, Mr,, President, I formally propose that the General 
Conference should adopt the following motions 


1,1 The General Conference notes that the matters raised in docu-< 
ment GC(III)/89 are under discussion in other more appropriate international 
forums and decides that it is not, in these circumstances, 
desirable to adopt any substantive resolution on these matters„' 


"I further request under Rule 77 of the Rules of Procedure that 
this motion should be put to the vote before the draft resolution contained 
in document G'j( IIl)/89. " 


29= Mr. HAYHERL*, (Austria), replying to the Soviet Union delegate, said 
he could not agree that his previous statement regarding the suspension of 
nuclear tests was not in conformity with the policy of the Austrian Government, 
as repeatedly expressed by the President of Austria. Feither were 
there any grounds for accusing the Austrian Government of not being in favour 
of disarmament, since its policy was already well known§ the draft resolution 
it had submitted to the United Nations the previous year was, in fact, almost 
identical with the present draft resolution* His previous remarks had merely 
been designed to avoid a long debate and a split vote on one of the most 
urgent problems of the day, 


30. Mr. 3MADJAK0V ( 'ulgaria) held that, by reason of the importance and 
timeliness of the proposals it contained, the Czechoslovak draft resolution, 
as amended by Morocco, was worthy of the General Conference's full support. 
31. The problem of the banning of nuclear weapons and the utilization of 
atomic energy for peaceful ends was at present one of the basic preoccupations 
of mankind. The Soviet Union Government, in its statement of 
18 September 1959, had once more directed attention to the need for banning 
nuclear weapons as an essential step towards total general disarmament, and 
for finding a way of putting an end to nuclear weapon tests immediately. 
J5/ The motion and proposal were subsequently issued as document GC(III)/l07. 



GC(III)/OR.34 


page 12 


32, In pursuance of its statutory obligations and its duty to further United 
Fations efforts to bring about disarmament, the Agency was bound to take part 
in the struggle to have nuclear weapons banned. Indeed, the faith and confidence 
which the peoples of the world reposed in the Agency would be shaken 
if it failed to take a positive stand against such a dire means of mass 
destruction, 


33° As a first step, the Agency must call for an end to nuclear weapon tests 
and follow up that action by pressure to secure a total ban on nuclear 
weapons and their production throughout the world. The success of such 
measures, in freeing scientific and technical resources which could be used 
for the benefit of mankind, would open up vast perspectives for the Agency's 
future work, 


34° Such were the constructive ideas underlying the Czechoslovak draft 
resolution. The object of the Moroccan amendment was to persuade France to 
renounce of its own free will the production of nuclear arms or, at any rate, 
the experimental explosion of atomic bombs, 


35o The draft resolution, inspired as it was by the principles guiding the 

United Nations in its efforts to promote peace and international understand


ing, could not therefore be regarded as being outside the Agency1s terms of 
.reference. Indeed, its adoption would enable the Agency to give more 


effective support to those efforts in so far as disarmament was concerned, 


and would be a substantial contribution towards decreasing international 


tension, 


36, For all those reasons, the Bulgarian delegation wholeheartedly endorsed 
the draft resolution, as amended, and trusted that the General Conference 
would recognize its true worth.by adopting it unanimously, 


37, Mr, PASSCMIK (Ukraini an Soviet Socialist Republic) recalled that 
his delegation had pointed out during the general debate how important it was 
for the extensive peaceful use of atomic energy that atomic weapon tests be 
suspended as a first step towards their full prohibition,—' There was no 


6/ GC(III)/OR,29, paragraph 41. 



GC( III)/Oil. 3-1 
page 13 


doubt that atomic weapons, as instruments of mass annihilation, would be 
prohibited. But the Ukrainian delegation was concerned that the prohibition 
be imposed as soon as possible, and in that context adoption of the Czecho


slovak draft resolution was quite clearly essential. The proposal had found 
warm support from the delegation of one of the great, atomic Powers, the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, and also from the Bulgarian delegation* It 
did not suggest that disarmament questions should be discussed. It only made 
an appeal to the heart and mind of every delegate. 


38. The procedural objections raised by the opponents of the draft resolution 
at the present meeting were quite indefensible. It was abundantly clear that 
those who were unwilling to vote against the Czechoslovak draft resolution, 
because their act would affront the conscience of the world, were seeking 
procedural pretexts to kill it. That was the real moaning behind the Austrian 
delegation's exhortation and the sentiments of those who had inspired it. The 
voice of the peoples cried out for an appeal to be made to the Great Powers 
for the suspension of nuclear weapon tests. And since no one would dare vote 
against it, the opponents of the draft resolution had resorted to procedural 
motions designed to conceal their objections to its substance. 
39. The Austrian delegate in his second statement had oonfirmed the fact that 
the President of Austria had spoken in favour of the suspension of nucloar 
weapon tests. That being so, the Ukrainian delegation failed to understand 
why he had made a procedural proposal clearly intended to prevent a vote being 
taken on a resolution appealing to the Great Powers to make every effort to 
bring about the suspension of such tests. The Austrian delegate was 
apparently afraid that by adopting the resolution the General Conference might 
be going beyond the Agency's statutory tasks. It was surely clear to everyone 
that such fears were groundless. 
40. As the highest organ of the Agency, the General Conference would be quite 
within its rights in adopting the draft resolution, which was fully consistent 
with the Agency's aims and purposes. That fact was clear from the text of the 
draft resolution itself. Paragraph (a) of the preamble recalled Articlo II 

GC(III)/0H.34 
page 14 


of the Statute, under which the Agency was instructed to "accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy, to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world". Paragraph (b) recalled Article III.B.l of the Statute, 


which stipulated that the Agency should conduct "its activities in accordance 
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations to promote peace and 


international co-operation, and in conformity with policies of the United 


Nations furthering the establishment of safeguarded world-wide disarmament and 


in conformity, with any international agreements entered into pursuant to such 


policies". Neither those two paragraphs nor paragraph (c) could givo rise to 


any real objections, eithor as to their substance or as to their form. 


41. Paragraphs (d) and (c) of the preamble referred to the promotion of 
peace and security, and the extensive development of the Agency's activities. 
Whoever was for the abolition of atomic armaments and in favour of international 
co-operation and the peaceful uses of atomic energy, not in words 
only but in deeds, could not, therefore, object to the preamble to the draft 
resolution. 
42. As for the operative part, paragraph 1 followed logically from the 
preamble. It contained no provisions dealing with questions of general policy 
or controversial' matters such as entailed discussion in the United Nations, 
It only expressed the desire of all those taking part in the debate to take 
stops to further the development of the Agency's fruitful work, 
43- The Austrian representative maintained that the adoption of the Czechoslovak 
draft resolution would duplicate the work of the United Nations, which 
was at present considering the disarmament question. But it was quite clear 
that there was no question of taking decisions about the abolition of tests. 
All that was proposed was that the Agency - an international technical 
organization, which was bound to concern itself with the health and welfare of 
the peoples of the world - should invite the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom 
and the United States to come to a rapid decision on the question. 


44. Clearly such a step would facilitate the development of the Agency's 
programme and promote its further success. For it was to be noted that both 
in the unanimous'decision of the tenth session of the United Nations'General 
Assembly to set up the International Atomic Bnojcgj Agency^ and in 
2/ General Assembly resolution 912.11 (X). 



GO(III)/OH.34 
page 15 


President Eisenhower's declaration proposing establishment of the Agency, the 


idea of lessening the threat from nuclear weapons and that of the increasing 


use of atomic energy for the welfare of mankind were regarded as inseparable 


and complementary, 


45. His delegation accordingly urged the unanimous adoption of the Czechoslovak 
draft resolution, as amended. 
46. Mr. SEVCKEMKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said the 
scientists and physicists attending the General Conference realized more than 
anyone else what really inexhaustible possibilities the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy held out for mankind, possibilities of which the world's first nuclearpropelled 
icebreaker "Lenin", built in the Soviet Union;, and the intensive 
research going on there in connexion with controlling thermonuclear reactions 
wore only two examples.. Tho'control of thermonuclear processes would substantially 
free mankind from worries about energy resources. 
47* To develop scientific research on a broad basis it was necessary to have 
international co-operation on a broad basis, too, so as to enable the vast 
potential power of the atom to be harnessed as soon as possible in the 
interests of the progress and well-being of all peoples of the world. Although 
such had been the aim at the time of its establishment, the Agones'- had in fact 
made an insufficient effort during the past two years to achieve the objectives 
set out in Article II of its Statute. 


48, The main brake 'on the Agency's activity was the armaments race and the 
accumulation of lethal nuclear and thermonuclear weapons. Tests of atom and 
hydrogen bombs not only threatened international confidence and mutual under


standing, which were so necessary in the present age of the rapid development 
of rocket techniques, but they prevented enormous resources from being used for 


the economic and cultural progress of present-day mankind. That opinion was 
borne out in the report by the United Nations Scientific Committee on the 
Effects of Atomic Radiations to the thirteenth session of the General Assembly 
of the United Nations, which drew attention to the danger to present and future 
generations of further nuclear tests.-' 


8/ United Nations document A/3838, 



GC(III)/0B.34 
page 16 


49, The Byelorussian SSR had always desired, and still desired, international 
agreement on the swift and unconditional prohibition of nuclear fission and 
fusion weapons and the destruction of all stocks of such weapons, for humanity 
could then make more profitable use of the enormous resources previously 
devoted to armaments;, and release scientific and technical manpower for the 
service of material well-being and greater spiritual values. The Byelorussian 
delegation therefore fully supported the step taken by the Czechoslovak 
delegation in tabling a draft resolution calling on the atomic Powers to reach 
early agreemont on the prohibition of tests of all forms of atomic weapons, . 
since further weapon testing would encourage an arms race and lead to the 
production of even more destructive nuclear and thermonuclear weapons - in 
other wordsj increase the danger of a destructive nuclear and thermonuclear war. 

50. The Agency should proclaim and disseminate the noble idea that atomic 
energy should be used solely for poacpful purposes. The vote of its General 
Conference, in which outstanding scientific and government personalities 
participated, would be listened to, and evoke a response throughout the world. 
51. As already pointed out by leading scientists of many countries who had 
signed petitions and messages to the United Nations and to their respective 
Governments, every new explosion increased the quantity of long-lived radioactive 
products contaminating the atmosphere, soil and waters of the earth. 
52. The Byelorussian people keenly desired to avert war, for thoy know too 
well what war meant. Hundreds of their towns and thousands of their villages 
and farms had been destroyed, many industrial and cultural facilities completely 
wiped out, agriculture ruined, and hundreds of thousands of innocent people, of 
all ages, had perished during the last war. And it must be realized that 
present-day nuclear and thermonuclear weapons wore far more destructive than 
conventional armaments. According to the- American physicist Davison, the 
energy released by the explosion of a single hydrogen bomb was more than that 
released by all the explosions produood by all the countries of the world in 
every war in the history of mankind. That was why the whole of humanity was 
closely following the talks between Mr. Khrushchev and President Eisenhower on 
disarmament questions, the banning of atomic and thermonuclear weapon tests 
and the ending of the armaments race. 

GC(ni)/u:i.34 
page 17 


53* Nothing would help the Agency towards greater success in its activities 
than a ban on the testing and production of nuclear and thermonucloar weapons. 
Unfortunately, however, the Agency had so far made no protest against the use 
of atomic energy for military purposes. It could certainly not be called 
logical for the Agency to prepare, on the one hand5 rules and instructions for 
using atomic energy for peaceful purposes, thus showing its practical concern 
for the lives and health of the small circle of experts and workers dealing 
with, atomic energy and; on the other hand,, to refrain from any action on 
behalf of the hundreds of millions of people who dreaded the testing of atomic 
and hydrogen bombs. 


54. In that connexion, he objected to the false distinction drawn between the 
Agency's peaceful activities in regard to atomic onorgy and the question of 
nuclear disarmament. Article III.B.l of the Statute established a direct link 
between the Agency's activities and the United Nations' work on disarmament. 
55. The Byelorussian poople hailed the decision of the Soviet Government not 
to resume atomic tests if the Western countries also agreed not to resume them, 
and it would continue the struggle for a complete cessation of nuclear weapon 
tests as an important stop towards stopping the armaments race and removing a 
throat to the life and health of millions of poople. 
56. For those reasons his delegation supported the Czechoslovak draft 
resolution, together with the Moroccan amendment,, and hoped that all Members 
of the Agency which wore actively interested in peace vrould also approve them. 
The meeting rose jat 1 p.m. 



INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(III)/OR.35 
9 December 1959 

ENGLISH 


General Conference 

THIRD REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 2 October 1959, at 3.15 P.m. 


President: Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda x 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 1-33 
Governors for the year 1958-59 (continued) 


25 ' The question of granting consultative status 34 .- 35 
with the Agency to the World Federation of 
Trade Unions 


17 Scale of Members' contributions 36 - 40 


13 The Agency's programme, budget and 41 - 48 
Working Capital Fund for 1960 


14 Voluntary contributions to the General 49 - 56 
Fund in 1960 


8 Report of the Credentials Committee (continued) 57 - 58 


12 Assistance to less developed countries with 59 - 75 
the production of nuclear power 


27 Closing of the session 16 - 90 

* GC(III)/88/Rev.2. 
N.B. The list of delegations attending the third regular session of the 
General Conference was issued as document GC(III)/INF/25/Rev.2. 

GC(III)/0B.35 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR THE YEAR 1958-59 
(GC(III)/73, 89 and Add.1, 92/Rev.1. 107) (continued) 


1. Mr. LOPEZ (Argentina) agreed with the views expressed at the 
thirty-fourth meeting by the Austrian delegate-/ and supported the motion submitted 
by Sweden (GC(III)/l07). The Agency was a technical organization, and 
it was not therefore the business of the General Conference to consider 
political problems. 
2. Mr. SUPJARWO (Indonesia) said that the Czechoslovak draft resolution 
(GC(III)/89 and Add.1) and the Moroccan amendment (GC(III)/92/Rev.1) had 
the merit of reminding States Members of the Agency's main ideals. The 
military uses of atomic energy were not,, of course, the Agency's concern;, but 
it would render a great service to humanity by using its influence to divert 
the nuclear energy at present used for armaments into peaceful channels. The 
Indonesian delegation would support the Czechoslovak draft resolution, as 
amended with the author's approval,—' since it had only the character of an 
appeal, an expression of hope, 
3. He appreciated the efforts of the Austrian and Swedish delegates to reach 
a compromise,—' but found it difficult to agree to referring to the 
Czechoslovak"resolution as a substantive resolution. 
4. Mr. ESCHAUZIBR (Netherlands) agreed with the Austrian delegate's 
comments and supported the Swedish motion. The Netherlands was most anxious 
to see an agreement concluded to stop tests of all kinds of nuclear weapons 
and to sot up a suitable international control system to implement such agreement. 
However, the Agency should not concern itself with the military uses 
of atomic energy. Furthermore, Article III.B.l of the Statute recognized 
that responsibility for furthering the establishment of world-wide disarmament 
rested with the United Nations. 
5. Mr. MATSUI (Japan) paid tribute to Czechoslovakia for the feelings 
expressed in the draft resolution, but doubted whether it was advisable for 
l/ GC(III)/OR.34j paragraphs 8 and 9. 


2/ Ibid, paragraph 6. 


3_/ Ibid, paragraphs 8 and 28. 



GC(III)/0E.35 
page 3 


the General Conference to consider an essentially political question. " 'The 


General Conference might debate for years and years without over achieving any 
positive results, since disarmament was a matter to be dealt with by the United 
Nations and not by the' Agency. Consequently the Japanes'o delegation, like the 
Austrian delegation, would request the Czechoslovak delegate to withdraw the 
draft resolution. If that request was refused, he would support the Swedish 
motion. 


6. Mr. L5NWAI (Hungary) said that the peoples of the world, who were 
following the General Conference's work with interest, not only entertained 
great hopes of what the peaceful utilization of atomic energy could mean in 
future years but were also somewhat afraid. That was particularly true in 
Hungary. No opportunity should therefore be missed of affirming that all the 
technical achievements which the scientists had bestowed on the peoples of the 
world must in fact be used solely for the well-being of mankind. And in that 
connexion, deeds spoke louder than "words. 
7. Experience had so far shown that the present international situation, 
which still made people afraid that the achievements of nuclear science and 
technology would be used against their interests, was a great stumbling-block 
to individual countries' own work on atomic energy as well as, on the international 
piano, to the exchange of information and to the Agency's activities. 
8. It was incorrect to state, as some delegations had done, that the Agency 
was not entitled to submit recommendations to the United Nations on a matter 
Which, it was said, came under that organiaation. The amended text of the 
Czechoslovak draft resolution removed any doubts on that point. -It was most 
important to show the world yet again that the men responsible for international 
co-operation, and to a large extent for all that had been done on the 
international plane in the field of atomic energy, had resolutely decided to 
insist that atomic energy should never again be used for the wholesale 
destruction of human life and that they had again taken the chance offered 
them of restating their firm desire to see nuclear energy employed for peaceful 
purposes. 
9. The Hungarian delegation therefore considered that the Czechoslovak draft 
resolution should be seriously considered and approved by the General 
Conference. The Hungarian delegation would vote for the draft resolution. 

GC(III)/OR.35 
page 4 


10. Mr. ARNOTT (Australia) said that the question raised by the 
Czechoslovak draft resolution should not he debated by the General Conference5 
he therefore associated himself with the proposals in the Swedish motion, 
11. Mr. El FASSI (Morocco) said that his country was at present the one 
most directly exposed to the harmful effects of radiation from the forthcoming 
atomic weapon tests. . However, his delegation did not intend to submit a 
draft resolution on that subject., for it did not wish to delay the General 
Conference's work and it knew that the question of nuclear weapons tests and 
disarmament would be studied by the General Assembly of the United. Nations, 
since the Moroccan request to place that question on the agenda of the General 
Assembly had received 42 votes. 
12. However, since the question had been raised by the Czechoslovak delegate, 
the Moroccan delegation could not but support the Czechoslovak draft resolution. 
Of course, the question was one for the United Nations, but if the General 
Conference wore now to reject the amended version of the Czechoslovak draft 
resolution, which was supported by other delegations, all peace- and freedomloving 
countries might think that the General Conference had failed in its 
duty. The United Nations would deal with the political and diplomatic aspects 
of the question, but the Agency had the right to consider the technical aspects 
and to consider the effects of nuclear tests on human health and life. 
13. The Moroccan delegation therefore hoped that the General Conference would 
approve the Czechoslovak draft resolution and the Moroccan amendment, the text 
of which had also been amended and now merely expressed a hope, 
14. Mr. CASSILI (Italy), speaking under Rule 60 of the Rules of Procedure, 
moved the closure of the debate on the draft resolution submitted by 
Czechoslovakia. 
15. Mr. MELLER CONRAD (Poland) observed that the Czechoslovak draft 
resolution invited the throe great atomic Powers to intensify their efforts for 
an early conclusion of an agreement on the suspension of the tests of all kinds 
of nuclear -weapons 5 among those Powers, however, only the Soviet Union had 
expressed its point of view and unequivocally stated that it was ready to do 
all in its power to reach such an agreement.-' Not only the General 
4/ GO(-III)/OE.27, paragraph 1. 



GC(III)/0E.35 
page 5 


Conference, but also the public, should have the opportunity of hearing the 
reply of the United States of America and the United Kingdom before the end of 
the debate. For that reason ho formally opposed the closure of the debate. 


16. Mr. PETRZELKA (C zochoslovakia), having received the President's 
permission to exorcise his right of reply, said that he was unable to accept 
tuo arguments advanced by the delegate of Sweden. In his view, responsibility 
in the field of atomic energy was shared by the Agency and the United Nations. 
In the Relationship Agreement with the United Nations, Article I, paragraph 4j 
which defined the Agency's functions, repeated word for word the text of 
Article III. B.l of the Statute, under which the Agency had to conduct its 
activities "in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations 
to promote peace and international co-operation", in other words in accordance 
with the principles and purposes set forth in Articles I and II of the United 
Nations Charter. Article III. B.l of the Statute also laid down that the 
Agency should conduct its activities "in conformity with policies of the 
United Nations furthering the establishment of safeguarded world-wide disarmament". 
No one could therefore deny that the draft Czechoslovak resolution 
was in complete accordance with United Nations policy. 
17. He wished to stress that under Article III.B.l of the Statute it was laid 
down that in conducting its activities in conformity with United Nations 
policies the Agency must in the first place further "the establishment of 
safeguarded world-wide disarmament". Thus, if the Czechoslovak draft resolution 
were regarded as being political in character, the same would have to be 
said of the Agency's Statute. 
18. Article XVI.B.2 of the Statute provided for "Consideration by the Agency 
of resolutions relating to it adopted by the General Assembly ... and the submission 
of reports, when requested, to the appropriate organ of the United 
Nations' on the action taken by the Agency or by its members in accordance with 
this Statute as a result of such consideration." Thus the Agency should only 
submit a report to one of the United Nations organs when that organ explicitly 
requested it to do so. In other words, the Agency did not have to submit a 
report on the measures it had taken to implement United Nations resolutions and 
need only mention them in its annual report to the United Nations General 

GC(III)/0H.35 
page 6 


Assembly. That also implied that the Agency might take a decision without 
waiting for the initiative to come from the United Nations, 


19. It was also indisputable that the Agency could consider items appearing 
on the agenda of the United Nations General Assembly. The Relationship 
Agreement with the United Nations recognized that the Agency was the body 
responsible,, under the aegis of'the United Nations, for international activities 
concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy, in accordance with its 
Statute. The Agreement also recognized, in Article I, paragraph 2, that the 
Agency by virtue of its intor-govornmental character and international 
responsibilities, will function under its Statute as an autonomous international 
organization in the working relationship with the United Nations". Thus, 
under Article I of the Agreement and Articles III and XVI of the Statute, the 
Agency was empowered to consider questions on the agenda of the United Nations 
General Assembly. Article VIII, paragraph 2, of the Agreement went so far as 
to state that "The Agency may propose items for consideration by the United 
Nations". 
20. It was thus clear that the Statute itself authorized the General 
Conference to consider and adopt the draft Czechoslovak resolution. 
21. With regard to the procedural proposal submitted by Sweden, requesting 
the General Conference to decide that the Swedish motion should be put to the 
voto before the Czechoslovak draft resolution, he observed that its intention 
was undoubtedly to make use of the old familiar voting machine in order to 
shelve the Czechoslovak draft resolution. 
22. The PRESIDENT put the motion for the closure of the debate to the. 
voto, 
23. The motion was adopted by 33 votes to 13 with 11 abstentions. 
24. Mr. FONTAINE (Prance), invoking Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure, 
asked that the votes on the proposals before the General Conference be taken 
by roll-call. His delegation would not take part in those votes for the 
following reasonss the question under discussion did not fall within the 
Agency's competence, moreover, according to his delegation's information, 
65 atomic explosions had taken place since the foundation of the Agency, 26 of 

GC(III)/Ofl.35 
pago 7 


them on Soviet territory,, without giving rise to any comments .-.c-Qmpar able to 


those he had listened to during the present debate, 


25. Mr. RAJAIT (India) said that the Agency's object was to promote the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy throughout the world and that it was perfectly 


within its rights in indicating the means which might facilitate, .the accomplish


ment of its task in that field, 


26. The Indian delegation realized that the questions raised in. the Czechoslovak 
draft resolution wore being studied in other international organizations. 


Nevertheless*, 'there-w-as~-ii-o -qu-o^-ti-o-n- of giving directives..to those organisations. 


The purpose of the draft resolution was simply to express a hope.... Since .the.. . 


Swedish proposal would provont the Agency from doing so, the Indian delegation 


would vote against it. 


27. Mr. MAKINBH (Finland) made the following statement.-^ 
"The Finnish delegation regrets the tone this debate has taken. 
Being firmly convinced that all Governments in the world are unanimous 
about the ultimate goal to be reached, namely the banning of nuclear 
weapons so that the resources'of atomic energy can be used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes,, the Finnish delegation believes that it should 
have been possible, once the question was raised in the draft resolution 
submitted by,Czechoslovakia, to request this important assembly to express 
the unanimous hope that an international agreement would be reached in the 
near future which would enable atomic energy to be utilized solely for 
peaceful purposes. Although it shares the opinion of those speakers who 
have said, during the debate, that the Agency should devote itself 
primarily to the practical activities - admirable and important as they 
are - assigned to it under its Statute, the Finnish delegation believes 
that the unanimous expression of such a hope would not have created a 
precedent by virtue of which the General Conference would be committed., 
in future to considering questions whose solution does not depend"on the 
Agency, For, seeing that the conclusion of the desired international 
agreement is primarily the responsibility of the United Nations, the 
General Conference would have no reason to resume discussion of the matter 
until the day such an agreement is signedt a day which will mark the 
beginning of a new era in the history of mankind. 

"In view of the tone the debate has taken and in view of the regret* 
table political controversy which has characterized it, Finland*, faithful 
to its spirit of neutrality, will abstain from participating in the votes 
which are-about te-be-taken.-'-5 ----


This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GO(III)/OR.35 
page 8 


28. Mr. ZAMYATIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) suggested that 
the vote on the proposals under consideration should be taken in the order 
of their submission, in othor words that the draft resolution submitted by 
Czechoslovakia should be voted on first. 
29. The PR5SIDSNT put to the vote the procedural proposal submitted by 
Sweden (GC(III)/l07, paragraph 2) 'to the effect that the General Conference 
should vote on the Swedish mo tion (GC(III)/107, paragraph l) before voting on 
the Czechoslovak draft resolution (GC(III)/89). 
30. At the request of Mr. Pctrzelka (Czechoslovakia) and Mr. Fontaine (France), 
a -roll-call vote was taken. 
India, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


The result of the vote was as followss 


In favour, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Luxembourg, 
Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, Nov/ Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, 
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Sweden, Thailand, 
Turkey, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vatican City, 
Venezuela, Vict-Nam, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, 
Brazil, Canada, China, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, 
Ecuador, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, 
Honduras. 


Againsts India, Indonesia, Morocco, Poland, Romania, Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 
United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, Albania, Bulgaria, 
Byelorussia Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia, Ceylon, 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary. 

Abstaining; Iraq., Spain, Switzerland, Tunisia, Finland. 


The procedural proposal submitted by Sweden was adopted by 40 votes to 
16, with 5 abstentions. 


31. The PRESIDENT put the Swedish motion to the vote. 

GC(III)/OR.35 
page 9 


32. As requested by Mr. Fontaine (Franco), a roll-call vote was taken. 
Canada, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


The result of the vote was as follows; 


In favours Canada,, China,, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador., 
Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, 
Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Luxembourg, 
Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, , 
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, 
Vatican City, Venezuela, Viot-Nam, Argentina, Australia, 
Austria, Belgium, Brazil. 


Against % Ceylon, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq., 
Morocco, Poland, Romania, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab 
Republic, Yugoslavia, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Cambodia, 

Abstainings Finland. 


The Swedish motion was carried by 41 votes to 17 < with 1 abstention. 


33. Mr. NOVACU (Romania) explained that he had voted against the Swedish 
motion because he was far from convinced by the arguments advanced in its 
favour. It had been said that the Agency was a technical organization which 
should not concern itself with political problems. Yet in speaking against 
the draft resolution submitted, by Czechoslovakia, the Canadian and Swedish 
delegates had themselves invoked political considerations, considerations 
which were contrary to the interests both of the Agency and of mankind as a 
whole, 
THE QUESTION OF GRANTING CONSULTATIVE STATUS WITH THE AGENCY TO THE WORLD 
FEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS (GC(III)/94) 


34. The PRESIDENT recalled that when the General Conference had included 
the item on its agenda—', it had decided to vote without discussion on the 
6/ GC(III)/OR.31, paragraphs 12 - 15, 



GC(III)/OR.35 


page 10 


draft resolution contained in paragraph 6 of the USSR proposal (GC(III)/94), 
which recommended that the Board of Governors re-cxaminc the question of 
granting consultative status with' the "Agency to the World Federation of Trade 
Unions. 


35. The draft resolution was adopted by '23 votes to 11, with 17 abstentions. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS (GC(III)/l0l) 


36. Mr. ARNOTT (Australia), on, behalf of the Rapporteur of the Programme, 
Tochnical and Budget Committee, introduced its report on agenda item 17 
(GC(III)/IOI). 
37. The PRESIDENT put to the vote draft resolutions A, B and C in the 
annex to the Committee's report. 
38. Draft resolution A ("Revised scale of Members' contributions for 1959") 
was adopted by 52 votes to none. 
39. Draft resolution B ("Scale of Members' contributions for 1960") was 
adopted by 52 votes to none. 
40. Draft resolution 0 ("Guiding principles for the assessment of Members' 
contributions") was adopted by 51 votes to none. 
THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME, BUDG3T AND WORKING CAPITAL FUND FOR 1960 (GC(III)/l02) 


41. Mr. ARNOTT (Australia), oh behalf of the Rapporteur of the Programme, 
Technical and Budget Committee, introduced its report on agenda item 13 
(GC(III)/102). 
42. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolutions'in Annexes I 
and II to the Committee's report. 
43. Part I of draft resolution A was adopted by 45 votes to 9. 
44• Part II of draft resolution A was adopted by 56 votes to none. 


45. Draft resolution A ("Budgetary appropriations for the financial year 1960") 
as a whole was adopted by 47 votes to none, with 9 abstentions. 
46. Draft resolution B ("Use of the Working Capital Fund in 1960") was 
adopted by 55 votes to none. 

GC(III)/OR.35 
page 11 


47- Draft resolution C ("Establishment of a publications revolving; fund") 
was adopted by 55 votes to none. 


48. The draft resolution in Annex II ("Preparation by the Agency of manuals 
and codes of practice on health and safety") was adopted by 53 votes to none. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO TIE GENERAL FUND IN 1960 (GC(III)/l03, 106) 


49. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference that since the report 
of the Committee for Pledges of Voluntary Contributions to the General 
Fund (GC(lll)/l03) had been drafted a number of delegations that had been 
unable to make pledges on behalf of their Governments in the Committee were 
now in a position to do so. 
50. Mr• FONTES (Portugal) stated that his Government would make a contribution 
of US $3 500 to the General Fund in 1960. 
51. Mr. CHRISTENSEH (Denmark) said that the Danish Government, subject 
to the approval of the Finance Committee of Parliament would contribute to 
the General Fund US $8 400, which was equal to its contribution to the Agency's 
regular budget. 
52. Mr• CARDONA (Mexico) stated that his Government would contribute in 
1960 an amount of 62 000 freely convertible Mexican pesos (equal to 
US $5 000). 
53. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the draft resolution in paragraph 5 
of the Committee's report. The United Arab Republic had submitted an amendment 
(GC(III)/l06) proposing the insertion of a now paragraph in the operative 
part of the text. 
54. Ho invited the General Conference to vote first on the amendment, then on 
the draft resolution itself. 
55. The United Arab Republic amendment was adopted by 52 votes to none. 
56. The draft resolution, as amended, was adopted by 57 votes to none. 
REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(III)/l04) (continued)^ 


57. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to take a decision on 
the draft resolution in paragraph 6 of the Committee's second report (GC(III)/l04). 
2/ GC(III)/OR.29, paragraphs 1 - 39. 



GC(III)/OR.35 
page 12 


ThQ Committee had unanimously recommended the draft resolution to the General 
Conference for adoption. 


58. The draft resolution was unanimously adopted. 
ASSISTANCE TO LESS DEVELOPED UOUNTRIES WITH THE PRODUCTION OF NUCLEAR 
POWER (GC(III)/105) 


59. Mr. ARNOTT (Australia), on behalf of the Rapporteur of the Programme, 
Technical and Budget Committee, introduced its report on item 12 of the 
agenda (GC(III)/l05). 
60. Mr. El ANNABI (Tunisia) said that although as Chairman of the 
Committee he had approved the report, which was an objective account of the 
facts, he could not, as delegate of Tunisia, support the amendment proposed by 
the United Kingdom (paragraph 6) to the draft resolution submitted by Brazil, 
India, Indonesia, Pakistan and the United Arab Republic (paragraph 4), nor the 
amendment submitted orally by the delegate of Turkey to paragraph 3(c) of that 
draft resolution (paragraph 8). 
61. The United Kingdom amendment was contrary to resolution GC(II)/RES/27 and 
would be likely to have the effect of discouraging countries such as Tunisia, 
which placed groat hopes in the work undertaken by the Agency on the economic 
aspects of nuclear power. It would also be in the interests of countries with 
uranium stocks if the use of the latter as fuel for small reactors were 
developed, as that would be the sole way of keeping up the price of uranium, 
which was showing a tendency to collapse. 
62. Although the Turkish amendment was based on a valid principle, its effect, 
by forcing collective action into a regional framework, would be likely to 
infringe Tunisia's freedom of action. In that connexion ho hoped that the 
present framework would soon be expanded in order to allow bettor representation 
of African countries, with particular reference to the countries in that 
continent which wore about to become independent. 
63. He therefore requested that the words "in accordance with the Charter of 
the United Nations and the Statute of the Agency" in paragraph 3(d) of the 
operative part of the draft resolution recommended by the Committee 
(GC(III)/l05, Annex) should be made th e subject of a separate vote. It would 

GC(III)/OR.35 
page 13 


also be preferable if paragraph 5 retained the original text of the joint 
draft resolution (paragraph 4 of the Committee's report). His delegation 
requested a separate vote on that point also, 


64. Mr. TAGAR (Turkey) expressed his delegation's surprise and regret 
that a Member of the United Nations and of the Agency should request that a 
reference to the Charter of the United Nations and the Statute of the Agency 
be deleted from a draft resolution. Such a proposal was unacceptable to him, 
65. Mr. FAHMY (United Arab Republic) said that ho was sorry to introduce 
a discordant note at the present stage of the discussion. The fault did not 
lie cither with the United Arab Republic or with Tunisia but solely with 
Turkey, which, in collusion with Israel, had, without a word of explanation, 
presented the Committee with an oral amendment although it had been agreed 
that all amendments should be submitted in writing. The object of the amendment, 
which added only a number of imprecise words, was no doubt perfectly 
clear to the delegations of Turkey and Israel but was of considerable 
obscurity to the delegation of the United Arab Republic, In any event, the 
amendment would be likely to create difficulties for Tunisia and other countries 
.which undeniably formed part of the area of Africa and the Middle East and 
which, unlike certain other countries, were not in a position to claim that 
they belonged at one time to Ttarope, at another to the Middle East, whichever 
seemed, convenient at the time, 
66. Mr. W5RSH0F (Canada) agreed with the substance of the draft resolution 
as a whole. It was not desirable, however, for the General Conference 
to give the Board of Governors too many directives at the present stage, 
especially in a sphere whore the Agency had practically no experience, such as 
assistance with the production of nuclear power. The Agency had not yet 
received a single request for such assistance and the time was still far 
distant when it would have to take a decision on the form in which assistance 
might be granted to a particular country or group of countries. Ho would 
accordingly prefer that paragraph 3(d) of the draft resolution be simply 
deleted, Canada was not certain what the United Arab Republic and Tunisia had 
in mind in proposing their amendment to that paragraph. In any event, it 
would be ready at the appropriate time to examine objectively and in-all good 
faith any specific proposals for Agency assistance in that general field which 
might be put to the Board. 

GC(III)/OR.35 
page 14 


67. The Tunisian motion that certain words in paragraph. 3(d) should be put 
to a separate vote represented a somewhat unusual procedure, particularly since 
the words in question aimod at conformity with the Charter of the United 
Nations and the Statute of the Agency. In those circumstances, he would wish 
to see the motion relate to the sub-paragraph as a whole. 
68. With respect to paragraph 5j ho saw no objection to putting the paragraph 
as a whole to a separate vobo. 
69. Mr. RAJAM (India) thought that the separate vote on paragraph 5 
asked for by the Tunisian delegation related solely to the phrase; "and to 
consider the desirability of submitting to it annually thereafter",, which was 
what had been added by the United Kingdom amendment, 
70. Mr. El AMABI (Tunisia), while not doubting Canada's goodwill, 
recalled that that country* and some others had shown a marked lack of 
enthusiasm at the second regular session of the General Conforoncc during the 
discussion that had led to the adoption of resolution GC(II)/RES/27.^/ The 
attitude of those countries had doubtless undergone some change since then. 
The Tunisian delegation would not press its motion for a separate vote on 
paragraph 5 if i"t could have satisfactory assurances from the countries in 
question. 
71. The Turkish amendment to paragraph 3(d) was completely superfluous and, 
if inspired by political considerations, was not acceptable to the Tunisian 
delegation. 
72. The PRESIDENT put to the yotc the Tunisian motion for a separate 
vote. 
73. The motion was rejected by 25 votes to 15, with 16 abstentions. 
74. ' The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution recommended by 
the Committee, as sot out in the annex to its report. 
75. The draft resolution was adopted by 53 votes to none, with 2 abstentions. 
8/ GC(II)/COM.1/OR.13, paragraphs 12 - 16. 



GC(III)/OR.35 
page 15 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


76. Mr. SCOTT (New Zealand), speaking on behalf of the Commonwealth 
countries, thanked the President for his distinguished conduct of the General 
Conference's debates. His wisdom, ability, courtesy and patience, added to . 
the excellent arrangements made by the Director General and the Conference 
secretariat, had. made it possible to surmount all the difficulties - at times 
quite substantial - and even to bring the session to a close a day earlier 
than.expected, 
77* Mr. TRUJILLO (Ecuador) expressed his pleasure at having been able 
to take part in the work of the General Conference, which had once more 
testified to the steady development of the Agency on which wore centred the 
hopes of people throughout the world. 


78. Qn behalf of the Latin American countries and of the United States of 
America, he congratulated the President and all who had seconded him in his 
task on the noteworthy work that had been accomplished. He also thanked the 
Austrian Government and the Municipality of Vienna for their hospitality. 
79. Mr. REGALA (Philippines), spoaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Far East and of South-East Asia, said he was glad to associate himself with 
the previous speakers' tributes to the President. 
80. Mr. FABMY (United Arab Republic) said he had gladly agreed to be 
spokesman for Iraq, Tunisia and Morocco, in addition to his own country, in 
paying tribute to the work of the President. He also wished to thank the 
Secretary to the General Conference and all members of the Secretariat without 
distinction^ there was often a danger that their devoted work, which was 
indispensable to the efficient functioning of the Conference, would pass 
unnoticed. 
81. Mr. HAYMSRLS (Austria) conveyed his country's thanks to the President 
for the personal contribution ho had made to the success of the General Conference, 
as well as to the other officers, the members of the Main Committees 
and the Secretariat for the outstanding work they had done. 
82. The Austrian Government was only too glad to be able to contribute in 
so far as it could to the achievement of the Agency's lofty objectives. 

GC(III)/OR.35 
page 16 


It was convinced that the sincere co-operation of all Member States would 
enable those objectives to be achieved for the greater good of mankind. 


83. The PRESIDENT thanked the other officers and the Secretariat for 
their co-operation and advice, without which he could not have discharged his 
functions, 
84. He availed himself of the opportunity to express his appreciation for 
the hospitality of the Austrian Government and of the Municipality of Vienna. 
He especially thanked the Chairmen of the Main Committees whoso task had been 
particularly onerous, His sincere appreciation was also duo to the representatives 
of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the intergovernmental 
organizations for their attendance,, and to the non-governmental organizations 
which had sent observers. Ho paid a special tribute to the Director General 
and the Deputy Directors General, as well as to all members of the Secretariat, 
whose untiring efforts had often continued late into the night. Appreciation 
was duo, too, to the representatives of the Press and Radio who had contributed 
to the Session's success by keeping the public informed of the progress made, 
85. The third regular session of the General Conference had achieved its 
objectives. The budget and programme for the year 1960 had been approved, and 
the target set for voluntary contributions. 
86. The session was unique in that the political discussions which had 
characterized the two preceding sessions had lost their vigour and edge. The 
Agency, as a scientific and technical body, could fulfil its functions bettor 
to the extent that politics woro divorced from its activities and programmes. 
The solid progress made during the past year would inspire new hope among its 
Member States. They could look confidently to the future of the Agency when 
every effort would be made towards achieving the lofty ideals and principles 
embodied in the Statute. 
87. As ho had said in his opening statement, the ago of the atom, enshrining 
the triumph of modern science and technology, demanded the broadest possible 
measure of co-operation among all nations, large and small5 indeed, the 
future of mankind d.cpcnded upon such co-operation. If the third session of 
the General Conference had succeeded in ensuring international co-operation 
of that kind in the sphere of the peaceful uses of atomic energy9 it would go 

GC(III)/OR.35 
page 17 


down in tlio history of the Agency as the session which had opened a new era, of 
poacos happiness and prosperity. 


88. He invited the Conference to observe a minute of silence dedicated to 
prayer or meditation. 
89. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
90. , The PRESIDENT then declared closed the third regular session of the 
Go noral Conference. 
The meeting rose at 6,20 p.m. v 



