International Atomic Energy Agency 
Distr. 
GENERAL 

GC(IV)/OR.36 
5 December 1960 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 
FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 20 September 1960, at 10.45 a.m. 
Temporary President Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) 
President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 
Opening of the session 1 -3


1 
Election of the President 4 — 14 


2 


5 
Credentials of delegates to the fourth 15- 16 
regular session 


(a) Appointment of the Credentials 
Committee 
3 Election of the Vice-President: 
20 


17 
4 Appointment of the General Committee 21 24 
7 Applications for membership of the Agency 25 32 
9 Statement by the Director General 33 60 
Statement by the Representative of the 61 68 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 


* GC(IV)/130. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev.3. 


60-6556 



GC(IV)/OR.J6 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared open the fourth regular session of 
the General Conference and welcomed all delegates of Member States, observers 
from other States, and representatives of the United Nations and of other 
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. He also extended a 
special welcome to the Federal Chancellor of Austria. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
Conference to observe ono minuto of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
?. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT stated that Mr. Nadjakov (Bulgaria) had been 
nominated for the office of President of the Conference. 
5. There being no other nominations, Mr. Nad.jakov (Bulgaria) was elected 
by acclamation President of the General Conference for its fourth regular 
session. 
6. Mr. Nad.jakov (Bulgaria) took the chair. 
7. The PRESIDENT thanked the Conference for the honor done to his 
country and himself. He would spare no effort to ensure the success of the 
Conferonco and was certain that the other elected officers would strive 
towards the same goal, 
8. In the xiame of all delegations he thanked the Austrian Government and 
the authorities of the City of Yienna for their hospitality. 
9. The fourth regular session marked the end of the Agency's organizational 
phase5 from now on it should concentrate on its primary task of assisting 
countries in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. As an international 
organization it had already acquired a personality of its own and had taken 
its place as a member of the group of international institutions linked with 
the United Nations. Relations had also been established between the Agency 
and certain international bodies closely concerned with the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. During the period which had elapsed since its establishment, 
the Agency, in conformity with the provisions of its Statute, had carried out 
various tasks such as work on the use of radioisotopes, the collection and 

GC(IV)/OR.56 
page 3 


dissemination of scientific information, the organization of scientific 
conferences, the exchange and training of experts, and the drafting of 
regulations on the transport and handling of radioactive materials. 


10. However, certain difficulties and differences of approach still persisted, 
and they could not he entirely eliminated either by the Secretariat or by the 
Board of Governors. For instance, the Agency had not yet been able properly 
to fulfill one of its main tasks, that of promoting the use of atomic energy 
as a source of power. 
11. International scientific co-operation to further the use of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes, which had been such a striking feature of the first and 
second United Nations Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy hold 
at Geneva in 1955 and 1958? must continue and must receive every support from 
the Agency. Clearly, new discoveries in atomic physics could greatly help 
the Agency to fulfill its tasks of promoting the use of nuclear powerj first, 
in countries whore there was a shortage of conventional fuels, and subsequently 
in all other countries, since with rapidly increasing requirements conventional 
fuels would soon be exhausted. In the same way, new discoveries in chemistry, 
biology and medicine would help to extend the scope of the peaceful applications 
of atomic energy, thus demonstrating its beneficial effects on the 
health and well-being of humanity. It was therefore one of the Agency's 
primary duties to foster a co-operative effort by all countries engaged in 
research. In that connection an important announcement had been made by the 
chairmen of the atomic energy commissions of the Soviet Union and the United 
States - the two greatest atomic powers in the world - that their Governments 
had decided to make arrangements for "co-operation in the exchange of information 
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to explore the desirability of 
joint projects. In a joint memorandum they had stated that the Agency would 
be usod as the repository of the reports and the results of information 
exchanges, and that it would be invited to assist in the consideration of 
possible joint projects.—' The practical effects of that decision and the 
part played by the Agency in deriving full benefit from it would undoubtedly 
contribute to the future progress of atomic science. 
l/ See document GC(IV)/ll4, paragraph 20. 


GC(IV)/OR.36 
page 4 


12. The need to devote greater efforts and resources to the peaceful 
application of atomic energy' was of' ever-increasing urgency. It was therefore 
lamentable that alongside the beneficial work performed by many countries 
with the help of the Agency, excessively large resources were still being 
diverted to the production and stockpiling of highly destructive nuclear ; 
armaments. It was hardly necessary to point out that existing stocks of such 
armaments were already amply sufficient to bring about the worst catastrophe 
in the history of humanity. 
1J. It was the solemn duty of all the statesmen, diplomats and scientists 
attending the Conference to seek a way of eliminating that deadly danger. 
Such a v/ay did in fact exist? the United Nations General Assembly, attended 
by a number of Heads of Governments, was at that moment engaged on one of the 
major problems of the age, that of general and total disarmament, which must 
of course include prohibition of the military uses of atomic energy. In 
those circumstances the outlook for the Agency was propitious? indeed, its 
very future depended on a reciprocal spirit of trust and goodwill within the 
United Nations in the interests of world peace. He wished the United Nations 
every success in its work, which would open up unlimited prospects for the 
use of atomic energy for the greatest benefit of all the peoples of the world. 
The Agency must therefore give the Unitod Nations every support. 

14. In conclusion he expressed the hope that the. work of the fourth regular 
session of the General Conference v/ould be creative and fruitful. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


(a) APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 
i5. The PRESIDENT proposed that the Credentials Committee should be 
appointed immediately in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, 
and should consist of the following Member States? Afghanistan, Brazil, the 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, Turkey, the 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America. 


16. The proposal was adopted. • 
The meeting was suspended at 11 a^m. and resumed at 11,15 a.m. 



GG(IV)/OR.36 
page 5 


ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 


17. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the election of the eight 
Vice-President:. 
18. Mr. CUNHA (Brazil) nominated the following Member Statess Canada,, 
India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan., Mexico, Morocco and the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
19. Mr. BINSON (Thailand) seconded the nominations. 
20. The Member States referred to were declared elected to the eight 
Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


21. The PRESIDENT said that, to comply with Rule 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure, the General Conference had to elect four additional members to the 
General Committee, He invited nominations in accordance with that- Rule. 
22. Mr. LALL (India) nominated the following Member Statess Prance, 
Iran, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America. 
23. Mi'. SCOTT (Nov/ Zealand) seconded the nominations. 
24. The Member States referred to were declared elected to the General 
Committee and the Committee itself duly appointed in compliance with the 
provisions of Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR'MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(IV)/llO, 125) 


25. The PRESIDENT proposed,, in the absence of any objection, that, 
despite the fact that the agenda had not yet been adopted, the Conference 
next take up the application by Ghana for membership of the Agency, since 
many delegations believed the item should bo dealt with as early as possible 
in the session. 
26. The Conference had before it a recommendation by the Board (GC(IV)/llO), 
It would note from paragraph 2 that the Board had considered the application, 
had determined that the Government of Ghana was able and willing to act in 
accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations and had accordingly recommended that the General Conference approve 

GC(IV)/OR.36 


page 6 


Ghana for membership of the Agency. A draft resolution on the subject had 


been submitted jointly,by Australia, Canada, India? New Zealand, the Union of 


South Africa and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 


(GC(IV)/125). 


27. Sir Roger MAKINS (United Kingdom), introducing the joint draft 
resolution;, stated that the delegations of Ceylon and Pakistan wished to join 
the other Commonwealth countries as co-sponsors. Ghana had been admitted to 
membership of the United Nations shortly after gaining its independence, 
since when it had made great advances, both in internal development and in 
its contribution to world affairs. Its application for membership of the 
Agency was a natural step in that progress, and he was sure that Ghana would 
make a valuable contribution to the Agency's work. 
28. Mr. LALL (India), Mr, EMBLYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) and Mr. MoCONE (United States of America) warmly seconded the 
joint draft resolution and declared their conviction that Ghana would play a 
significant part in the Agency's activities, 
'29. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the joint draft resolution (G0(IV)/l25). 


JO. The joint draft resolution was adopted by 54 votes to none. 


31. The PRESIDENT congratulated Ghana on its election to membership of 
the Agency. 
32. Mr. AMONOO (Ghana) thanked the Conference for its decision and hoped 
that the faith expressed in Ghana's future contribution to the Agency's work 
would be justified, He was certain that other newly independent African 
States would soon be welcomed as Members, which would strengthen their voice 
in international affairs, Ghana fully supported the Agency's objectives and 
would favor any action that would help to free the world of atomic armaments. 
Ghana, the independent African States and all other peace-loving States had 
therefore rightly condemned atomic tests, especially in Africa. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


33. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, on behalf of both the Secretariat and himself, 
joined in congratulating the President on his election. Under Mr. Nadjakov's 
guidance the General Conference would, he felt sure, proceed efficiently to 

GC(lY)/OE.36 
page 7 


far-sighted and constructive conclusions. The presence of the Austrian 
Federal Chancellor and twenty national atomic energy commission chairmen 
clearly indicated the importance which Member States attached to the Agency's 
activities. 


34• During its first three years of existence the Agency had explored the 
various possibilities open to it and, although the way ahead was still not 
entirely clear, most people would agree that initial efforts had proved 
modestly successful. In the cotirse of those years, undue optimism about the 
rapid approach of the atomic age had had to be replaced by the knowledge that 
years of training, research and development would he needed before atomic 


energy could be universally and economically applied. However, the Agency's 
role in that great undertaking would be undiminished, provided that Governments 
recognized and made use of its full potential. 


35• Various recommendations which could help to strengthen and consolidate 
the Agency's activities had been put forward? for example, it had been 
suggested that all international uranium shipments should be registered with 
the Agency, that the international uranium traffic should be administered by 
the Agency, that Agency safeguards should be applied to all peaceful atomic 
energy installations in Member States, that preference should be granted to the 


23t5


Agency in the price of uranium and that the Agency should co-ordinate 
research on nuclear fusion. Ecgrettably, nothing had so far come of those 
recommendations.• 


36. After a brief initial period of exploration, the Secretariat had been 
instructed to prepare for a period of consolidation. The Agency had thus 
come to a crucial point in its development, when it had either to move forward 
in fulfillment of its noble objectives, or sink into'inertia and retreat. 
The present situation in atomic energy had obliged the Agency to make slight 
changes in its aims and activities. There was no need to repeat the causes 
of that shift in emphasis, as they had already been thoroughly analyzed, but 
the fact remained that there would necessarily be a delay in the advent of 
competitive electric power from nuclear energy. Fortunately, that setback 
was not without its advantages% in a sense the Agency had been afforded a 
needed respite, during which it could take measures to ensure that when nuclear 
energy finally arrived on the world scene, the safety and interests of the 

GC(IV)/OR.36 
page 8 . 


public could be fully protected and the benefits made available to the whole 
of mankind. 


37. In actual fact, many of the Agency's, current activities related 
specifically to that preparatory or regulatory task. In a short time the 
Agency would have trained a thousand scientists and technicians. Considerable 
progress had been made in the formulation and acceptance of international 
regulations and uniform practices in the handling of radioisotopes, the 
transport of radioactive materials, the disposal of radioactive wastes and 
other important activities. In addition, the Agency was investigating the 
problem of insurance for foreign shipments of fuel elements, and research 
activities were-being actively supported. Through Agency conferences, 
symposia and publications, information was being exchanged throughout the 
world. Moreover, thanks to advisory missions and various minor projects, 
many Member States were now in a far 'better position to judge realistically 
the benefits which atomic energy could bring them, 
38, In the course of 1960, nine extremely successful scientific meetings 
had been held, attended by over 2 000 scientists from 41 countries. During 
the same period, 400 fellowships had been granted to students from 38 
countries1 arrangements had been made for experts and equipment to be made 
available for atomic programs in 27 countries5 over 30 scientific reports, 
bulletins, symposia and conference proceedings had been published, and the 
first issue of a thermonuclear journal would shortly appear. Codes for the 
transport of radioisotopes and irradiated fuel elements would soon acquire 
force of law. After very careful preparation, technical recommendations on 
waste disposal had been formulated and it was expected that they would soon 
be implemented. The principles and procedures dealing with the very 
important and intractable subject of safeguards were before the Conference, 
Such had been the main features of the Secretariat's activities during the 
period under review, 


39-. Those activities had been ably carried out by the Secretariat with the 
limited funds at its disposal. The Agency's future course was entirely 
depondent on the support, financial and otherwise, offered by Member States. 
At the present time the Agency's financial resources unhappily fell far short 
of actual needs. For example, in the second half of 1960, instead of an 



GC(IV)/OR.36 
page 9 


anticipated sum of $400 000, only $40 000 was actually available for 
distribution over the entire Agency program. The General Conference might 
wish to take note of the constitutional difficulty which led to that anomalous 
situation, namely the distinction drawn between the regular budget financed 
from assessed contributions and the operational budget financed from voluntary 
pledges. In 1959 Governments had simultaneously approved the regular budgetand 
an operational program of $1.5 million. Later, however, those same 
Governments had failed to give the program full financial support, pledging 
less than $1 million to the General Fund in 1960. The result had been that 
the Agency's resources under the regular budget,, planned to support a specific 
operational program, had not been utilized to the full, which amounted to an 
uneconomic use of international resources. The situation which had arisen 
illustrated clearly the difficulty of basing an operational program entirely 

•on voluntary contributions. 


40. The point could not be too highly stressed, since the Conference would 
shortly be asked to establish a slightly higher target for the General Fund 
in 1961s |1,8 million, a figure which, in his opinion as Director General, 
was considerably less than the essential minimum for carrying out the Agency's 
most immediate and urgent tasks. Approval of that target necessarily implied 
that Member States were prepared to provide the resources needed to implement 
the program as planned. 
41. The budget contained another striking features the high cost of the 
Agency's governing bodies, i.e. the General Conference itself and the Board 
of Governors. The figure amounted to nearly 15'fo of the regular budget, 
which was considerably higher than in most of the United Nations specialized 
agencies. The explanation was that some of the constitutional machinery laid 
down in the Statute had clearly been intended for operations and aims somewhat 
different from those later found to bo realistic. In fact, the Agency's 
administrative machinery had been planned to handle a much greater volume of 
atomic assistance. Moreover, it had been established on the assumption that 
the Agency's principal activity would consist in supplying substantial 
quantities of fissionable materials under international safeguards. As the 
emphasis shifted to more traditional technical assistance activities and 
purely scientific services, there was a real danger that the statutory 
machinery might actually act as a brake on the execution of the program. 

GO(iv)/OR.36 


page 10 


42. It was to bo hoped that in the future more emphasis would he placed on 
operations and that the extent of .future activities would justify the heavy 
supervisory machinery imposed upon the Agency by its Statute. One way of 
financing such operations would bo for each of the atomically developed 
235 


countries to make available to the Agency some of the uranium 'J material 
at present in military stockpiles. If a price advantage were offered to the 
Agency, and assuming that the price charged by the Agency to Member States 
were based on prevailing rates> the financial predicament could readily be 

solved. Such a course of action would relieve the Agency of the great strain 


attached to financing its.programs and at the same time bring about a measure 


of disarmament. 


43• The decisions which would have to be taken in the near future did not 
relate to financial support alone, but to the fundamental position of the 
Agency in the international development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
The proliferation of other multi-national organizations concerned with atomic 
energy, but limited to particular geographical areas, was a matter of some 
concern. The creation of those organizations might have boon advisable as a 
moans of dealing with atomic matters peculiar to a given region, but it was 
imperative that some co-ordination and demarcation of effort should be 
established between them and the Agency, similar to that within the United 
Nations family. 


44• Because of the cost and complexity of atomic energy programs it was 
natural that countries of the same geographical area and of common economic 
outlook should join together in order to undertake collectively what they 
might not be able to achieve separately„ On the other hand, there wore 
problems which transcended regional boundaries and should be solved on a 
worldwide basis? they included health and safety regulations, radiation 
protection measures, and legal problems such as third-party liability and the 
maritime aspects of atomic energy. The Agency's work on such matters should 
clearly not be duplicated by regional organizations, 


45• The proposed agreement between the Agency and the Organization for 


9/ 
European Economic Co~operation=/ , which the Conference would bo asked to 
approve, constituted an important initial step towards the co-ordination of 


2/ GC(IV)/l21, Annex, 



GC(IV)/OE.36 
page 11 


worldwide and regional effort. Similar arrangements could be made between 
the Agency and other regional organizations, and there were indications that 
the Agency could be associated with various bilateral agreements. 


46. He was pleased to note that the role accorded to the Agency had been 
confirmed once again in the agreement on co-operation which had been concluded 
between the two leading atomic Powers. 
47* From the annual report of the Board of Governors to the General 
Oonf erence-^, it would be seen that fellowships had increased in number and 
their results had improved in quality. Professors and lecturers were being 
exchanged on a modest but expanding scale, and he felt that still greater 
emphasis should be placed on that type of training5 from the financial 
standpoint it was much more satisfactory to train many people at home than to 
send a few of thorn abroad. The Agency's first training courses had proved 
useful, and the demand was now considerably in excess of what could be 
financed from available resources. 


48. In other fields of technical assistance the Agency had an active, 
expanding program. In the provision of experts and equipment, demand once 
again was outstripping resources - resources which were clearly insufficient 
for a rapid increase in the development of nuclear energy in many Member 
States. 
49* T^e conferences and symposia held by the Agency in 1960 had made a 
significant contribution to scientific and technical knowledge* The published 
proceedings had been vory well received., as had the Agency's other publications, 
such as directories, manuals and reviews. In contrast with certain 
other activities, the conference and publications programs had now reached a 
level at which the idea of consolidation could temporarily be accepted. 


50. Heartening progress had been made with reactors, as evidenced by the 
review of nuclear power costs—' before the Conference, For the first time 
a comprehensive effort had boon made to bring together and clarify the various 
methods of nuclear power costing. A joint study with Finland on the future 
development of nuclear power in that country had just been completed*" and 
should provide guidance for other Member States. 
1/ GC(l¥)/ll4. 
&J GC(IV)/123. 
5/ GC(IV)/ll4, paragraph 245. 


GC(IV)/OR.36 
page 12 • 


51. Special reference should also bo made to the Directory of Nuclear 
Reactors, the third volume of which was/now in course of production and to 
the symposia and reports of the meetings on uranium heavy water lattices and 
the computation of reactor codes. The Conference on Small and Medium Power 
Reactors—' had been of great value, and preparations v/ere well advanced for 
an important symposium on nuclear ship propulsion, 
52. 
A safety evaluation of a Swiss reactor had been carried out, at the 
7/ 
request of the Swiss Government,-17 and a similar request from the Netherlands 
was being met, A panel on the safe operation of critical assemblies and 
research reactors had mot twice during the year and a manual had been drafted 
which would be issued in the health and safety series. 


53. The radiation dosimetry project at Vinoa—' was a particularly good 
example of multi-national scientific collaboration. Thanks were due to all 
who had contributed to the success of the experiment, especially the Government 
of Yugoslavia, which had so amply demonstrated its belief in the value of 
international co-operation. 
9/ 


54. The far-reaching report of the panel on waste disposal into the sea—J 
had been submitted to all Member States, and a panel was being organized to 
make recommendations as to the best means of implementing the findings. A 
similar panel on the possible radioactive contamination of fresh water by 
atomic wastes was to start work late in the year. 
55• The Agency's function as a supplier of nuclear facilities and materials 
had been seriously affected by the unexpectedly slow development of economic 
nuclear power. Arrangements wore almost completed, however, for the supply 
to Finland of a research reactor and fuel. Disappointment and criticism had 
been voiced at the absence of further calls upon the stock of more than 
235 


5 000 kg of uranium ' which had been made available to the Agency. ±t 
235 
had to be remembered, however, that only about J00 kg of contained uranium-- 5 


6/ Held at Vienna from 5 "to 9 September 1960. 


2/ G0(IV)/114, paragraph 215. 


8/ Ibid., paragraphs 174 a^d 175. 
2/ TO/HS/21. 



GC(IV)/OR.36 
page 13 


had so far been handled in international trade since the start of the nuclear 


age. There would undoubtedly be a more active demand in the future and, in 


the meantime? the Agency was gaining valuable experience through modest pilot 
projects such as the Finnish one, 


56. Construction work on the Agency's laboratory at Scibersdorf was making 
progress and scientific work-was planned to start in 1961. In the meantime, 
a good deal of laboratory work had been carried ovil in the very limited 
facilities improvised in the basement of the Agency's temporary headquarters. 
In addition, the two mobile laboratories had been in constant.use, 
57. Some seventy research contracts had been awarded and were serving the 
dual purpose of supporting research work in institutions in Member States and 
filling gaps in nuclear research, particularly in regard to radiation and 
health and safety, including waste disposal. 
58. The steady improvement in the quality of the Secretariat's scientific 
staff was highly satisfactory. It showed that employment with the Agency 
held an attraction for first-class scientists, and that the authorities in 
Member States were increasingly willing to send to the Agency highly-qualified 
personnel for longer or shorter periods. It had to be realized, however, 
that short-term service was costly and raised problems of continuity. It 
was vitally important that the Agency should be able to continue to attract 
and retain scientific staff of the highest repute and quality. 
59* The coming year might be the right time to consider a major reorganization 
within the Secretariat. Recommendations on that subject would be submitted 


to the Board together with the 1962 budget- By that time the Agency would 
have been operating for four years, which was a suitably long period, and the 
Director General's term' of office would come to an end, The administrative 
machine was working, but readjustments would enable it to function more 
smeethly, economically and efficiently. 


600 The Agency had made a satisfactory start, but it was only a start, and 
some discouraging signs had appeared, such as lack of wholehearted financial 
support from Member States, a certain weakening of effort through duplication, 
and a failure of Governments to take full advantage of the services and 
facilities vrtiich the Agency could offer. The coming year should see the 
beginning of a period of decision, leading to an expansion and strengthening 



GO (IV)/OR. 3 6 
page 14 


of the Agency's activities. He sincerely hoped that the present session of 
the General Conference would give the Agency a strong impetus towards becoming 
an active and useful international organization and that, throughout the 
coming year, the Agency would he permitted to plan and work in a climate 
conducive to peace and the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


61. Mr. TUOMIOJA (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations), after conveying the Secretary-General's best wishes for the success 
of the fourth regular session of the General Conference, said that nuclear 
science was now a major instrument of research and technological change, and 
was beginning to transform the material basis of human life. Man's future 
destiny depended on the use to which he put the new form of energy he had 
discovered. The peoples of the world would increasingly look to the Agency 
for leadership in their efforts to use nuclear power for constructive purposes, 
and the Secretary-General was confident that the Agency would provide that 
leadership.' 
62. The past year had boon a fruitful one for the Agency, As one of the 
United Nations staff he was particularly gratified to noto the effective 
co-operation which had boon established between the Agency and the United 
Nations family of international organizations. The introduction of nuclear 
power had to bo considered in the context of a country's whole economy, and 
it was to the general good that the Agency's studies were being carried out' 
in close co-operation with the United Nations. 
63. The Agency had begun work on a comparative study of nuclear and 
conventional power, a subject which was of special concern to the United 
Nations. The long-range prospects for the use of nuclear power now appeared 
to be somewhat brighter than they had been a few years previously, even though 
the hopes of the loss-developed countries that nuclear power would offer 
them a short-cut to modernization and industrialization might not have been 
fulfilled. Good examples of co-operation in that sphere wore the contribution 
which the Agency would make to the seminar on electric power, which was to be 
organized by the Economic Commission for Latin America in Mexico in 1961, and 
the parallel and concerted studies on the costing of power from conventional 
and nuclear sources which were at present being undertaken by the Agency and 
the United Nations, 

GC(IV)/OR.36 
page 15 


64. As the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Europe for the 
last three years, he was happy to report that during the past year co-operation 
between the Agency and the United Nations regional economic commissions had 
been strengthened^ the Agency had been represented at meetings of all four 
commissions and had supplied expert advice on specific problems. 
65. The Agency had continued to take an active part in the work of the United 
Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation,, and had 
submitted to that committee.a report on the relation of radiation danger to 
radiation doses in the bone. Agains in pursuance of a resolution adopted by 
the General Assembly of the United Nations—', the Agency had given valuable 
assistance to the Secretary-General in evaluating the second United Nations 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy with reference 
to the need, nature and timing of•similar conferences in the future. In his 
report to the fifteenth regular session of the General Assembly, the Secretary-
General recommended that a third conference on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy should be held in Geneva in 1962 or 1963^ and recognized that the 
Agency should play a very important role in the Conference, particularly in 
regard to its scientific staffing and the preparation of its detailed program. 
66. The Economic and Social Council of the United Nations had recently 
requested the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to undertake an annual 
review of the atomic energy work carried out by members of the United Nations 
familyj no doubt the Agency would be able to offer valuable assistance in 
preparing that review. 
67. During its growth the Agency had naturally experienced difficulties in 
carrying out the duties assigned to it, but the constructive work which it 
had already undertaken in less than three years of existence gave ground for 
expecting that in duo course it would make even faster progress towards the 
full accomplishment of its tasks. 
68. The United Nations family would follow with great interest and attention 
the future progress of the Agency's efforts to ensure that the new and awesomo 
force of atomic energy was used for the welfare of the human race. 
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m. 


10/ See General Assembly Resolution 1J44 (XIIl). 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(IV)/OR.37 
7 December 1960

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 21 September 1960, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


6 Adoption of the agenda and allocation 1 -3 
of items for initial discussion 


5 Credentials of delegates to the fourth 
regular sessions 


(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 4-60 
3 The closing date for the session 61 - 62 
* GC(IV)/150. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
G0(IV)/lHF/3l/aev.3


60-6^60 


GO(IV)/OR.37 
page 2 


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION . 
(GG(IV)/128-) . . 


1. The PRESIDENT invited the General Gonferenco to examine the report 
submitted by the General Committee (GC(IV)/l28), which recommended that the 
General Conference include in its agenda all the items on the provisional 
agenda, supplementary item A—' -;'Thc use of funds provided to defray the 
Agency's administrative and operational services costs in 196O under the 
United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance" - and the item 
proposed by Poland concerning the matter of the grant of consultative status 
with the Agency to the World Federation of Trade Unions. The General Committee 
recommended that the latter item bo discussed at a plenary meeting to be hold 
on or after Wednesday, 28 September. 
2. He proposed that the Conference accept the recommendations of the General 
Committee on the agenda and the allocation of itoms for initial discussion. 
3. The agenda and the allocation of items for initial discussion were 
approved. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE FOURTH REGULAR SESSIONS 


(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE.(GC(IV)/l29) 
4. Mr. YEMISCIBASI (Turkey), Chairman of the Credentials Committee, 
associated himself with the congratulations expressed to the President and 
thanked the Conference for having elected Turkey to the Credentials Committee. 
5. On behalf of the Committee he asked the General Conference to approve the 
Committee's report (GC(IV)/l20) and the two draft resolutions appearing at the 
end. of it. 
6. Mr. SMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that his 
delegation was categorically opposed to recognition of the credentials of the 
Chiang Kai-shek clique, which claimed to represent the people of China, with 
its 600 million inhabitants, at the General Conference, The delegation of the. 
Soviet Union considered that China could be represented only by persons 
nominated-by the Government- of-the People's Republic of China, The Chiang 
1/ GG(IV)/109/Add.l. 



GO(IV)/OE.57 
page J 


Kai-shek group had long been dissociated from the Chinese people5 it was now 
living out its last days at Taiwan? protected by American bayonets and 
subsidized by the United States Government. 


7. The Soviet Union delegation again drew the attention of the Conference to 
the completely abnormal, if not absurd, situation; as a result of which the 
groat State of China was not represented in the Agency and played no part in 
the work of the General Conference, The absence of representatives of the 
People's Eopublic of China was prejudicial to the cause of international cooperation. 
The responsibility for that rested with the United States delegation; 
whose attitude showed clearly that the United States was pursuing a cold 
war policy and intended to subordinate the interests of the Agency to its own 
interests. The Soviet Union delegation proposed that the credentials of the 
representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek clique should not be recognized and 
that the draft resolution submitted by the Credentials Committee on that 
subject should be rejected. 
8. The delegation of the Soviet Union also condemned the attitude adopted by 
the majority of the Credentials Committee with regard to the delegation of "the 
People's Republic of Hungary. Hungary was a Member of the Agency and was 
meeting all its obligations under the Agency's Statute. Everyone know that 
there was only one Hungarian Government and one Hungarian State. The 
credentials of the delegation of the People's Republic of Hungary had been 
issued by the Government of that country, in conformity with its Constitution 
and with the provisions of Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. The attempt of the United States delegation to question the 
credentials of the Hungarian delegation constituted an interference in the 
internal affairs of a sovereign State, which was a Member of the United Nations. 
It was perfectly clear that the United States delegation was seeking to 
intensify the cold war and complicate the v/ork of the Conference. The position 
adopted by that delegation on whoso proposal the Committee had taken no 
decision on the credentials of the Hungarian delegation; was absolutely 
illogical. The United States Government maintained diplomatic relations with 
the Government of the People's Republic of Hungary, had a legation in Hungary 
and, at the fourteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly, had 
voted for the admission of Hungary to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of 

GO(IV)/OR.37 
page 4 


Outer Space, For those reasons? his delegation was categorically opposed to 


the action taken by the Committee in regard to the credentials of the 


Hungarian delegation and would vote against the draft resolution proposing 


that the report of the Committee he approved, 


9. Mr. McCONE (United States of America) said that his delegation 
supported the report of the Credentials Committee and would vote in favor of 
the two draft resolutions recommended hy the Committee. 
10. The Soviet representative had opposed the Committee's action in regard to 
the questions of the representation of China and the credentials submitted on 
behalf of the delegates of Hungary, and in doing so had made a number of 
statements to which the United States strongly objected. Despite the 
provocation, the United States delegation would not, however, reply to those 
statements in kind nor engage in a debate on the substance of the political 
matters in question. Those issues were not now; the Agency was not the 
proper forum in which to discuss their substance. In addition, the United 
States delegation wished to avoid an acrimonious debate which would not enhance 
understanding or servo any useful purpose, 
11. The United Statos delegation, like many others, had not come to the 
Conference to use the Agency as a propaganda platform, but to consider 
seriously ways and means of promoting the important work for which the Agency 
had the primary responsibility within the United Nations system, 
12. The views of the United States on the substance of the question of the 
• representation of China and Hungarian credentials had been made clear repeatedly 
in the political organs of the United Nations and other appropriate international 
forums. The United Statos Government would have further opportunity at the 
current session of the United Nations General Assembly to restate the facts 
underlying its strong opposition to the seating of Communist China in international 
organizations and to reiterate the reasons for its attitude on the 
matter of Hungarian credentials. 
13. TTith regard to the representation of China, the resolution recommended by 
the Committee was in full conformity with the decisions taken on that matter by 
the United Nations and the specialized agencies. The Agency and the specialized 
agencies had, in fact, always recognized that the questions involving the 
representation of Member States were the primary concern of the General Assembly 
of the United Nations. 

GC(I7)/0E.37 
page 5 


14. As to the representation of Hungary, thd action taken by the Credential£t_ 
Committeo was likewise in conformity with the practice consistently followed by 
the General Assembly over since the tragic events in Hungary in 1956. 
15. The United States delegate appealed to all delegations to make a determined 
effort to avoid debates on controversial issues which were not the concern of 
the Agency - ?/hioh properly fell within the jurisdiction of, and were under 
active consideration in, other international forums. The problems to be 
solved to make the atom servo the peaceful purposes contemplated by the Statute 
of the Agency, and to achieve the goals established, wore formidable. Their 
solution could only bo delayed by confusing them with political issues. 
16. Mr. MELLBR-CQgaAD (Poland) protested against the pretensions of a 
group of persons who claimed to represent China, and regretted the absence of 
the only valid representatives of that country, namely those of the People's 
Republic of China. Ho also protested against the fact that the Committee had 
not recognized unreservedly the credentials of the Hungarian delegation. 
17. Ho wondered why the General Conference had set up a Credentials Committee 
if it was only to rubber-stamp a decision of the United Nations. By their 
vote, the majority of the Committee had not served the Agency's interests since 
they had in fact countenanced a maneuver that smacked of the cold war. The 
Polish delegation would vote against the Committee's report, 
2/ 


18. Mr. SSBES (Hungary) made the following statements—' 
a. "As delegate of the Government of the Hungarian People's Republic I 
protest most emphatically against paragraph 12 of the Credentials Committee's 
report proposing that the General Conference should once again take no decision 
regarding the credentials submitted by the delegation of the Hungarian People's 
Republic. 
b. "It is obvious to everyone that the proposal concerning the credentials 
of the delegate of Hungary is illegal and absurd. Hungary is a founder Member 
of the Agency and as such has participated actively in the Agency's work from 
the beginning. It takes part in sessions of the General Conference as well 
as in numerous seminars and meetings of experts organized by the Agency and 
endeavors to contribute towards the success of those activities. Under the 
Agency's auspices fellows proposed by the Hungarian Government have been 
2/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure, 


GC(IV)/OR.37 
page 6 


received in many countries including the-Federal-.Republic of Germany, France, 
the United Kingdom and even the United States of America. On its part Hungary 
has offered fellowships to the Agency, one of which has already boon accepted 
by a oandidate from another country. The relations maintained by Hungary with 
the Agency are thus effective and useful.- It is therefore senseless, on the 
pretoxt of a discussion concerning credentials, to start a debate on a 
factitious question when the Conference ought to devote all its attention to 
matters concerning the Agency's work, such as the- development of trade and 


scientific relations between countries and the industrial, agricultural and 
medical uses of radioisotopes. 


c. "Delegations of countries socking to question the credentials of the 
Hungarian delegation arc fully aware that the international relations of the 
Hungarian People's Republic are developing satisfactorily in regard to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy both within the framework of the Agency and in 
othor spheres, as demonstrated by the Director General's visits to Hungary and 
my country's relations with both Bast and West, 
d. "The fact that the Hungarian delegation's credentials have boon contested 
obviously serves only to deflect the work of the Agency, which should primarily 
be of a technical and economic character, in a way that frustrates the 
successful accomplishment of its specific task so clearly defined in its Statute. 
Everyone realizes which arc the countries to whose advantage such maneuvers 
redound. 
e. "Concerning the representation of China, in the name of the Government of 
the Hungarian People's Republic, I most emphatically protest against acceptance 
of the credentials presented by the representative of the Taiwan clique. 
Credentials can only be submitted by duly authorized representatives of 
legitimate governments. In China there is only one legitimate government, 
the Government of the People's Ropuhlic. Accordingly, only the authorized 
delegate of that Government can be regarded as the lawful representative of 
China, 
f. "Y/o all know that the question we are roally being askod to decide is not 
whether the General Conference should or should not endorse such credentials, 
but how long China is still to be deprived of its undoubted right to play its 

GC(IV)/0E,37 
page 7 


proper part in the international organizations within the United Nations 
family. At,present the place of the fifth great Power? recognized by the 
United Nations and hence by all international organizations? is being usurped 
by a cliquey that diminishes respect for these organizations and stands in 
the way of the solution of world problems,, including that of the use of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes and the development of its applications. It is 
obvious that the Agency's objectives on a worldwide scalo and true international 
co-operation can only be achieved with the participation of the 
People's Republic of China, Consequently I will vote against acceptance of 
the-credentials presented by the representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek clique." 


19. Mr. NOVACU (Romania) noted from the Credentials Committee's report 
that the seat of the People's Republic of China was once again being occupied 
by private individuals representing no one but themselves. That anachronism 
reflected the attitude adopted by certain circles hostile to democracy and 
progress at a time when the People's Republic of China was continuously 
expanding its productive forces at an impressive pace and turning itself into 
a first-class industrial power. 
200 The report of the Board for 1959-1960 stated that advantage must be taken 
of the Agency's rroildwide membership by using it as a means of improving 
scientific contact between different countries. But it was difficult to see 
how the igency could effectively discharge that function as long as it was 
deprived of the technical and scientific experience and the practical contribution 
of a country with a population of over 600 millions. The absence of 
China detracted from the Agency's authority and prestige. The only credentials 
his delegation could recognize were those emanating from the Government of the 
People's Republic of China. 


21, Furthermorej his delegation opposed the Credentials Committee's proposal 


concerning the credentials of the Hungarian delegation whichj being in order, 
were fully valid. The United States motion discriminated against Hungary and 
was wholly lacking in any legal basis since it concerned a country which 
maintained diplomatic and scientific relations with most Member States of the 
Agency,, including the United States. 


22. His delegation would vote against the Credentials Committee's report. 

GC(IV)/0E.37' 
page 8 


23. Mr. LALL (India) considered that, in paragraph 1 of the proposed draft 
resolution I, the Committee had gone beyond its terms of roforence. The text 
derivod from a similar resolution of the United Nations General Assembly, but 
whereas the Assembly had had before it requests and motions concerning the 
representation of China, nothing of the sort had happened in the General 
Conference. The proposed text, which was not in conformity with Rule 28 of 
the Rules of Procedure, was therefore inacceptable. 
24. His delegation would support draft resolution II although it was opposed 
to the recommendation in paragraph 12 of the report concerning the credentials 
of the Hungarian delegation. 
25. Mr. LEE (China) regretted that the Conference had had to listen once 
again to well-worn and false accusations against the Republic of China, which 
was a free country on whose territory there was not a single soldier belonging 
to an army of occupation. The United States had not sent an army to China to 
suppress the fight for freedom as others had done in Eastern Germany and 
Hungary. If the 600 million inhabitants of continental China had a free choice 
they would certainly not choose the Communist regime. That would also be true 
of the peoples of Eastern Europe. " The delegation of the Republic of China 
thanked all the delegations who staunchly defended the cause of right and 
justice, 
26. Mr. PETRZBLKA (Czechoslovakia) made the following statements^ 
a. "The Czechoslovak delegation'stated at the previous session of the General 
Conference as well as at the Conference on the Statute of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, and considers it urgent to re-emphasizc emphatically at 
the present juncture, that the Czechoslovak Government docs not recognize as 
valid any signature appended to the Statute of the Agency in the name of China 
that has not been appended by the representatives of the •Government of the 
People's Republic of Chinap. likewise it does not recognize the validity of 
any credentials issued on behalf of China by persons other than the representatives 
of the Government of the People's Republic of China, which is the only legitimate 
Government of China. 
3_/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker1'J request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(IV)/OR.57 
page 9 


b. "In this connection, Mr. President, I wish to express once again the deep 
regrets of the Czechoslovak Government that, as a result of the discriminatory 
policy pursued by some Western Powers, the People's Republic of China, whose 
population makes up a quarter of all humanity,, has thus far boon prevented from 
becoming a Member of the Agency. That policy, which has made itself felt also 
on other occasions, cannot under any circumstances further the interests of our 
organization. International co-operation within the framework of the Agency 
cannot but suffer from the fact that that great country has been deprived of 
the possibility of participating in the Agency's activities and that its place 
has boon takers by the representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek clique, who 
represent nobody, and who maintain their existence only thanks to the military 
occupation of Taiwan by the United States armed forces. 
c. "We therefore warmly support the motion tabled by the delegation of the 
USSR that the General Conference should declare the credentials of the so-called 
representative of China to be out of order and consequently exclude the name of 
China from the list of delegations which have submitted their credentials for 
the General Conference. 
d. "With regard to paragraph 12 of the report of the Credentials Committee, 
the -Czechoslovak delegation is obliged to express its fundamental objection to 
the effect of the voting in the Credentials Committee, which, resulted in 
rejecting consideration of the credentials of the Hungarian People's Republic. 
The credentials of this delegation wore issued by a Government elected legally 
and in accordance with the State Constitution. The unwillingness to consider 
the credentials of the Hungarian People's Republic represents; as was the case 
at the last session of the General Conference also, another attempt to 
discriminate against the delegation of the Hungarian People's Republic, with 
a view to frustrating its co-operation in the international field. 


e. "The Czechoslovak delegation will therefore vote against the report of 
the Credentials Committee." 
27. Mr. PIAH (Indonesia) said that be had studied the report of the 
Credentials Committee but could not support the Committee's draft resolution 
concerning the representation of China, as the Indonesian Government recognized 
only the Government of the People's Republic of China. In regard to the 

GO (IV) /OR.37' 
page 10 


credentials --submitted by the Hungarian delegation, the Indonesian delegation 
was obliged to point out that thoso credentials wore in conformity with the 
provisions of Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure. Indonesia, like many States 
Members of the Agency, maintained diplomatic relations with the Hungarian 
Government, and the Indonesian delegation saw no legal reason why the validity 


of the credentials submitted by the Hungarian delegation should not bo 
recognized. 


28. Consequently, the Indonesian delegation could not support draft resolution I 
which the Credentials Committee recommended the Conference to adopt, but, 
subject to the reservations which be had mentioned, his delegation would vote 
for draft resolution II. 
29. Mr. 2HMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that his 
delegation protested most strongly against the recognition of the credentials 
of the Chiang Kai-shek group. In the Agency the Government of China was judged 
on the basis of the negative attitude which the United States Government 
adopted towards the system of government instituted by the Chinese people5 
consequently that great country found itself deprived of the possibility of 
taking part in the Agency's work. It was time the Conforoncc put an end to 
the practice of subordinating the activities of the Agency to the egotistical 
intorosts of certain States and did away with the anomalous position which had 
arisen in regard to the representation of China. His delegation considered that 
the legitimate representative of China in the Agency could only be a 
representative appointed by the Government of the People's Republic of China. 
30. The Ukrainian delegation protested most strongly against the doubts which 
a certain group of delegations wore attempting to oast on the validity of the 
credentials of the delegation of the Hungarian People's Republic. Hungary was 
a Member of the Agency and had therefore an undeniable right to send its 
delegation to take part in the work of the Conference. The credentials of 
the Hungarian delegation had been submitted in accordance with the constitutional 
provisions of the State and .they had been issued in entire conformity with the 
provisions of the Statute and of the Rules of Procedure. Consequently, any 
consideration of the political system in Hungary constituted an attempt to 
interfere in the internal affairs of that State. For thoso reasons his 
delegation was unable to vote in favor of the report submitted by the 
Credentials Committee. 

GC(IV)/0B.37 
page 11 


51. Mr. CONTRERAS (El Salvador) said that El Salvador maintained diplomatic 
relations with, the Republic of China and for that reason his delegation was 
bound to recognize the validity of the credentials issued to the representatives 
of that country. His delegation would therefore vote for the draft resolutions 
submitted by the Credentials Committee. 
32. Mr. pANEV (Bulgaria) stated that his delegation did not recognize any 
credentials submitted in the name of China other than those issued by the 
Government of the People's Republic of China. His delegation would continue 
to protest until the legitimate representatives of the Chinese people had taken 
their rightful pir^o in the Agency. The question of the representation of the 
Chinese people in the Agency was an important one and had a direct bearing on 
the principle of the universality of the Agency. His delegation considered 
that the Chinese people should be represented by its real representatives. 
33. In the interests of international co-operation his delegation protested 
most vigorously against the approval of the credentials of the representatives 
of the Chiang Kai-shek clique. His delegation was likewise, opposed to the 
attitude adopted by the Credentials Committee in regard to the credentials of 
the Hungarian delegation? the delegations which had raised that matter wore 
compromising the very principles on which the Agency worked, 
34. His delegation accordingly protested most strongly against the report 
submitted by the Credentials Committee and would vote against the draft 
resolutions it contained, 
35• Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea) regretted that certain delegations had 
felt it necessary to raise the question of the representation of China. The 
Conference was there to promote the peaceful use of atomic onorgy, and could 
have no place for propagandist political maneuvers. Yfas it to be tolerated 
that Communist China, which had attacked Korea and had been condemned as an 
aggressor by the General Assembly of the United Nations;, and had novor ceased 
to harbor evil designs against the Republic of Korea, should bo allowed to 
become a member of an international organization like the Agency? The 
credentials of the Chinese delegation,'which had boon issued by the representatives 
of the only legitimate Government of China, wore in comploto conformity with the 
provisions of Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure, and wore therefore fully valid. 
Without wasting any more time on the question, the Conference should approve 
the conclusions of the Credentials Committee. 



GC(IV)/OR,37' 
page 12 


36, Mr. PAVLUGHENKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) recalled 
that his delegation had stated on many occasions that only the representatives 
appointed by the Government of the People's Republic of China could represent 
China in the Agency. In accordance with that view, Byelorussia had never 
recognized and did not recognize the validiby of the signature which the Chiang 
Kai-shek group had appended to the Statute of the Agency. 


37. During its eleven yoarb of existence, the Chinese People's Republic had 
had enormous successes., political, economic and social, and had consistently 
followed a peaceful foreign policy. By depriving it of the right to take part 
in the work of the Agency, groat harm wa,s done to the Agency, and the 
opportunities for ensuring a broad international co-operation in the peaceful 
use of atomic onergy were considerably restricted. 
38. His delegation therefore unreservedly supported the Soviet Union proposal 
not to recognize as valid the credentials of the so-called Government of Chiang 
Kai-shek. 
39> His delegation also protested strongly against the attempt to cast doubts 
on the credentials of the Hungarian delegation, which had been issued in 
accordance with the Constitution of the Hungarian People's Republic and with 
the provisions of the Rules of Procedure. The proposal to take no decision on 
•ohc credentials of the Hungarian delegation, which had boon imposed by the United 
States and was politically inspired, seriously obstructed the work of the present 
session of the General Conference and was intended to intensify the cold war. 


40. The Credentials Committee's action was in flagrant contradiction with the. -
Statute, Article IV of which provided that "The Agency is based on the principle 
of the sovereign equality of all its members .,.." His delegation was therefore 
strongly against approval of the Committee's report. 
41. Mr. PHUONG (Viet-Nam) said be had carefully studied the report of the 
Credentials Committee. The problem of the representation of China must be 
considered from three viewpoints3 legal, political and practical. From the 
legal viewpoint it was difficult to contest the validity of the credentials 
submitted in the name of the Republic of China, for the Conference only had to 
decide if those credentials were in conformity with the provisions of Rule 27 
of its Rules of Procedure and it was clear beyond all dispute that they were. 

GC(I¥)/OR.37 
page 13 


From the political viewpoint it-seemed uncertain ?/hcthor the Gonforcnce was 
competent to take any decision. The Agency was a highly specialized 
organization, and if the discussions of the Conference wore to bo imbued with 
proper serenity, political questions should be left to such bodies as the 
United Nations General Assembly. Finally, with regard to the practical aspect, 


i.e. the contribution Member States could make to the Agency's work, there was 
no denying the progress which had boon made in atomic energy thanks to the work 
of eminent scientists from the Republic of China. 
42. For those reasons? the Yict-Nam delegation approved the report of the 
Credentials Committer and would vote in favor of the two draft resolutions it 
recommended to the Conference for adoption. 
43• Mr. BAUM (Yugoslavia) said he would not restate Yugoslavia's attitude 
to the question of the representation of China^ it was already well known and 
had not changed. His delegation would vote against draft resolution I, 
submitted by the Credentials Committee. It would vote in favor of draft 
resolution II, although disagreeing with that part of the report which dealt 
with the credentials submitted on behalf of the delegates of Hungary and the 
decision taken in that regard by the Committee. . . . 


44. Mr. BOONWAAT (Burma) said be shared the Indonesian viow on the 
credentials submitted by the delegation of China. In addition, his delegation 
could not recognize the validity of the credentials submitted by the.delegations 
of Viet-Nam and Korea so long as the People's Republic of Yiot-Nam and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea were not also represented. 
45• Mr. BIUSON (Thailand) pointed out that, every time the Credentials 


Committee had had to deal with the problem of the credentials of the delegations 


of China and Hungary, it had taken a decision similar to that taken by the 


appropriate United Nations bodies. It therefore seemed reasonable for the 


Conference to approve the Committee's report. His-delegation would, vote for 
the two draft resolutions submitted by the Committee and hoped the discussion 
would soon end, so that the Conference could tako up other items on its agenda. 


46. Mr. SINACEUR (Morocco) pointed out that his Government maintained 
diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China and therefore found it 
difficult,to recognize any Chinese Government other than that of Peking. In 

GC(IV)/OR.37 
page 14 


regard to paragraph 12 of the Credentials Committee's report, he thought the 
Committee should have adhered strictly to the provisions of Rule 28 of the 
Rules of Procedure? which provided that it should "examine the credentials of 
all delegates and report thereon without delay to the General Conference". 
His delegation would vote against the first draft resolution submitted by the 
Credentials Committee, and could vote for the second only with the reservation 
he had mado. 


47. Mr. FAHMY (United Arab Republic) said his delegation would vote against 
the first draft resolution? because his country maintained that the only 
legitimate government of China was that of the People's Republic of China^ it 
would vote for the second draft resolution, but only on the understanding that 
its vote should not be interpreted as expressing doubts in regard to the validity 
of -the credentials of the Hungarian delegation. 
48. Mr. BUESO (Honduras) said be approved draft resolution I as a whole. 
49. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote on .draft resolution I 
in the report of the Credentials Committee. 
50. Mr. PBTRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) formally proposed that the two 
paragraphs of draft resolution I be put to the vote separately and asked that 
voting be by roll-call. 
51. Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) seconded the 
Czechoslovak proposal for a soparatc vote. 
52. Mr. McCONE (United States of America) also supported the proposal. 
53' A roll-call vote was taken on paragraph 1. 

Pakistan, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


The result of the vote was as follows % 

In favors Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, 
Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Groat Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Viet-Nam, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, 
El Salvador, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, 
Holy Sec, Honduras, Iran, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, 
Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, Hew Zealand, 



GC(IV)/OR.37 
page 15 


Againstz Poland, Romania, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, 
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Bui-ma, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Ceylon, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, 
Denmark, Finland, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq., Morocco,_ 
Norway, 

Abstainings Pakistan, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ethiopia, Iceland, Israel. 


54• Paragraph 1 was adopted by 32 votes to 21, with 6 abstentions. 


55• A roll-call vote was taken on paragraph 2. 
Haiti, having boon drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


The result of the vote was as follows; 
In favors Holy See, Honduras, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of 
Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Motherlands, New Zealand, 
Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, Union 
of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United" Spates of- America, Viet-Ifom, Argentina, 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada., China, 
El Salvador, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, 


Against a Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Morocco, Poland, Romania, 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, 
Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Ceylon, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. 


Abstainings Iceland, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, 
Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland. 


56. Paragraph 2 was adopted by 33 votes to 17, with 9 abstentions. 
57• A roll-call vote was taken on draft resolution I.as a whole, 
Spain, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 



GC(IV)/OR.37 
page 16 


The result of the vote was as follows? 


In favors Spain, Thailand,, Turkey., Union of South Africa? United 
Kingdom of Groat Britain and Northern Ireland? United 
States of America, Vict-Nam, Argentina? Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, El Salvador, Ethiopia, 
Franco, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Holy See, 
Honduras, Iran, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Luxembourg, 
Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, Now Zealand,. Peru, Philippines, 
Portugal. 


Against; Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, 
Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Ceylon, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Denmark, 
Finland, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Morocco, Norway, 
Poland, Romania. 


Abstaining; Switzerland, Iceland, Israel, Pakistan. 


58. Draft resolution I was adopted by 35 votes to 21, with 4 abstentions. 
59. . The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote on draft resolution II. 
60• Draft resolution II was adopted by 45 votes to 10, with 3 abstentions. 


THE CLOSING DATE FOR THE SESSION 


61. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 of the Rules of Proceduro, 
the General Conference on the recommendation of the General Committee should, 
at the beginning of each session, fix a closing dato for the session. At its 
eighth m-eeting, on 20 September 196O, the General Committee had estimated that 
the general debate might conclude during the afternoon of Thursday, 
22 September and the main committees begin work the following morning. The 
General Conference would then bo able to resume plenary meetings in the middle 
of the following.week. The General Committee accordingly recommended that 
the Conference provisionally fix Saturday, 1 October 1960, as the closing date 
for the session, on the understanding that the dato could cf course be altered 
if the Conference succeeded in completing its work earlier. 
62, The recommendation of the General Committoo was adopted. 


The meeting rose at I p.m. 



Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL 
GC(IV)/OR.38 
5 December 1960 General Conference ENGLISH 

FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna,, 
on Wednesday, 21 September 1960, at 3.5 p.m. 


President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* 


10 
General debate and report of the Board 
of Governors for 1959-60 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Afghanistan 
France 
United States of America 
Japan 
Israel 
Union of South Africa 
Yugoslavia 
Thailand 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Republic of Korea 
Switzerland 
Mexico 
Monaco 
Turkey 


Paragraphs 


1 -4 
5 -20 
21 


43 
44 


49 


50 


56 
57 


67 


68 


77 


78 


79 


80 


86 


87 


90 


91 


92 


93 


103 


104 


106 


107 


115 


GC(IV)/130. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/31/Rev.3 


60-6564 



C0(X\T;-/ORu38 

GFJIJERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OP GOTORNORS FOR 1959-60 

(CJ(IV)/114, 126 and 126/Corr.1) 


J"> . Mr^__KAKA_R (Afghanistan);, after congratulating the President on his 
election, expressed his Government's gratitude to the Agency for its assistance 
in organising a nuclear training program in Afghanistan. As a result of 
recommendations made by the Agency's fourth preliminary mission, which had 
visited Afghanistan in 1959? equipment worth $23 000 would be received before 
the end of 1960 for the nuclear physics laboratory of the University of Kabul5 
the United States Government had agreed to provide the equipment under its 


offer of equipment to the amount of $200 000 for technical assistance projects 
undertaken by the Agency in 1960 (see the annual report of the Board of 


Governors to the General Conference (GC(IV)/114, paragraph 103)) . 


20 A nuclear physics export, also provided by the Agency, was soon expected5 
he would assist in drawing up a development program and sotting up the 
nuclear physics laboratory, ' In 1961-62 Afghanistan hoped to receive ad


ditional equipment worth some $30 000 through the Agency under the United 
ITations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, and had alroady been 
awarded numerous Agency fellowships, 


3o It was hoped that, by the end of 1961, the University of Kabul v/ould have 


1 fully equipped and staffed nuclear physics laboratory, A request would be 


submitted to the Agency for an export in radiotherapy and for a contribution 


towards the cost of a radiocesium unit for a cancer therapy center which was 


urgently needed, 


4, His Government was well satisfied with the assistance the Agency had 
provided in 1959 and 1960 and hoped such assistance would continue5 it would 


support any bilateral or international agreements that could benefit mankind, 


5, Mr. COUTURE (France) extended his warm congratulations to the Presi


dent, the first scientist to become President of the Conference, 


6, In the Agency's third year of existence, certain expectations had been 
fulfilled, but fears caused by its inability to carry out some of its statutory 
functions remained. Ho dealings in natural uranium had boon arranged through 
the Agency, and two requests made a yoar previously for small quantities of 
enriched uranium weife still at the stage of negotiation, Nor had any bilateral 
agreement boon registered with the Agency or submitted foot execution under 
Agency supervision as envisaged in Article XII#A of the Statute, 



GC(IV)/OR,38 
page 3 


7. His delegation, which had closely followed the Board's study of the safeguards 
problem and had provisionally approved the principles and procedures 
l/ 


submitted to the General Conference— , continued to believe that the theoretical 
rules would have to bo very flexibly interpreted and adapted when they wore 
actually applied to projects involving Agency safeguards. Otherwise, the 
Agency might find it had a safeguards system but no opportunity of using it, 


8. At a time when the world's main uranium producers were beginning to shut 
down mines., it was unlikely that a largo number of countries would come to the 
Agency to obtain fuels which were in abundant supply. The same applied to 
the power reactor construction industry., for which the market was far less 
favorable than had been hoped some years previously, 
9. Moreover, the problem of supervision might be greatly complicated by the 
advances which had apparently taken place in the technique of uranium isotopic 


separation by ultra-centrifugation - advances which might enable other countries 


235 
to produce uranium ^ on a more modest scale than that involved in the immense 
gas diffusion plants, which only the Groat Powers could afford, 


10. Technically, a peaceful atomic industry could most readily bo supervised 
at the plant where irradiated fuels wore chemically processed, i.e. whoro pure 
plutonium was produced. That type of plant was not covered in the principles 
and procedures for the attachment and application of safeguards, which referred 
to the next two years only, but it was a matter the Agency should study. In 
that connection, Eurochcmic - the irradiated fuel processing enterprise jointly 
sot up by thirteen countries belonging to the European Nuclear Energy Agency 
(ENEA) — v/ould certainly provide interesting practical data and it would be 
2/ 


useful if, under the proposed agreement with ENEA—' , the Agency could arrange 
to obtain such data, 


11. On the credit side, the Agency had continued its valuable work on the 
dissemination of information, and had trained numerous experts from the lessdeveloped 
countries in the use of radioisotopes. That type of work should 
be expanded, especially in regard to the use of radioisotopes in medicine. 
The French delegation entirely approved the 1961 fellowship program. In 1960, 
Prance had received 27 trainees from 12 Member States, and would continue to 
open its laboratories and lecture-rooms to Agency fellowship-holders. 
1/ GC(IV)/l08/Rcv.l, Annex. 
2/ See GC(IV)/121, Annex. 



GC(IV)/0B.58 
page 4 


12, Agency conferences and symposia had been extremely valuable. Thanks to • 

their efficient organization, bhc quality of the reports and the number of 
eminent scientists who had participated, those meetings had become one of the 
Agency's most useful activities. Prance was anxious that the Agency should 


take an active part in organizing the third United Nations International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in close collaboration with the 
United Nations, In the meantime, the smaller meetings hold by the Agency 
offered one of the rare points of contact between all countries. However, it 
was generally recognized that the saturation point had already boon reached and 
that too many conferences could bo harmful, Consequently, the number should 
be reduced so that scientists also had time to work in their laboratories, 


13,, His. delegation also approved the Agency's work on health and safety moasr 
ures and, in particular, the regulations on the handling, transport and disposal 
of radioactive materials. In that connection, the report of the Panel on 


3/ 


Radioactive Waste Disposal into the Sea—' was particularly useful. Since his 
Government was convinced that such problems should bo dealt with by an international 
organization, it had taken a large part in the Tinea dosimetry project, 
expending a sum roughly equal to its voluntary contribution to the Agency's 
operational budget for 1960, 


14, Technical assistance continued to bo the Agency's major activity, although 
it did not seem to have succeeded completely in finding the right approach. 
Preliminary assistance missions had helped to define the needs and programs of 
the countries concerned, but there was a danger that increasing requests and 
projects might lead to a dissipation of the Agency's limited resources. His 
delegation believed - and the Conference on Small and Medium Power Reactors—' 
confirmed, the view - that during the next few years the Agency would probably 
have no opportunity of helping to build nuclear powor stations in the nonindustrial 
countries, where nuclear energy at present offered few advantages, 

15, One lessen of recent years was that some countries had embarked upon 
atomic energy programs more rapidly than was desirable, with the intention of 
training technicians to operate power reactors, which they hoped would be 
available on the world market, competitively with conventional sources of energy. 


3/ TO/HS/21. 
4/ Held at Vienna from 5 to 9 September 1960, 



GC(IV)/OR.38 
pago 5 


A time-lag of some ton years was involved, however, and those countries now 
found that they had plant - research reactors in particular - without having 
the necessary technicians,, programs and financial means, 


16, The Agency could play an extremely useful role by helping Member States 
which so requested to plan work programs for their research reactors, coordinating 
research undertaken with reactors of the same type. Such 
assistance had four aspectss the collection at Agency headquarters of data 
on research undertaken with research reactors, with the ultimate purpose of 
co-ordinating such research;; the drafting, also at headquarters, of work 
programs for the national teams5 the training of experimental physicists 
and reactor managers in centers in the advanced countriesj and the provision 
of experts to help in putting newly-constructed reactors into operation. As 
part of its previous offer of experts (seo Annex VIII to the annual report), 
Prance was prepared to place at the Agency's disposal some of the experts 
trained at the ten research reactors it had in operation, and to receive 
trainees at Saclay, Fontenay-aux-Rosos and Grenoble who could join tho'teams 
actually operating the research reactors, 


17• Some typo of pairing might also bo devised, through which an advanced 
laboratory would become the adviser and guide to a newly-created center, 


18, The French delegation had always emphasized the importance of the 
Agency's scientific and technical activities and approved the program of the 
functional.laboratory to which it had made a gift of electronic material worth 
150 000 NF, The laboratory already had useful work to its credit, and would 
help to retain the services of the excellent technicians already employed at 
"Vienna, and attract others. 


19. His delegation approved the Agency's 1961 program as a whole, and hoped 
that the modest 4f. increase in professional staff and the 5*~f!. increase in the 
regular budget would enable it to play an increasingly effective part in 
international atomic collaboration. Although the operational budget was less 
than one-third of the regular budget, the fact that it depended on voluntary 
contributions made it more uncertain from one year to the next$ that was a 
defect which should bo kopt in mind when the Statute camo up for revision in 
two years' time. 

GC(IV)/0E.58 
page 6 


20. 
The French delegation hoped that in the .future the Board would avoid the 
political discussions which had marred some of its too frequent meetings, and 


that the excellent relations established with the United Nations and the 


specialized agencies would be strengthened., enabling the Agency to fulfill, as 


it should, an essentially technical role in regard to atomic energy. 


21. Mr. HeCOMB (United States of America) congratulated the President on 
his election, 


22. 
Ho expressed the hope that the Conference would devote its entire 
attention to the Agency's technical programs and administration, Differences 


of opinion on those matters should be discussed openly, but political matters, 

which wore beyond the assigned responsibility of the Agency, should bo excluded. 


23. 
Ho was happy to convoy to the Conference the following message from the 
President of the United States, Dwight D, Eisenhowers 


"lib. 
President and Delegates s 


(a) 
"Nearly seven years ago, at the United Nations General Assembly, it was 
my privilege to give voice to a hope that was rising in many minds and 
many places, The hope was to harness the new force of the atom for 
the benefit of all peoples of all nations. The challenge was to do 
it. 


(b) 
"The almost universal approval of the Atoms for Peace proposal 
demonstrated the hope of people everywhere that the groat new force of 
atomic energy would bo devotod to the peaceful advancement of mankind. 
This International Atomic Energy Agency is one expression of that hope, 
The historic mission of the Agency was to make a new approach to international 
co-operation - to translate the concept of the peaceful 
atom into a practical, positive program on a world-wide basis. 
(c) 
"In throe short years, the Agency has become the prime international 
organization in the nuclear field. Its activities are stimulating 
much of the global effort to bring more people more benefits in this 
still new atomic ago. It is providing sound advice and guidance for 
the management of many now atomic projects under way in its Member 
States, 
(d) 
"The Agency is making substantial contributions on an international 
basis in such fields as education, training, and technical assistance. 
. It is making great strides in spreading the knowledge of many uses of 
radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture and industry. In addition, 
the Agency has a paramount role in the development of the necessary 
health and safety standards, 


(c) 
"This Agency is an organization that has no socrets| an organization 
devoted to the sharing of effort, research and information5 one in 
which the major Powers can lay aside political differences to work for 
the common good. 

GC(IV)/OR,38 
page 7 


(f) 
"In broad outline, I can soo the Agency fulfilling the basic purposes of 
its historic charter and thereby contributing to world peace, I can, soo 
it as a unique forum v/horc technical skills and resources are pooled for 
the benefit of mankind, 
(g) 
"The United States is gratified and encouraged at what has boon done in 
throe short years. My country will continue to support this organization, 
I wish for it continued progress and success," 
24. The Agency was destined to grow. Science had just begun to reveal the 
applications of the atom,, and as its uses increased,, the responsibility of the 
Agency would grow and it would need moral, technical and financial support, 
25. The Agency's achievements were already substantial. It had become the 
foremost international body providing technical assistance in atomic energy. 
While it was true that certain applications of the atom had boon slower in 
developing than had originally boon expected, that should not cause discouragement 
nor obscure the worth-while contributions made by the Agency to 
the benefit of almost every nation, 
26. Technical assistance had been provided to forty-five Member States. To 
train a thousand scientists and technicians in three years was an achievement, 
but oven more important was the fact that the first thousand would in turn 
train thousands of others. 
27. Agency-sponsorod'conferences on a wide variety of subjects had boon of 
great benefit to scientists and engineers, and the results had appeared in a 
series of important technical publications, 
28. International health and safety standards were vitally important, and the 
Agency should continue with that work. His delegation was happy to learn 
that the &50 000 worth of special nuclear materials donated by the United 
R/ 


States in 1959 might be used in the new research reactor which was being 


constructed in Finland. His Government wished to offer a second $50 000 
worth of special nucloar material, to bo mado available in 1961. 


290 The United Statos had contributed substantially to the Agency's regular 
budget, as well as giving at least half of the voluntary contributions for 
each of the three preceding years. It had also mado special grants, totalling 
almost $1 million, for the Agency's functional laboratory, the mobile 
laboratories and equipment, placed $150 000 worth of research contracts through 
the Agency, and provided more than 200 cost-froo fellowships. 

5/ Soo GC(III)/OR,28, paragraph 27. 



GC(IV)/OE,38 
page 8 


30, Continued progress demanded that every Member State should .support the 
Agency in. a manner consistent with its ability, but not all had done so. 


31. His.delegation wholeheartedly supported the program and budget proposed 
for 1961. 
32„ The application of radioisotopes in medicine, industry and agriculture 
offered immediate re burns and the agency should continue the excellent work 
it was doing in that connection., 


33. There had been some setbacks and disappointments in fcho development of 
nuclear power programs.. It had provoc more difficult than had at one time 
been expected to transf orrr atomic energy economically into electricity, while 
now sources of conventional fuel had been developed in many places and the 
efficiency of existing plant had boon improvedt The Agency's approach had 
boon realistic1 studios and surveys had provided essential information, and 
uniform practices had boon devised for calculating nuclear power costs. His 
delegation agreed with the Agency's most recent conclusion that important cost 
reductions would result from technical advances based on continuous research 
and development, 
34• Under the United States intermediate and small power plant program, 
several roo-ctors of differing design, ranging in size from 12 000 to 
60 000 kilowatts, would soon be completed,. In response to an invitation 
issued in 1959 > Agency scientists had seen and studied some of those projects 
and, in particular, the small, pressurized water reactor designed to provide 
nuclear power in the range of 20 000 kilowatts or less, His Government 
renewed its invitation and suggested that the Agency concern itself with the 
design and operating details of several small reactors included in the 
current United States program., 

35• Ho had a number of specific recommendations to make 


36. The United States Government considered that the Agency's technical 
assistance program should be expanded. Up to the present, the primary need 
had been to train personnel, provide equipment and advise on programs. Those 
needs continued, but many countries had now reached the stage where actual 
programs could bo undertaken. His delegation accordingly recommended that the 
research contract program should be broadened and increasingly used to assist 
6/ See GC(III)/OR,28, paragraph 16, 



GC(IV)/0E.38 
page 9 


laboratories and institutions in Member States, particularly in connection 
with such subjects as solid state and roactor physics, radiation effects, basic 
properties of materials, low-energy physics, shielding, corrosion and so on. 
An attempt should be made to determine what data of importance to all Member 
States could be produced in the many now research reactors that wore now 
available% the Secretariat had already made a start in that direction. 

37-^n research, the Agency was in a unique position to servo the interests 


of science, and should stimulate research on selected matters of general 


interest. In that connection, the Scientific Advisory Committee, composed 


of the world's host authorities in their particular subjects, could provide 


valuable guidance, 


38. The Agency was making good progress in collecting and disseminating 
information. Its scientific publications wore increasing in number and 
quality,, and the library was a most important world repository of data on 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The United States sent the library all 
pertinent reports, bibliographies, abstracts and other publications, and had 
to date contributed more than 29 000 documents. Some Member States wero 
following suit, but all States should provide the library with all relevant 
documents and information, 
39. The fellowship program had boon highly successful, but it might have 
to bo changed as the needs of Member States altered. Meanwhile the United 
States would continue to make cost-free fellowships available in 1961, It 
specifically recommended that the program for exchanging senior scientists and 
engineers should be expanded and that the Agency should arrange specialized 
training courses in health physics. 
40, Health and safety involved international problems'^ and protection must 
keep pace with' the development of nuclear facilities, Ono serious reactor 
accident could adversely affect programs in all countries but procedures must 
not be so extreme or drastic as to deny mankind the enormous potential benefits 
of atomic energy, The work of the Conference on the Disposal of Radio


7/ 


active Waste-1- and similar activities should be continued and regarded as ono 
of the Agency's foremost tasks. 


7/ Held at Monaco from 16 to 21 November 1959. 



GC(IV)/OE.38 
page 10 


41. A practical and workable system of safeguards had boon devised and put 
forward by the Board for consideration by the Conference.—' The need for a 
system of safeguards had been questioned? his delegation believed that the 
need was as vital today as when the relevant provisions had been incorporated 
in the Statute in 1956. The United States was prepared to submit to Agency 
safeguards four of its facilities - two research and two power reactors - of 
a typo and size envisaged under the Agency system? if the proposals submitted 
to the Conference wore accepted, the United States would request the Agency 
to inspect the operation of the four reactors in question for an agreed period 
of time. His delegation urged all Member States to'support the proposed 
system and recommended that an increasing number of bilateral activities should 
be submitted to Agency safeguards. Several countries which had bilateral 
agreements with the United States had agreed with his Government to enter 
into consultations with a view to applying the safeguard provisions as soon 
as the Agency was prepared to assume the necossary responsibility.' 
42, Ho hoped delegates would feel froo to discuss with the United States 


delegation the recommendations he had made, and promised to- give the same 


consideration to constructive proposals put forward by other delegations. 


45, His Government was gratified with the progress the Agency had made and 
was improssod with the opportunities that lay ahead, but future progress 
depended on the fullest possible support in manpower, material and money from 
all Member States. 

44, . Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan), after congratulating the President on his 
election, assured the Conference of the Japanese Government's continued strong 
support of the Agency, The past year had seen the establishment of a firm 
operational basis for the Agency's activities, which could be expected to 
expand. In executing specific projects? the Agency should try to achieve a 
well-balanced program that would make a substantial contribution to the needs 
of all its Member States, One of the Agency's most important functions was 
the establishment of an effective safeguards system? his Government believed 
such a system could eventually bocome the basis of a genuinely universal safeguards 
system. The first transaction for the supply of uranium through the 
Agency had taken place at the request of the Japanese Government,^ One of the 


8/ GC(IV)/l08/Eev.l. 
2/ Soo document INFOISC/3. 


GC(IV)/OR.38 
pago 11 


main purposes of that request had boon to expedite the Agency's establishment 
of appropriate measures to accompany such transactions., including procedures, 
and facilities for implementing safeguards against diversion to military use, 


45. IiLs delegation was therefore very pleased that the principles and 
procedures for Agency safeguards had boon provisionally approved by the Board 
of Governors? to which it was most grateful. Effect must bo given without 
delay to those principles and procedures, and his Government was ready to apply 
them to activities in Japan relating to the purchase of throe tons of natural 
uranium through the Agency, His Government had agreed with the Governments 
of Canada and the United States to hold consultations with a view to requesting 
the Agency to administer, as soon as it could, the safeguards applicable to the 
agreements between Japan and Canada and Japan and the United States* Japan's 
experience would show how the safeguards system could be improved. 
46. The increasing importance of health and safety measures was beyond 
dispute, particularly in view of the development of nuclear activities throughout 
the world. The Agency was best placed to deal with such problemsp it had 
already done much to promote and co-ordinate research, and to establish international 
regulations for radiation protection. The problem of radioactive 
wasto disposal into the sea should be solved as early as possible5 it 
specially concerned maritime States, including Japan, His Governmont urged 
the Agency to tako immediate stops to establish international regulatory 
measurosy including an effective monitoring and registration systom such as 
that recommended in the report of the Panel on Radioactive Waste Disposal into 
the Sea—-^ and to accelerate the development and co-ordination of technical 
studios on proper methods of waste disposal and measurement, and the investigation 
of.contamination by radioactive wasto. Japan could contribute to those 
studios, 
47. Despite the 3oinowhat pessimistic views expressed roccntly in many 
countries, the study and development of nuclear power were still one of the 
main activities in regard to the peaceful use of atomic energy, and the Agency 
should continue to promote them, Japan was constructing a nuclear power 
plant, and would bo pleased to make available to other countries any information 
or technical knowledge obtained from the project. 
10/ TO/HS/21. 



GG(IV)/Ollod 
page 12 


48, Little progress had 1)00)1 mado towards the successful uso of plutonium as 
a reactor fuel, though plutonium production was oxpootod to riso because of the 
increase in the uso of source material. The Agency should take the initiative 
in research en the peaceful uses of plutonium, and should in particular seek 
effective measures for collecting and disseminating the technical information 
necessary for the fahricatjen of plutonium fuel. 


49' Since atomic energy activities wore expanding on a world-\/ido scale, and 
damage caused by the operation of reactors or nuclear ships might affect many 
countries; it was most, desirable that the Agency should take the lead in 
standardizing rules and principles? with a view to establishing internationallyapplicable 
regulations on civil liability for nuclear damage, 

5.. Ifc. BERGMfiltLT (Israel) also congratulated the President on his 
election. His delegation appreciated the help given by the Agency to Israel, 
particularly through the preliminary assistance mission which had studied 


conditions in Africa and the Middle East. The mission's excellent and wellbalanced 
report correctly outlined the most reasonable method of establishing 
regional centers. The process must bo gradual, Such ccntors were undoubtedly 
necessary,, for very few countries had enough money and manpower to embrace 
all problems and aspects of atomic energy. Viable centers, however, could 
not bo established by decree^ they must form a logical step in the nuclear 
development of countries and regions. The Agency would therefore bo 'well 


advised to encourage national efforts, with the ultimate intention of joining 


them together with a view to the establishment of regional centers, 


51. Israel felt acutely its inadequacy in many branches of nuclear science, 
and therefore would not yet request the establishment of a regional center in 
its territory, Its scientists wore trying to gain experience in the Israeli 
training center, which had recently acquired a research roactor by courtesy 
of the United States Atomic Snorgy Commission, It would welcome scientists 
from any other country and, if the number of participants seemed sufficient, 
would willingly hold courses at the center in an international language, 'The 
Government had offered a number of study grants for students from other 
countries., 
52, 3xpcrioncc had shown that training courses were much more useful if 


followed by participation in a research project for about a year, since the 


application of newly-acquired knowledge to a practical problem gave the student 


a more lasting understanding of what he had learned„ 



GC(IV)/OR.38 
page 13 

53 • Preliminary assistance missions had proved to bo one of the most useful 
activities of the Secretariat, and Israel would be proud if its modest 
experience could contribute to thoir work. Missions formed a first link 
between the Agency and, in particular, developing Member States, and so made 
possible the gradual progress essential for success - gradual in order that 
the Agency might ensure that technical considerations alone wore taken into 
account in establishing regional centers and that free access to the facilities 
of the center wore available to every country in the region. 


54. Because of the Israeli Government's view that science, and the international 
organizations devoted to science, woro the safest basis for true international 
collaboration, it was somewhat disturbed by the strong political 
flavor of the Agency's discussions and decisions. It was wrong to assume 
that world political questions must bo solved before an effective approach 
could bo made to the scientific and technical problems confronting humanity. 
On the contrary, once the latter problems were solved, political difficulties 
would disappear almost of themselves. Apparently, therefore, the Agency's 
most urgent task was to strengthen and widen its efforts in research, development, 
training, and dissemination of information, 
55• The collection and distribution by the Agency of data on various subjects 
of goncral interest had been most useful, and other subjects warranted efforts 
by all Member States, directed and co-ordinated by the Agency. Much work was 
being done by the Agency and other bodies on protection against the effects of 
radiation, but it was not yet commensurate with the importance of the problemj 
in particular the possibility of chemical protection had boon somewhat 
neglected. Even more important was the possibility of eradicating insects -. 
both agricultural posts and disease-carriers -~by moans of ionizing radiation. 
That problem was particularly important to the new and developing countries, 
and the Agency could not show them a better example of the benefits of 
nuclear energy. His delegation welcomed the suggestion in the report of the 
preliminary assistance mission to Morocco that the possibility of eradicating 
certain insects by sterilization should bo studied, 

56. For some time a number of Member States had held that bilateral agreements 
ran counter to the Agency's aspirations. That was a short-sighted view, 
since bilateral agreements wore the first step tovrards multilateral agreements 

GO(IV)/OE,38 
page 14 


and global co-operation. The Agency should encourage all forms of scientific 
and technical co-operation, on any scale5 from such beginnings would come the 
ultimate realization of the dreams on which the Agency had boon founded. 


57. tir. SCHUMANN (Union of South Africa) convoyed the good wishes and 
congratulations of his delegation to the President on his election. South 
Africa was happy that the General Conference had elected a distinguished 
scientist to preside over its proceedings, and hoped the precedent would be 
followed in future. It had consistently argued that the most important of 
the factors essential for success was that the Agency should he primarily a 
technical body. One clement in fostering the Agency's scientific prestige, 
and so enlisting the help of the world's scientists, was to onsuro that the 
President of the General Conference was a scientist of recognized standing,-
South Africa also firmly believed•that an eminent scientist who happened to bo 
a national of an atomic Groat Power should not on that account bo regarded as 
ineligible for the Presidency, 
58, South Africa was also glad that the General Confcronco had welcomed the 
representative of another African State, and hoped that next year more 
African countries would apply for membership. Collaboration with other 
African countries in agriculture, transport, medicine, meteorology and many 
other branches of science had long boon an essential feature of South Africa's 
external relations, and it looked forward to continuing and developing that 
collaboration with a growing number of African countries, 


59• The prospect that an increasing number of African States would apply to 
the Agency for membership during the next two or throe years naturally raised 
the question of adequate representation for Africa on the Board of* Governors, 
a problem alluded to in 1959 by the delegates of Morocco—' and Tunisia—'. 
In 1956, when the Conference on the Statute had boon debating the composition 
of the Board, it had boon the understanding of a number of delegates that one 
of the throe "floating" seats would in practice be allocated to Africa. In 
other words, Africa had been regarded as entitled to one elective scat in 
addition bo qualifying for an elective regional scat for the area of Africa 
and the Middle East. 


11/ GC(III)/OR,50, paragraph 50. 
12/ GC(III)/OR.31, paragraph 76. 



GC(IV)/OR,38 
page 15 


60, At that confcrenco South Africa had firmly pledged itsolf to support an 
African candidate for one of the throe floating seats,, and it had consistently 
remained true to that pledge. Suggestions had been made that Article VI of 
the Statute should be amended to provide for separate representation of Africa 
as an areas that problem; however;, could not effectively be considered until 
the Statute came up for review. Until then it would bo desirable to bear in 
mind the understanding reached in 195&* 


61, South Africa was pleased to note that the Agency's relations with, the 
Unitod Nations had continued to develop harmoniously, and hoped that the Agency 
would increasingly take over from the Unitod Nations responsibility for matters 
within its own jurisdiction, provided, of course, that full use was made of 
the great experience the United Nations had acquired. For example, although 
the third United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy would necessarily have to bo sponsored by the United Nations, 
the Agency should play a more active and prominent role in its organization 
than had been possible at the 195^ Geneva Conference. The General Assembly, 
at its current session, should give full weight to the views of many Agency 
exports that it would bo preferable to hold the next Geneva-typo conference in 
1963 rather than 1$62, From experience gained at the 1958 Geneva Conference, 
it was also South Africa's considered opinion that the unwioldy size of the 
Conferonco militated against efficiency, and that ways and moans should bo 
considered for limiting the numbor both of papers and of delegates and observers, 
An entirely separate conference devoted to radioisotopes and their 
applications might be considered. 

62, As its own resources developed, the Agency could gradually assume some of 
the responsibilities of the Unitod Nations for monitoring and measuring radioactivity. 


6J, In many ways the present general picture of atomic energy differed greatly 
from what had boon expected by the authors of the Statute, in which the main 
emphasis had boon placed on international sponsorship and development of nuclear 
power projects, and on the establishment of a system of international supervision 
to ensure that assistance should be applied solely for peaceful purposes. 

64. For a number of well-known reasons, the development of nuclear power 
projects had not proceeded as rapidly as onco expected, ' Accordingly, with the 

GC(IV)/0E.38 
page 16 


emergence of greater economic and technological realism, the Agency had come 
to take a more soher and long-term view of its functions. Emphasis was now 
being placed on the development in various countries of a sound basis of 
technological experience,, which would bo essential when the time came to embark 
on atomic power projects, 


65, South Africa agreed with that approach and had full confidence in the 
future of atomic power - a significant view since in Southern Africa power 
from conventional sources was still relatively cheap, The Union, for instance, 
had almost inexhaustible supplies of inexpensive coal,, and power could be 
produced appreciably more cheaply by conventional than by nuclear methods. 
None the less, South Africa had recently embarked on a comprehensive and costly 
research and development program. 


66. Ho welcomed the announcement by the Governments of the Soviet Union and 
the United States, referred to in paragraph 20 of the Board's annual report 
(GC(IV)/114), that they were making arrangements for co-operation in the exchange 
of information on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and exploring the 
desirability of joint projectsg the Agency would be the repository of the 
reports and assist in the consideration of possible joint projects. 
67. At previous sessions of the General Conference the South African delegation 
had deprecated the tendency to use the Agency as a forum for the 
prosecution of political ends. It would be a great step towards mutual 
•goodwill and confidence between the world's two leading atomic Powers, so 
vital to the success of the Agency, if their two Governments would, before 
the Board's next annual report was submitted to the United Nations General 
Assembly,"ensure the practical implementation of that agreement on a wide 
front, 
68. Mr. KAKICEHOVIC (Yugoslavia) said his delegation noted with satisfaction 
that marked progress had been made during 1960. More realistic 
appraisals had been made of the opportunities for the useful applications of 
nuclear energy, both present and future. A clearer appreciation had been 
shown of the best way to assist the less-developed countries to prepare for 
the use of nuclear energy, and of the need to establish the international 
standards and legislation indispensable to the development of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes throughout the world. 

GC(IV)/OR.58 
page 17 


69, Insufficient emphasis had as yet been placed, however, on one of the 
Agency's main functions? the co-ordination of worldwide efforts to solve the 
research and development problems still delaying wider application of nuclear 


energy. 


70, With its very limited resources, the Agency had nevertheless managed to 


supply useful assistance to a number of countries in developing their national 
programs. Some of its technical assistance activities had achieved positive 
results? for instance, the training program, with its growing number of 
fellowships, and the scheme for the exchange of scientists and exports, which 


should bo expanded. 


71, The integration of nuclear power into electricity supply systems had 
raised problems which varied from country to country. The Agency had already 
undertaken systematic studies of those problems? it should now begin to 
examine the use of nuclear power in individual countries, particularly in 
loss-developed regions, 


72, By moans of contracts and symposia the Agency had increased its efforts 
to promote research on various outstanding questions. It should also 


stimulate to a greater degree the technological investigation of the uses of 
nuclear energy. 


73, His delegation welcomed the Agency's efforts to promote the use of radioisotopes 
in medicine, biology and agriculture, but deplored the fact that 
their application in industry had so far been neglected, 


74• In 1960 the Agency had only partially discharged its duty of disseminating 
information. Despite declarations made at the third regular session of the 
General Conference, the countries most advanced in atomic energy had not 
apparently made available to the Agency any recently declassified information. 
Work on the drafting of standards and regulations and of international 
provisions of a legal nature should be accelerated, particularly in cases 
whore scientific criteria had been established, 


75. Several important problems concerning the Agency's role as a technical 
supplier remained unsolved, Projects had boon handled slowly and 
ineffectually, It was time serious consideration were given to the drafting 
of simple and flexible procedures, The safeguards problem should bo solved 

GC(IV)/0I1.38 
page 18 


as liberally as possible$ rights and obligations should bo so framed that 
safeguards could be rapidly attached and applied without undue difficulties 
to the parties concerned, 

76, The time had come seriously to consider amending the Statute, particularly 
because the conditions under which it nad boon drafted had changed. For 
instance, it was clear that the new independent States in Africa should bo 
adequately represented. Moreover, the principle by which Governors wore 
designated and elected favored certain countries, thanks to a criterion which 
had not boon justified oven when the Statute had boon adopted., and which later 
developments had refuted. Generalise speaking, the Agency should be allowed to 
operate more rapidly and effectively, For that purpose the procedures of the 
Board, and the relationship between the Conference, the Board and the 
Secretariat,, should bo re-examined. Given a well co-ordinated mechanism, the 
Agency would bo bettor able to fulfill its statutory functions, advance its 
activities and increase world confidence in the major role which it must play 


•in the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
77. 
In accepting the Board's annual report, and approving in principle the 
13/ 
programme and budget for 1961— , the Yugoslav delegation hoped that the 
Agency would receive larger contributions, in keeping with its increasingly 
responsible tasks of promoting research and developing the worldwide practical 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, Yugoslavia would continue to 


suirport wholeheartedly the Agency's aims and activities. 


78, Mr. BINSON (Thailand) referred to the considerable assistance, 
through exports and fellowships, granted to Thailand by the Agency, On its 
side, Thailand had always fulfilled its financial commitments to the Agency, 
and would welcome the symposium on the use of radioisotopes in the study of 
endemic and tropical diseases, scheduled to take place in Bangkok in 
December 1960. With Agency guidance and technical assistance, a 1 MW research 
reactor was being built in Bangkok under a bilateral agreement between Thailand 
and the United States. It would bo completed about the end of 1961, 

79. As soon as the Agency was ready to assume the responsibility, Thailand 
would request it to administer safeguards, irrespective of whether the facilities 
concerned wore made available through the Agency or under bilateral agreements 
with other countries. Thailand would also request nuclear material from the 
Agency in the near future. 
15/ GC(IV)/116. 



GC(IV)/OR.58 
pago 19 


80* Mr. SCHULTE-MSERMAWN (Federal Republic of Germany) said his Government 
had noted with satisfaction the Agency's considerable achievements in the 
past year with a relatively modest budget. Certain aspects of the Agency's 
work wore of particular importance,, and most important of all perhaps was 


effective technical assistance. The missions sent to a number of countries 
had been most valuable. They had helped to establish scientific research 


centers,, to draw up nuclear programs, and to solve problems connected with 


training and with the use of isotopes in agriculture and medicine, The scale 
of such activities should be increased. The offers of equipment that had 
boon made wore also valuable,, as was the fellowship program. His Government 
had been happy to note that a large number of Agency fellowship-holders were 
working in German research centers. It would provide a number of Type II 
fellowships for 1961. 


81. Much interest also attached to the Agency's studios on reactor design, 
particularly the design of small and medium-sized reactors. He welcomed the 
fact that the Agency was paying more and more attention to nuclear power and 
v/as trying to obtain a general idea;, on a world-wide scale, of the existing 
situation and the prospects for the future, 
82c As in 1959? "khe Agency had organized a largo number of scientific con


ferences and symposia. The Federal Republic had boon glad to welcome the 
participants to a symposium on the effects of ionizing radiation on seeds and 


14/ 


their significance for crop improvement—' , and would bo glad to act as host 


to other Agency conferences, 


83. The Agency had "awarded a considerable number of research contracts in the 
past year, and various institutes in his country had participated in that 
program. It was gratifying to see that the Agency was concentrating on 
contracts relating to its primary responsibilities, such as health protection 
and technical assistance. Infchafc way the Agency would avoid overlapping 
with the work of international agencies created especially for research work. 
15/ 
The tritium research project—*- seemed particularly important, and his Government 
was making available a sum of |10 030 to help in carrying it out. The 
Agency was also to be congratulated on the rapid progress in the construction 
of the laboratory at Seiborsdorf. 


14/ Held at Karlsruhe from 8 to 12 August 1960; 
15/ Soo GC(IV)/116, paragraph 138, 



GC(IV)/OR,38 
page 20 


84. Another very important task of the Agency was to ensure health protection 
by drawing up regulations of world-wide scope and getting them accepted by all 
Member States. For that reason the publication of the.Agency's "Standards of 
Safety for Agency Operations" v/as particularly valuable. Its work on regulations 
for the safe transport of radioactive materials was likewise of groat 
interest, 
85. It also seemed necessary to standardize by moans of an international 
convention national regulations on the question of liability for nuclear 
damage. That applied particularly to the case of damage caused by nuclearpropelled 
ships? whore the damage was likely to concern several States, His 
Government was glad to be able to collaborate with the Agency in that work. 
86. The financial policy of the Agency seemed sensible and modest. The 
1961 budget envisaged only a very slight increase on the 1960 budget, in spite 
of the Agency's increased responsibilities. His Government had therefore no 
reservations to make on that subject. It hoped that the voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund would reach the target which the Board had fixed. 
The Federal Republic proposed to make a modest increase in its own contribution 
to that fund, 
87. Mr. REE (Republic of Korea) congratulated the Agency on the excellent 
work it had done, particularly for the loss-developed countries. The work of 
the preliminary technical assistance mission which had. visited Korea in 1959 
had been much appreciated., During the current year a mobile radioisotope 
laboratory had boon sent to E'oroa to demonstrate the techniques of handling 
radioisotopes for medical,, agricultural and chemical purposes. Altogether, 
I58 persons would complete the courses provided by the laboratory, 
88. In response to his country's request,, the Agency had also sent to Korea 
a health physicist and a geologist, who had given a great deal of valuable 
advice. 
89. The fifteen Agency fellowships awarded to Koreans would bo of groat 
value in training scientists and technicians, and be hoped that at least the 
same number of fellowships would bo awarded to Koreans in 1961. 
90. The establishment of regional training centers and the award of research 
contracts.wore other ways in which the Agency could assist loss-developed 
countries. It had taken the first stops towards establishing a regional 
training center in Latin America, and was contemplating another in the Arab 
world! similar action should bo taken in other areas, particularly the Far East. 

GC(IV)/OR.38 
pago 21 


91. Ir. BURCKHARDT (Switzerland), after congratulating the President 
and Vice-President: on their election? said his delegation was pleased to sec 
the Board had come down in favor of economy in the 1961 budget. At the 
present stage, expenditure should be stabilized as far as possible and, in any 
case, a balance must bo maintained between administrative expenses and the 
objectives which the Agency could reasonably pursue. 
92. As regards the operational budget, his Government had decided to maintain 
its voluntary contribution for 1961 at 50 000 Swiss francs, Among those 
activities which desorvoa special mention were the preparatory work on civil 
liability, which seemed to meet a long-term need, and the export work on 
reactor safety, from which Switzerland had derived some benefit already. Ho 
thanked the Board, the Director General and the Secretariat for the difficult 
tasks which they had accomplished in that respect, 
93. . Mr. ORTIZ TIRADO (Mexico) congratulated the President on his 
election, 
94* AH delegations to the fourth regular session of the General Conference 
wore vitally concerned that the Agency should continue to be governed by the 
principles which had inspired its ^stablishmont. Technical and economic 
difficulties had boon met with, but the future could be facod with confidence 
if a sincoro spirit of international co-operation existed. It was clear from 
the Director General's opening statement that, despite difficulties, much had 
boon accomplished, and the Agency was approaching a period of consolidation. 


It now largely depended on Member States themselves to ensure that the Agency 
achieved the aims for which it had boon founded, 


954 The Board's annual report showed that the year which had just ended was 
the Agency's first really normal working yoar, Its activities could bo considered 
under two main headings? thoso which wore intended to be of special 
benefit to the less-devclopcci countries, and thoso which wore undertaken in 
the interest of all Member States. Certain major preoccupations were 
rofloctod in the fact that, of the 41 research contracts awarded in 1959? 
29 concerned radiological protection— . On the other hand, 36 countries had 
benefited from the advice of missions which had helped thorn to plan their atomic 
energy programs. The award of 378 fellowships during the first six months of 
1960 brought the total number awarded to 973• Although far from satisfying 


16/ Sco Annox K to the Annual Report to the Economic and Social Council of 
the United Nations for 1959-6O (lBFCIRC/17). 



GC(IV)/OR-38 
page 22 


all needs, those activities represented very considerable progress,, particularly 
if account were also taken of the work done on the technical and 
economic aspects of nuclear power production, and the exchanges of technical 
information which had taken place at numerous conferences and meetings of experts, 


96. In any now evaluation of plans to expand the production of electric power, 
account must he taken of the continuous increase of known oil reserves and the 
decreasing capital costs of electricity production from conventional sources, 
while costs involved in long-term plans for nuclear power production remained 
constant. 
97• ^"fc "the second regular session of i,tio General Conference his delegation 
had welcomed the proposal to take part in the Expanded Programme of Technical 
'17/ 
Assistance,—J and it was now evident that that co-operation had proved extremely 
fruitful. The number of requests for technical assistance received 
by the Agency •- including requests for technical assistance missions - had 
exceeded expectations, confirming the point of view his delegation had always 
hold, namely that, for most countries, technical assistance was vital if they 
were to develop national atomic energy programs, 

$8, As his delegation had often pointed out, fellowships should bo granted 
in such a way that the holders, when they returned home, would bo able to 
work in teams.. Account should also bo taken of the need to train technicians 
as well as professional staff, 

S$. The Board had provisionally approved a system of safeguards and put it 
forward for consideration by the Conference, It was based on the relevant 
provisions of the Statute and would enable any State requesting assistance 
to know in advance what type of safeguards the Agency would apply. The 
requirements of the system should bo regarded as maximum requirements, and 
it should be possible to apply loss stringent safeguards ^^vhoro appropriate 
by means of an agreement between the Agency and the Member State concerned. 
Safeguards wore necessary to ensure that materials or equipment supplied \)j 

the Agency wore not used for non-peaceful purposes, but at the same time the 


sovereign rights of States must bo respected-, As the Governor from Mexico 
had stated in the Board, safeguards could bo applied only in accordance with 
the spirit and letter of the relevant provisions of the Statute and in conformity 
with the way in which those provisions had boon interpreted at the 


17/ GC(II)/OR,20, paragraph 39< 



GC(IV)/OR,58 
page 23 


Conference on the Statute, Otherwise it was likely that many States would 
refrain from requesting assistance which involved safeguards? or from asking 
that safeguards should he applied to their bilateral agreements with other 
States. Mexico could not agree to any regulation or administrative rule 
which wont beyond the stipulations of the Statute. 


100, The Mexican National Nuclear Energy Commission continued to pay special 
attention to scientific and technical training and education., and sent many 
trainees abroad, 3ight universities now had professors qualified in atomic 
energy techniques. Courses which had boon started in 1958 wore training 
technicians for the groafc responsibilities they would be roquirod to undortakc 
in connection with the application of modern techniques in medicine., industry 
and agriculture, More than 300 technicians had been trained and their 
numbers incroasod every year. Training had been greatly facilitated by the 
mobile isotope laboratory/ loaned by the Agency to Mexico for throe months. 


It was hoped to bring all sections of the population within the scope of the 
nuclear training program through the universities and various educational 
institutions and centers, 


101, Prospecting for radioactive ores,, and thoir exploitation and processing, 
were matters which received constant attention. Reserves of uranium-bearing 


ores were conservatively estimated at 275 000 tons, with an average 0.2$ 


uranium oxide content. Hew deposits wore continually being discovered in 
various parts of the country. Experience in processing such ores had been 
gained in a small pilot plant? and it was planned to set up one or two semi


industrial pilot plants, 


102, Mexico currently had the following laboratoriess radioisotopes (with 
electronics and chomistry sections) $ crystallography^ plasma:; actinometryj 
radioactive wastes5 radioactive standards? electronics;; and an inorganic 
chemistry laboratory and pilot plant. A genetics and a nuclear engineering 
laboratory wore also to bo established. 

103, I'he Agency had agreed to a request to send a special mission in 
October 1960 to advise on the Mexican nuclear energy program. Ho hoped the 
Director General would visit Member States more often; and he was very glad to 
announce that the Director General had accepted an invitation to Mexico, 



GC(IV)/OR.36 
page 24 


104. Mr. CBOVETTO (Monaco) rocallod that in November 1959 the Agency had 
hold in Monaco a most successful international conference on the disposal of 
radioactive wastes, a subject which was closely connected with the question of 
the safety of marine life, 
105. To promote further study of that subject, his Government had offered the 
Agency, for a period of three years, the facilities of the Monaco Institute 
of Oceanography,, to which had recently been added a center equipped with a 
laboratory for the use of applied radioactivity;, particularly in the form of 
radioactive tracers in oooanographio studies. Those facilities included ships 
specially equipped for marino research . His Government had also offered to 
assume a large part of the expenses of that three-year program, beginning in 
1961. 
106. The proposal was at present being examined by the Board? and his Govorn'mont 
hoped that an agreement would shortly be concluded with the Agency, 
107o Mr. OLCAY (Turkey) said his delegation considered that, at the 
present time? the most important activities of the Agency wore the provision 
of technical assistance,, the drawing up of standards and regulations (particularly 
safety measures)? the collection of information en atomic energy and 
the organization of scientific conferences, 


108, With regard to technical assistance, his delegation wished to congratulate 
the Agency on its fellowship program, from which Turkey had considerably benofitod, 


109. Bequests from Member States for equipment; and exports wore increasing 
every year but,, for financial reasons, the Board was finding it impossible 
to meet them all. In 1959 bbo Director General had boon authorized to 
allocate $125 ..0 for the supply of equipment; The United States Government 
had subsequently offered the Agency $200 000 for the same purpose,. In 
the ovont, $300 000 had boon spent on equipment, but much more could usefully 
have been expended, had the funds boon available. Atomic energy equipment 
was always very expensive. Certain countries which already had sufficient 
qualified personnel therefore tended to submit requests for technical assistance 
relating solely to equipment. Such requests should not bo refused on 
the grounds that they had not boon.accompanied by a request for experts, as 
was the Agency's existing practice. Each request should be troated on its 
merits. 

GC(IV)/OR.38 
page 25 


110, In any case, in the fiold of technical assistance many difficulties still 
remained. Under the Statute the operational program and technical assistance 
wore financed by voluntary contributions, but that system of financing was 
proving loss and less satisfactory and efficient. Of the $1,5 million target 
for 1960, only $962 837 bad been pledged by Member States by 31 August 1960. 


111, On the one hand the operational program of the Agency was expanding in 


scope (§1,8 million for 1961) and requests for technical assistance wore 


continually increasing,, On the other hand,, it was extremely difficult to 
draw up plans sufficiently far in advance if the exact total of the funds on 
which one could count was unknown, The Turkish delegation was of the opinion 


that the difficulty could bo resolved only by a revision of the Statute, 


112, The scientific authority of tbe Agency would depend abovo all on how far 
it succeeded in drawing up standards and regulations which woro internationally 
accepted. 


113, His delegation had noted with satisfaction that the Board had recently . 


adopted international regulations for the transport of radioactive materials. 


It was also following with interest the work on regulations for the operation 


of reactors and for the registration and disposal of radioactive wastes. It 
was also interested in the proposals for international standards regarding 


third-party liability for nuclear damage on land. 


114, Turkey had boon particularly interested in the conclusions of the Con


ference on Small and Medium Power Reactors, which indicated that important 


reductions in the cost price of energy from nuclear sources were to bo antie— 
ipated„ 

115, Although it was only some years previously that Turkey had begun work on 
the uso of atomic onorgy for peaceful purposes, much progress had already been 
made, The advico and recommendations of the Agency's preliminary technical 
assistance mission which had visited Turkey at the end of 1959 would bo of 
groat value in making further progress along the samo linos. 


'The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 



Distr. 
international Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL 

GC(IV)/OR.39 
6 December 1960 


General Conference ENGLISH 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE THIRTY-NINTH PLENARY METING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 22 September 1960, at 10,40 a.m. 
President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
10 General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1959-60 (continued from the 
38th meeting) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Australia 
Canada 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Italy 
Romania 
Philippines 
Pakistan 
Netherlands 
1 
9 
19 
55 
41 
46 
59 
66 
8 
18 
52 
40 
45 
58 
65 
75 

G0(IV)/130. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/31/Rev.3. 


6O-6568 



GO(IV)/OR.39 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1959-60 (CC(IV)/ll4, 
126 and Corr.1) (continued from the 38th meeting) 


-lr, Mr. McKNIGHT .(Australia) said atomic energy had many facets and raised 
many and difficult problems, It was not yet extensively employed for power 
generation,, but tb/* possibility of doing so was being studied in the research 
institutions of many countries. Some 160 reactors were at present in operation 
throughout the worid5 countless laboratories, hospitals and industries were 
using radioisotopes5 while other institutions vrere doing research on nuclear 
materials, 

2„ The need to regulate and control atomic activities - with special 
reference to ensuring the health and safety of persons and the prevention of 
accidents involving damage to property - was thus becoming increasingly evident. 
The Agency had already done mucn in regard to health and safety, but much 
remained to be done in regard to insurance, third party liability, reactor 
safety ~ and in passing on the results of what had already been done. Regulations 
pnd procedures must be standardized? and international codes must be 
based on.'.the same principles a.nd applied throughout the world; In that 
connection, the Agency should co-operate with bodies like the International 
Organization for Jir'-,rrc*rdination, 

3. During the corning years the Agency should concentrate on that type of 
work rather than disperse its efforts in other activities which, however 
tempting, it might at present be premature to undertake* 
4o One of tie fascinations of atomic energy was that it offered mankind a 
new source of power, with vast potentialities, that would ultimately provide 
power more efficiently and economically. The fact must be faced, howerer, 
that, at present, nuclear power was less economic than power from conventional 
sources. There was alsc the problem of the reliability of nuclear power 
generators; despite considerable progress in the design and operation of 
nuclear reactors, much remained to be done, particularly in regard to fuel 
elementst 


5. Australia fortunately had time to do research on nuclear reactors because 
it was net short of conventional power resources, and was concentrating its 
research mainly on new methods of reactor construction and on determining the 
stability of nuclear materials for use in future power reactors, fie could 

GC(IV)/OR.39 
page j 


claim without false modesty that, in the latter regard, Australian research 
workers were with the vanguard. In particular, their work now seemed to 


indicate that there was a 'close connection between the behavior of materials 
under irradiation and the methods of fabrication. 


6. Australia was primarily interested in high temperature gas-cooled 
reactors, and in that connection he emphasized the considerable importance of 
beryllium and its oxide, beryllia. Little was known about the nuclear 
properties of beryllium but the problem of preparing it in a pure form had 
now to a large extent been mastered. However, material testing was long and 
arduous and it would take much time and effort before the new types of 
reactor were available to supply economical, efficient and reliable nuclear 
power. In the meantime, research workers, engineers and technologists 
capable of ensuring nuclear power development in the coming years must be 
trained? Australia had already made its arrangements and had been pleased to 
receive Agency fellowship-holders from other countries. 
7. Radioisotopes opened up interesting possibilities in agriculture, 
medicine and industry, and their use should be encouraged, together with the 
exchange of research results. 
8. He suggested that, as a new regulatory activity, the Agency might ask 
countries to supply information and reports about accidents and near-accidents, 
and circulate it to to Member Statesf certain accidents could be avoided by 
a knowledge of the experience of others. 
9* Mr. WBRSHOP (Canada) recalled that the Conforonco was rcviowing 
the Agency's activities for the period 1959-60 which really constituted its 
first year of normal operation. The pattern of those activities would 
doubtless serve as a guide in the shaping of future programs. 

10. As the Director Genoral had pointed out, it seemed th&i the demand for 
nuclear power was not developing as fast as had been originally expected. 
But intensive research in an increasing number of countries might alter that 
situation at any time. In Canada, for example, the scientists working on 
the structure of the atom had just produced what they called a "nuclear 
molecule". Although that was far from having any immediate practical 
application, it nevertheless illustrated the insights into the nature of 
nuclear energy which patient laboratory work would yield. 

GC(IV)/OSo39 


page,.'. 


11, Canada was also pioneering in the production of nuclear power, A 
20 000 kW(e) prototype reactor under construction would be completed in 1961. 
On the shores of Lake Huron, work had commenced on a 200 000 kW(e) nuclear 
power station which, would go into operation in 1964 or 19655 its construction 
even before the prototype reactor had been tested showed Canada's confidence 
in the natural uranium, heavy-water-type reactor which Canada believed wouldsoon 
produce electric power at a competitive price, 


12, In view of the vast amount of in/estigation required, the Agency had an 
important part to play in encouraging exchanges of experience and information. 
It was also in a unique position to devise a framework of regulations for the 
day when nuclea,r installations would bo operating on a largo scale all over 
the world. Little had yet been done in that regard, and States had not yet 
adopted rigid attitudes. Moreover, international conformity was clearly 
desirable, and international co-operation could bring great benefits, 


13, The Agency had already made good progress towards producing health and 


safety codes5 was investigating the containment and disposal of radioactive 
waste1 was collaborating with the United Nations Scientific Committee on the 
Effects of Atomic Radiation in studying the effects of radiation exposure and 
had offered to analyze samples with a view to determining the degree of 
radioactive contamination; and was working on the formulation of minimum 


international standards with regard to liability for damage attributable to 
land-based nuclear installations and nucloar-propolled vessels - all 
activities which would increase confidence in the potential benefits of 
atomic energy. An essential element of that confidence was the principle, 
enshrined in the Statute, that the activities in question should servo 
peaceful purposes exclusively. The Canadian delegation paid tribute to the 
efforts made by the Board to apply that principle in the formulation of 
safeguards procedures, 


14. Canada fully realized the difficulties the Board had to contend with in 
working out a system of safeguards against the diversion of Agency assistance 
to other than peaceful purposes. Despite those-difficulties, the Board had 
steered a fair and proper course, basing itself on a reasonable interpretation 
of the concept of safeguards laid down in the Statute, Member States, in 
accepting the Statute, had pledged themselves to ensure that assistance made 

c-c(iv)/on.39 
page 5 


available through the Agency would not he diverted to military uses. That 


example would, he hoped,, commend itself to Member States when concluding 


bilateral agreements, Canada, for its part;, had included safeguards in its 


bilateral agreements and was now negotiating with some of its partners 


including Japan - regarding the possibility of transferring the administration 


of such safeguards to the Agency as soon as the Agency was in a position to 


accept the responsibility. 


15. Canada hoped the Agency's operational program would continue to be 
directed towards using nuclear energy for peace and progress. It was in 
that spirit that the Canadian Government had established at Ohalk River a 
reactor school which provided basic instruction in the design, construction 
and operation of nuclear reactors. Ho was happy to announce that the 
school had accepted applicants for its present course from thirteen countrios, 
ten of whom were sponsored ""nj the Agency. 
16. One main objective of the operational program was to keep the lessdeveloped 
countries abreast of nuclear progress and bring about conditions 
in which they could benefit from it on a fair and equitable basis. He noted 
with regret that many Member States had not given the operational program the 
support it deserved. Total voluntas contributions in 1959 had not reached 
&Ofo of the target^ the 1960 contributions were even more discouraging, the 
total to date being only just over Gotfo of the target. . It was to bo hoped 
that Governments would in future make voluntary contributions in proportion 
to their ability and, as far as possible;, in a form readily usable for an 
.-agreed program which, of necessity, must reflect a balance of the different 
interests of Member States in the various aspects of the Agency's work, 


17. Special contributions offered to the Agency from time to time were, of 
course, welcome in principle, for they represented a definite indication of 
interest. In some cases, however, they had the effect of attaching special 
weight to a particular activity and so tended to distort the balance of the 
program as a whole. 
18. Whatever the short-term outlook for the atom as a competitive source of 
power might bo, there could bo no doubt that its long-term possibilities 
were vast. In the meantime, manifold activities were open. But the Agency, 

GC(IV)/OR.59 
page 6 

in drawing up its programs, must establish and observe certain priorities, 
concentrating on the tasks which were particularly appropriate to it as an 
international organisations; in that way would it bo most likely to continue 
to command the support and active participation of all its Members. 


19. Mr.' EMELYANQV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said his 
delegation had noted the Agency's activities during the past year with 
satisfaction. It had organized many scientific conferences and symposia, 
published technical directories, organized training courses and granted a 
considerable number of fellowships (35^ in 1959 s.nd 37$ in 1960). The 
services of experts had been made available to a number of countries and 
17 States had received scientific equipment. Preliminary assistance missions 
had gone to 36 countries. Useful work had also been done as regards the 
use of radioisotopes and in the collection and exchange of various typos of 
technical information. 
20. During the preceding three years, there had been 14 bilateral agreements 
between the Soviet Union and other countries, under the terms of which the 
Soviet Union had supplied 1 800 kg of enriched uranium fuel elements and a 
considerable amount of other materials, equipment and apparatus. With 
Soviet Union assistance, seven countries had begun to operate seven 
experimental reactors ranging between 2 000 and 10 000 kW(t) and six particle 
accelerators, With that equipment, it had been possible to establish new 
research centers. Institutes, laboratories and industrial undertakings in 
the Soviet Union had trained some 1 300 engineers and technicians from States 
that had concluded bilateral agreements with it. 
21. 
Over much the same period, between September 1955 an(i 'the end of 1959s 
235 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission had delivered 309 kg of uranium 
to foreign countries for reactors and for research. Under bilateral agreements; 
with Government assistance, it had arranged for the construction in 
1957 and 1958 of 15 research reactors, 11 of which were of less than 100 kW(t) 
and 4 of between 1 000 and 5 000 kl(t). 


22. The primary purpose of the Agency was "to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world". Three years had passed, and the Agency had not oven begun to carry 
out that fundamental duty. No Member State had in fact received a single 
235 


gram of the 5 140 kg of uranium at the Agency's disposal. 



GO(iv)/OR,39 


page ? 


23. The Soviet Union was in favor of granting assistance on a bilateral basis 
- always provided that no conditions impinging on their sovereign rights were 
imposed on the receiving countries. Of the 309 kg of uranium y sold or 
leased by the United States to other States, more than 2J0 kg had been supplied 
to France, Canada and the Federal Republic of Germany, the balance being 
delivered to various other European States. Of the less-developed countries, 
the Federation of Malaya was the only one to have received a gift of 
235 


uranium - amounting to less than 10 grams - from the United States. In 
point of fact, the less-doveloped countries wore not anxious to obtain 
assistance from States which insisted on laying down totally unacceptable 
conditions, 


24. It was not easy for a less-developed State to buy or rent nuclear 
materials for the construction of a test or experimental reactor above a 
given power rating if delivery of the source and special fissionable material 
was subject to the condition that the supplier State must have access to all 
operating records, receive reports on the way in which the material was 
utilized and have the right to appoint inspectors with access to all sites 
where such material was used and to all experimental, scientific or research 
results. Scientists in countries receiving assistance under such agreements 
no longer had power over their own inventions and discoveries, and the States 
themselves had to pay the very highest price - their own sovereignty. 
25. A French legal expert, analysing the bilateral agreements concluded by 
the United States, stated that the system of inspection laid down in the 
agreements was unilateral and all-embracing. Under agreements concluded 
with the United States in 195.? "the Netherlands, Australia and Switzerland 
were required to cede to the United States all rights and advantages deriving 
from the inventions or discoveries made on the basis of information obtained 
from the United States or with the use of equipment or nuclear material 
supplied by it. Those draconian conditions, said the legal expert, wore 
giving rise to increasingly violent protests by countries that received United 
States aid. Those conditions were indeed frightening off many States, 
particularly those that had recently become independentf they rightly feared 
that such conditions would deprive them of their dearly-bought liberty and 
sovereignty. 

GC(IV)/OR,39 
page 8 


260 Soviet Union assistance to other countries rested on entirely different 
principles. It was not subject to any condition that might impinge on the 
sovereign rights of Statesf and the fact that receiving States in accepting 
the Statute undertook not to use such assistance for military purposes was 
regarded as a sufficient safeguard against its being diverted to non-peaceful 
ends,, That was why the Yfcstern atomic powers, faced with the growing 
indignation of countries receiving assistance under conditions that infringed 
their sovereign rights, wore anxious to substitute Agency control for the 


control they were themselves exercising over those countries.' They obviously 
expected to be able to continue to exercise their own control under cover of 


international control. 


27. Thus9 the real purpose of drawing up and installing a system of Agency 
safeguards was to subject the development of atomic energy in the lessdeveloped 
countries to the atomic monopolies of the United States and its 
allies. 
28„ The Conference had before it a document on Agency safeguards-^ which 
was far from having been unanimously approved by the Board, In fact, seven 
Members had either abstained or taken no part in the vote5 four of them, 
representing the areas of Africa and the B&ddlo East, South Asia, South East 


Asia and the Pacific, and the Far East,, had expressed their opposition to 


the safeguards proposed, 


29. As far as the Soviet Union was concerned, its representative on the 
Board had always supported the countries which stood in need of atomic 
assistance in view of the fact that the countries likely to receive Agency 
assistance were precisely the countries to which safeguards would be applied. 
A system of Agency safeguards would bo meaningless unless nuclear weapons were 
forbidden, their manufacture stopped and all stocks destroyed5 otherwise, 
the application of the system would in practice amount to dividing the world 
into the inspecting countries - those possessing nuclear weapons - and the 
inspected - mainly the less-developed countries. 
l/ GC(IV)/l08/Rev.10 



GC(IV)/OR.39 
page 9 


30. A glanco at the draft program and budget for 1961—' would sho'ff that the 
considerable increase requested in the regular budget was due to the 
Secretariat's tendency to inflate salaries and finance more and more contract 
work that was quite irrelevant to the Agency's basic objectives. His 
delegation believed the Agency should aim primarily at making the most of its 
resources and shoulds 
(a) 
Use the fissionable material at its disposal for the construction 
of testj research and experimental reactors, particularly in the 
less-developed countriesj 
(b) 
Use its financial resources to obtain scientific equipment and 
apparatus for countries needing it for their nuclear physics 
laboratories^ 
(c) 
Use the specialists at its disposal to a greater extent for the 
training of key personnel5 particularly in the less-developed 
countries % 
(d) 
Use the consultants made available by the Soviet Union and the 
United States in such a way that their knowledge and experience 
was made available to countries which needed them to develop the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy5 and 
(e) 
Enlarge the scope of its scientific and technical information 
program to include questions which wore most topical and of interest 
to all Member States. 
31, In spite of international tension and the intensifioation of the cold 
war, the forces of peace> led by the Soviet Union;, were doing their utmost 


to extend international co-operation in science and technology. The Soviet 
Union was known to favor widespread collaboration between all countries in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It had agreed that the Finnish request 
for uranium for a sub-critica] assembly should be met. It had already given 
specialist training to eighteen fellowship-holders from Ifember States, and 
seven others were studying in Soviet higher educational establishments on 
long-term fellowshipsf the total cost involved was over a million roubles. 


2/ GC(IV)/ll6. 



GC(IV)/OR,39 
pago 10 


32. The greatest obstacle to the extensive employment, of atomic energy was 
that material resources and the knowledge of scientists were at present being 
used to sow death and destruction; not to servo peace and progress. Only 
if nuclear weapons wore prohibited, their development stopped and nuclear 
stockpiles destroyed could the Agency prosper. Only then would laboratories 
working in secret open their doors to scientists from all over the world and 
the results of scientific achievement bo made a-va.il8.ble to everyone. The 
cessation of nuclear tests must necessarily bo the first practical step. 
That should be the aim of all Members of the General Conference. 
33. Mr, FOCACCIA (Italy) said hi a delegation approved the Board's 
reportj which made a sound analysis of the Agency's work during the period 
considered. He was pleased to note the importance attached to the training 
of specialists and technicians.;, the exchange of knowledge and information, and 
attempts to solve loca] problems. 
34. He bolievod technical assistance should continue to be the Agency's 
main activity, taking the term to moan not only the aid given to a country 
by another which was advanced, in the peaceful applications of nuclear onorgy 
but also mutual assistance between countries at the same level of development. 
35. Research contracts, under which countries were invited to investigate 
specific problems and set up centers - open to foreign exports - to study 
thorn, stimulated national scientific research. For that reason, Italy was 
particularly interested, and had already concluded several contracts with the 
Agency? one for studying the radioactive contamination of marine organisms 
(awarded to the Fiascherino Occanographic Laboratory of the National Nuclear 
Energy Committee)| one for studying the biological concentration of radioisotopes 
and the biological effects of radiation in certain species of 
aquatic molluscs (the Committee's Ispra Medical Service) and a number for 
research in radiobiology (Physiological Institute of Perugia University and 
the Padua Institute of Comparative Anatomy,), 
36. The initial results of the study on the contamination of the sea had been 
presented to the Monaco Conference, jointly organized by the Agency and the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 
with the participation of the Food and Agriculture Organization of"the' United 
Nations (FAO). However, the" measures recommended by the Brynielsson Panel 

GC(IV)/0E.39 
page 11 


on Radioactive Waste Disposal into the Sea could not bo applied universally. 
For example, diffusion, solution and absorption were different in the 
Mediterranean from what they were in oceans. The Agency was in a position 
to find out what practically all exports working on those problems thought, 
and should undertake a broader and more detailed study, using for the 
purpose the laboratory and services which the Government of Monaco had 
offered to place at its disposal. It should also establish a system for 
supervising the disposal of radioactive waste into the sea. 


37 • Under the technical assistance program, Italy was helping to train 
personnel, and had sent experts to a number of countries requesting thems 
The National .Nuclear Energy Committee, which had recently replaced the 
National Nuclear Research Committee, would continue to place ten fellowships 
at the Agency's disposal, 


38. Italy was also interested in regulations for the transport of radioactive 
materials, nuclear power costing, and the study of civil liability for nuclear 
hazards. 
39. -A- monopoly of the industrial applications of radioisotopes in the hands 
of a few countries would tend to widen the gap between the highly industrialized 
and the less-developed countries,, To prevent it, the Agency should 
try to make such industrial applications better known, particularly in the 
loss-developed countries. 
40. His Government was glad to note the Agency's outstanding rolo in 
carrying out the agreement botwoon the United States and the Soviet Union? 
and its contribution to progress and the maintenance of peace. 
41. Mr. NOYACU (Romania) said he noted with pleasure that during the 
previous year the Agency had become an international center for the exchange 
of information on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Its scientific and 
technical publications wore highly appreciated by Romanian specialists, and ' 
its scientific meetings had given very encouraging results. The fellowship 
program had also made satisfactory progress5 the increase in the number of 
fellowships from 218 in 1958 "to 378 in 1960 showed that States were becoming 
more and more interested in the training of specialists. 

GO(IV)/OR.39 
page 12 


42. HG regretted, however, that, after throe years of existence, the'Agency 
was still unable to fulfill one of its main statutory functions - that of 
supplying fissionable material. The explanation given in the Board's report 
was that nuclear power still cost considerably more than conventional power 
and that the world production of uranium was beginning to exceed the demand, 
resulting in a free market and falling prices. Without entirely disagreeing 
with that explanation5 he felt the real reason why States did not apply to 
the Agency for fissionable materials was much more serious, namely the 
institution of a safeguards system whoso provisions applied only to States 
needing assistance and left the supplying countries to do as they pleased. 
The unilateral character of that system derived from a policy of discrimination 
that was becoming more and more evident within the Agency. His delegation 
believed no system of guarantees could bo effective in the absence of an 
agreement to ban nuclear weapon tests, cease their manufacture and destroy 
weapons already stockpiled, 
43• Reforring to the Board's proposal for an increase of about 6fo in the 
regular budget, he pointed out that any such increase clearly entailed an 
increase in the contributions of Member States - already a heavy enough 
charge on their own budgets. His delegation proposed that the program and 
budget resolution for 1961 should expressly provide that the 1961 regular 
budget should not exceed the regular budget for the current year. 

44. In Romania considerable progress had been made in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Studies in reactor physics had made possible .an increase of 
50$ in the maximum power and about AOOfo in the thermal neutron flux in some 
regions of the Romanian research reactor core, The research program had 
been extended to include beta and gamma spectroscopy and nuclear paramagnetism, 
the necessary equipment having been manufactured entirely in 
Romania. A 30 MoV betatron, designed for research on photonuclear reactions 
and certain medical and technical purposes, had recently been put into service. 
A model for the study of power reactor dynamics was under construction. 
45• In conclusion, he stressed that discrimination against certain States, 
particularly the People's Republic of China and the German Democratic 
Republic, must end if the Agency was to become a truly representative and 
effective .international organization. 



GC(IV)/OR.39 
page 13 


46. Mr. RBGALA (Philippines) said his delegation was pleased to see the 
Agency's operational activities expanding, especially technical assistance? 
but their financing continued to be a problem. Only $957 837 na<3- so far 
boon pledged of the 1960 target of $1.5 million set for voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund. It was to be hoped that a satisfactory solution would 
eventually be found. 
47. Gifts -were one resource available to the Agency for its technical 
assistance program — gifts such as the services of experts, fellowships, and 
equipment. Under the latter heading, for example, was the offer made in 
1960 by the United States to supply equipment to the value of $200 000. The 
less-developed countries, the main beneficiaries, greatly appreciated such 
gifts and hoped they would continue to increase. 
48. Preliminary assistance missions had proved beneficial both to the Agency 
and to the States visited. Contact was made with the national atomic energy 
authorities and data obtained on the spot, enabling the Agency to make a 
better assessment of needs and adjust its programs accordingly. The 
Philippines was pleased to have received one such mission, which had helped 
the Government to draw up its atomic energy program. Periodic visits by 
small groups at intervals of, say, throe or four years could be very helpful. 
49* The Agency's scheme for the exchange and training of scientists and 
experts merited the unqualified support of all Member States. The lack of 
qualified personnel continued to handicap atomic development in many countries, 
and while training was clearly the primary responsibility of the national 
authorities, facilities' for such training would bo chiefly confined to the 
advanced countries for years to come. It was therefore to be hoped that 
they would continue to place Typo II fellowships at the Agency's disposal. 

50. International and regional training courses organized by the Agency in 
existing national centers wore also valuable. The experience gained would 
facilitate the creation of regional centers in the future. The Board had 
therefore been wise in approving, recently, the organisation of radioisotope 
courses in Cairo, Greece and*Turkey. He hoped it would 6.0 likewise if 
similar requests were received from the Far East or South East Asia. 

GC(IV)/OR.39 

page 14 


51. Recognizing the importance of documentation and library services for the 
development of atomic energy, the Philippines had agreed to act as host to the 
South East Asia regional library workshop, to bo organized by the Agency in 
November 1960. His Government hoped a largo number of Asian countries 
would bo represented, 
52. His delegation also noted that the Agency was investigating the economics 
of importing, distributing and, finally;, producing radioisotopes in the lossdeveloped 
countries, and their value in determining the suitability of 
certain fertilizers for tropical and sub-tropical conditions. The results 
wore eagerly awaited* 
53• The Philippines Atomic Energy Commission was setting up an atomic 
research center, based on a 1 JUW swimming-pool research reactor supplied by 
the United States under a bilateral agreement. Pending the opening of the 
center towards the end of 1961, the Commission was having the necessary 
scientists, research workers and technicians trained abroad and was itsolf 
organizing regular radioisotope training courses. 


54. TkG Soviet Union delegate had referred to bilateral agreements between 
the United States and certain less-developed countries. The Philippines had 
one such agreement, Contrary to what the delegate of the Soviet Union had 
alleged, it contained no onerous provisions. The reactor and the scientific 
information supplied under the agicement would be of great service to the 
Philippines. In making that clear, he felt be was speaking for all States 
that had bilateral agreements with the United States, 
55. Tko Philippines thanked the Agency for providing the Atomic Energy 
Commission with the services of an export and with the nucloonic equipment 
for a radiochemistry laboratory and was glad a contract had been awarded to 
the research laboratory and the thyroid clinic of the University of the 
Philippines for research into-the cause of endemic goiter in certain parts of 
the country. 
56. The Government fully subscribed to the system of safeguards submitted 
to the Conference by the Board. If not perfect, it was as logical and 
realistic as could be expected in present circumstances5 to be applied 
initially for two years, it could bo improved in the light of experience. 

GC(IV)/OR.39 
page 15 


57. During the session, the Philippines, Pakistan and other States would 
submit to the Conference a proposal to establish an international institute 
of theoretical physics where scientists from different parts of the world 
could work together on such subjects as reactor theory, high energy physics, 
plasma physics and thermonuclear fusion. 
58. In token of its support of the Agency, the Government had decided to 
increase the amount of its voluntary contribution in 1961, and thereby 
associate itself modestly, but sincerely, with the Agency's efforts to 
"accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world". The Agency must be able to play its 
part in providing a solid basis for international peace and co-operation. It 
must also help to bridge the gap which, in nuclear technology, separated the 
advanced and the backward countries so that the great benefits deriving from 
the peaceful applications of atomic energy might become accessible to all 
nations* 
59. Mr. SALAM (Pakistan) said it was a matter for satisfaction that 
the Agency was coming closer to the fulfillment of the objectives laid down 
in its Statute, and all Member States must support it. It had certainly 
done useful work in providing technical assistance, awarding fellowships, 
developing safety standards and arranging conferences and seminars, but that 
was not enough. It should in future place increasing emphasis on the 
development of research on all aspects of atomic energy. 
60. To start with, the Agency could usefully promote research in theoretical 
physics. In that connection, his delegation and others proposed that the 
Agency should sponsor an international institute of theoretical physics. 
Such an institute would need no laboratories or costly apparatus5 a modest 
building containing lecture halls and a library would be sufficient. The 
staff would work on nuclear theory, the theory of elementary particles, 
reactor theory and the theory of thermonuclear fusion. At first the 
institute would award aboux 50 fellowships a year, half to experienced 
physicists who would be granted one year's leave for the purpose by their 
respective institutes. A similar system had proved successful at the worldfamous 
institutes in Copenhagen and Princeton. 

GC(IV)/0E.59 
page 16 


61. The need for an international institute of that kind was particularly 
evident in the less-developed countries;, where there were not enough 
theoretical physicists to permit the establishment of local research schools § 
the few physicists there wore lived in enforced isolation, and lacked the 
stimulus that was provided by an interchange of ideas and experience with their 
colleagues. Institutes like those in Copenhagen, Princeton and Dubna did not 
meet the purpose. In his view, an active international center, sponsored 
by a body like the Agency, was required. 
62. He had some comments to make on the Agency's training program. The 
procedure for awarding fellowships was not satisfactory. The Agency should 
prepare a list of each country's institutions, showing the available 
facilities, the minimum qualifications for entry and the number of places 
offered to the Agency. Member States would then correspond directly with 
those institutes and, once candidates had been accepted, approach the Agency 
for financial assistance if necessary. That procedure would save time and 
simplify the work of the Secretariat, The Agency should also earmark some 
funds for training laboratory technicians for the less-developed countries. 
63. .Funds allocated for the purchase of equipment should bo placed at the 
disposal of Member States, which would do the purchasing themselves. They 
could be trusted to comply with the relevant Agency rules. 
64. Although first-class experts were generally not available for long 
periods, the loss-developed countries would still prefer them, even if only 
for short periods. Countries intending to establish laboratories also 
needed architects and nuclear engineers to design specialized buildings5 the 
Agency could perhaps prepare a list of consultants. 
65. Pakistan's bilateral agreements with the United States and Canada were 
voluntary, the two countries having offered to help in obtaining fissionable 
materials for peaceful uses. The United States would boar up to 50/^of the 
cost of the research reactor Pakistan was constructing. Nothing in the 
agreements infringed the sovereignty of the recipient country, 
66. Baron van LYNDEN (Netherlands) regretted that Mr, I3schauzier, who 
for two years had represented the Motherlands on the Board, had been unable, 
for health reasons, to attend the Conference which, incidentally, marked the 
end of the Netherlands' period of membership of the Board. 

GC(IV)/OR„39 
page 17 


67. That membership had been very valuable to the Netherlands, enabling it 
to become familiar with the Agency's many problems during the period, and had 
strengthened its desire to see the Agency take a leading role amongst 
organizations dealing with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
68. 
At the third regular session the Mexican delegation had suggested that 
3/ 
it might be sufficient to hold the conference every two years^ as was the 
practice in several specialized agencies. However, since that would entail 
a number of amendments to the Statute, he thought no action should be taken 
pending revision of the Statute, which was to bo considered in principle 
during the fifth regular session in 1961 and in detail in 1962, 

69. In that connection, he warned the Conference against suggestions for 
altering or enlarging the composition of the Board, which the Conference on 
the Statute had fixed only after difficult and protracted negotiations. 
70. His delegation considered the question of safeguards to be one of the 
most important on the present agenda. He recalled that Article XII of the 
Statute had been adopted with but one abstention. The safeguards system 
submitted by the Board to the Conference might not be perfect, but it did 
represent the best possible solution in the existing circumstances. His 
delegation hoped the Conference would share-that view, take note of the 
principles and procedures approved by the Board-^ , and leave the Board to 
arrange for their detailed application and revision as experience dictated. 
71. In view of the arguments suggesting that a general safeguards system 
would be valueless, the Netherlands welcomed the announcement that the United 
States Government was prepared voluntarily to accept the application of 
Agency safeguards to four reactors of less than 100 MW capacity^. It also 
welcomed Japan's readiness to accept Agency safeguards with regard to 
6/ 


operations under its bilateral agreements with Canada and the United States-
His delegation hoped other countries would follow those examples. 


3_/ GC(lIl)/CQM.l/OR.l8, paragraph 17. 
4/ GC(IV)/l08/Rev.1. 
5_/ GC(IV)/0E.58, paragraph 41. 


§J IfricU <> paragraph 45. 


GC(IV)/OR.39 
page 18 


72, Replying to the Soviet Union allegations regarding bilateral agreements 


to which the United States was party, be endorsed the views of the delegate of 


Pakistan, The Netherlands had voluntarily concluded a similar agreement 
with the United States and had not been obliged to subscribe to onerous 
conditions. Neither had that agreement given rise to "growing indignation" 


in the Netherlands, It was perfectly natural that the results of research 


carried out under a bilateral agreement should be communicated to the other 


party. He doubted whether countries that had bilateral agreements with the 


Soviet Union had the right to keep secret from it the results of work under


taken under those agreements. 


73. Among other Agency activities worthy of special mention were the studies 
on small and medium power reactors, waste disposal and civil liability. The 
Netherlands particularly welcomed the Agoncy's co-operation with the European 
Nuclear Energy Agency (ENEA) with a view to harmonizing the draft conventions 
on civil liability and State responsibility which each had prepared^ the need 
for such co-operation provided the best argument for the draft relationship 
agreement between the Agency and ENEA which had been submitted to the 
7/ 


Conference for approval--' , 


74. His delegation hoped the Agency would have an important part in preparing 
a third international conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy if the 
United Nations decided to convene one. It also hoped, the Agency would 
properly co-ordinate its activities with those of the United Nations Economic 
and Social Council. 
75• The Agenoj could develop its operations on a wider and more solid basis 
by co-operating and co-ordinating, not only with the United Nations and the 
specialized agencies? but also with regional organizations doing similar or 
closely related work. 

The meeting roso at 1.5 p.m. 


1/ GC(IV)/l21. 


Distr. 
International Atomic Enerqy Aqency GENERAL 

GC(IV)/OR.40 
14 December 1960 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg,, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 22 September 1960, at 3 p.m. 


President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of th e 
agenda* 


10 
General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1959-60 (continued from 
the 39th meeting) 


Statements by the delegates of 
Norway 
Poland 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
China 


India 
Czechoslovakia 
Austria 
Spain 
(Discussion on point of order raised by the 
delegate of Canada) 


Paragraphs 


1 -7 


8 -30 


31 -39 


45 -52 


53 -67 


68 -79 


80 -37 


88 -94 


40 - 44 


GC(IV)/l30„ 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev.3. 
60-6572 



GC(l?)/OR,40 


page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR '-1959-60 


(GC(TV)/L14, 126 and Corr.1) (continued from the 39th meeting) 


1. Mr. OFTEDAL (Norway) joined with previous speakers in congratulating 
the President on his election. He also congratulated the Director General on 
the progress made by the Agency during the past year and hoped he and his staff 
would be given the necessary means to continue that progress. 
2, His delegation was taking part with some reluctance in the general debate. 


General debates tended to cover many problems which were not immediately 


relevant, and the tasks that had to be faced were serious and important enough 


to require all the attention the Conference could devote to them. All were 


agreed that disarmament and the effective control of nuclear weapons were 
matters of fundamental importance for the world, but that and similar topics 
were not relevant to the present agenda. The Agency's two main objectives 
were clearly stated at the beginning of the Statute, i.e. to promote the use of 


atomic energy for peaceful purposes and to ensure that in doing so,, it did not 


further military purposes. 


3. No action had so far been taken to ensure that the second objective would 
be attained. Now for the first time, a system of Agency safeguards-^ had boon 
drawn up. It was not perfect but represented a compromise worked out by the 
methods characteristic of international co-operation. It represented a guide 
both for the Board and for nations requesting assistance. The small and lossdevelopod 
countries especially would naturally wish to know in advance what 
Agency assistance implied for thorny on the other hand, the Board also needed 
guidance in deciding, in specific cases, what safeguards should be applied. 
The Conference might be ablo to indicate ways in which the proposed system could 
be improved, but it would be failing in its duty if it did not now provide the 
Board with clear recommendations. His Government had agreed with the Government 
of the United States to enter into negotiations with a view to requesting 
the Agency to administer the safeguard provisions of the bilateral agreement 
between the two Governments, and he had been asked by the delegate of Denmark 
to announce that the Danish Government had made a similar arrangement with the 
United States Government. 
1/ GC(IV)/l08/Rev.1. 



GC(IV)/0E.40 
page 3 


4- Slow but steady progress had been made towards achieving the Agency's 
other main objective - that of furthering the peaceful uses, of atomic energy, 
but a point had been reached where further progress might he held up if no 
adequate safeguards machinery was available. 

5. He wished to congratulate the Board and the Secretariat on the high 
quality of the work done on health and safety regulations. The method of 
using a panel of experts for the scientific work and of issuing regulations in 
the form of recommendations to Member States, which were requested to inform 
the Agency of any changes that were made and why, might very well become a 
pattern for the practical implementation of internabional regulations in the 
technical and scientific fields. 
6. The same comments applied to the work done on liability and insurance 
problems connected with reactors and nuclear-propelled ships. The important 
role that regional agreements and organizations could play in settling such 
difficult technical and economic questions should bo borne in mindo The Agency 
might investigate the possibility of arranging some system of mutual financial 
guarantees for small nations which were unable, individually, to providG the 
financial guarantees against possible nuclear hazards that were at present 
demanded. He personally believed experience would show that financial guarantees 
of the order of magnitude at present required were unnecessary. 
7. His Government believed it was of fundamental importance to the whole world 
to build up expert technical knowledge in new States, and hoped that increasing 
emphasis would be laid on that aspect of the Agency's program. If 
they had the ability, students who had completed their preliminary training 
should be enabled to continue, taking up advanced training and research. For 
that purpose the Agency would need to have access to research and development 
facilities which could be utilized for long-term research projects| students 
could then take part in the planning and organization of experiments as well as 
in day-to-day laboratory v/ork. The Norwegian Government had consequently 
decided to make available to the Agency, for a joint research program, a new 
zero-energy reactor which would be completed by the beginning of 1961. The 
United States had offered to give financial support to the scheme and to arrange 
that a fuel charge from the "Savannah" ship reactor would be available? in 
addition, two fuel charges would be made available by Norway* That would 

GC(IV)/OR,40 
page 4 


provide the 'basis for a program of measurements which would have great scientific 
value and provide very useful advanced research experience. Definite 
proposals would be submitted to the Board in the very near future. It was to 
be hoped that similar facilities would be made available by other Member States. 
Ho assumed that the interosting proposal for advanced theoretical work made by 


2/ 
the Pakistan delegation during the general debate-' would be considered by the 
Board. 


8. Mr. BILLIG (Poland) emphasized that, in assessing the work of the 
Agency during the current period and in planning its future program, it was 
necessary to realize that peaceful co-existence and disarmament were essential 
for the widest use of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind. Members must 
inquire whether the Agency was justifying the hopes of those who had set it up, 
9. The Polish delegation was gratified that the Agency was continuing its 
work on the training of personnel and in particular its fellowship program. 
Young Polish specialists had for three years been using those fellowships to 
help them develop nuclear research in Poland. He thanked the host countries, 
and indicated that during 1960 Poland had itself been able to receive its first 
fellows. 
10. Polish scientific workers and engineers had taken an active part in the 
proceedings of the specialized conferences, seminars and panels organized by 
the Agency, That part of the Agency's work was sound in principle, but there 
was a danger that too many such conferences might be hold. Their number should 
be limited, and priority given to meetings on subjects which interested many 
countries and which could contribute to relatively early progress in nuclear 
research. 
11. The Polish delegation was also pleased with the Agency's work on publications 
and the dissemination of information. 
12. The contracts signed by the Agency with, scientists in ariumbor of countries, 
including Poland, represented a step forward in its efforts to develop nuclear 
research and the dissemination of results. At the same time, greater care 
should bo taken in concluding contracts, as the subjects had sometimes been 
chosen without sufficient thought and planning. 
2/ GC(IV)/OR.39? paragraphs 60 and 6l. 



GC(IV)/OR,40 
page 5 


IJ. In addition to its merits, the Agency's work also shov/ed some grave defects. 
Far-reaching changes had taken place in the world since the establishment of 
the Agency, which had originally been set up to supply countries with fissionable 
materials. At that time some of the big atomic Powers had believed that 
their monopoly over such materials would continue, if not for ever, at least 
for a very long time. They had then proclaimed that the Agency's main task 
was to draft rules for safeguards and control. The Agency's Statute, however, 
gave it no authority for obtaining control over the development of atomic work 
in other countries and subordinating that work to itself. 


14• Later, developments had taken a different course. Not only uranium but 
also reactors, accelerators and other installations essential to the development 
of nuclear physics and technology could now be obtained through bilateral 
trado agreements. Under such agreements, particularly with the Soviet Union, 
Poland had been able in a few years to carry out large-scale research and experimentation 
in a completely new field of science and technology. The aid 
of the Soviet Union and the close co-operation between the socialist- countries, 
which exchanged experience and granted each other assistance, was a major contributory 
factor in the development of Polish nuclear technology. Poland was 
also expanding and consolidating its co-operation in 'atomic matters with many 
non-sooialist countries, 


15. The Polish delegation noted that, in the present changed circumstances, 
the Agency could not fulfill its original duty to supply fissionable materials, 
reactors and the like. The Polish representatives at the Conference and on 
the Board had more than onco pointed out that the Agency was giving much attention 
to matters which were not of primary importance. One such subject, which 
had given rise to prolonged and heated disputes, was safeguards and control. 
Respite factual criticism and forceful arguments, certain countries continued 
to regard safeguards as a matter of paramount importance. A small number of 
States, unable to acquire control over others by means of direct bilateral 
relations with them, were attempting, by forcing the issue of safeguards, to 
obtain that control through the Agency. The over-emphasis on safeguards was 
directly harmful in the present circumstances, and was alienating from the 
Agency countries which needed its help. On the other hand, the Agency's 
assistance to needy countries would make sense only if provided under conditions 
more favorable than those obtainable under bilateral agreements. 

GC(IV)/0E.40 


page 6 


16. Poland, which had ratified the Agency's Statute, was not opposed to safeguards 
in general. The point of safeguards was that fissionable materials 
should be used for peaceful purposes only, and he made available without: conditions 
which violated the sovereignty of the receiving countries. Safeguards 
should depend on the actual project which the Agency was helping to execute, 
and be proportional to the amount of assistance granted. Otherwise an absurd 
situation would arise in which the Agency exercised control without giving 
assistance, instead of providing assistance subject to reasonable precautions. 
17• The Polish delegation noted that the loss-developed oountr 1GS WQ3TC not 
applying to the Agency for assistance in obtaining fissionable materials and 
reactors, as that type of aid from the Agency had ceased to be of vital importance. 
The enthusiasm which in 1956 and 1957 bad accompanied plans for the 
development of atomic power had fallen off considerably, and loss interest was 
now shown. Plans had been revised and repeatedly deferred, as a result of the 
technical difficulties which had arisen in actual practice and, above all, as 
a result of economic events, especially the opening of new and extensive coal 
and oil deposits and the groat advances made in the production of conventional 
energy. The lower cost of power from conventional sources had postponed the 
time- when the cost curves of nuclear and of conventional energy would intersect. 


18. In many countries the most important current problems concerned the use 
of radioisotopes in industry, technology, agriculture, biology and medicine, 
the use of powerful sources of radiation, and the use of radiation chemistry. 
Solution of those problems could yield concrete results very quickly at rola-. 
tivcly small technical and financial cost. But first it was necessary to train 
suitable staff and ensure a sufficiently high level of technical development. 
19• Poland was drawing the appropriate conclusions. It had deferred the con


struction of its first atomic power station for a few years, and during the 
next five years, in addition to research and the training of scientific and 
technical personnel, it would concentrate on the application of isotopes and 


the development of radiation chemistry. 


20, The most fundamental question for the present and future work of the Agency 
was assistance to the less-developed countries. That part of the Agency's 
work deserved close attention at a time when so much effort was being devoted 



GC(I7)/OR.40 
page 7 


to costly measures of secondary importance. The technical assistance provided 
to the less-developed countries was unplanned and adventitious. Until a program 
on the linos of paragraph 19(o) of "the Preparatory Commission's report had 
boon drawn up, the Agency would make no progress. It could carry out considerable 
and evon large-scale measures, hut they would remain unrealistic until 
several practical and significant prohlems had been settled. 


21. The first and most important step should be an overall plan based on the . 
assistance needs of the loss-developed countries. To execute such a plan over 
a number of years would require large financial resources. The Agency could 
find the funds even if it had to abandon somo measures of doubtful value and 
reduce administrative expenditure. A large part of the Agency's regular budget 
went on administration, and a disproportionately small part on basic operational 
activities. The Secretariat should consider whether it could transfer funds 
from the regular budget to an overall plan involving an expansion of basic 
operations. 
22. Thought should be given at once tc methods of drafting an overall plan, by 
discussing methods of work and by securing the co-operation of representatives 
of the great Powers, atomic physicists and economists, and representatives of 
countries requiring assistance. The general development schemes in those 
countries must be taken into account, and collaboration with the United Nations 
and a number of specialized agencies was therefore indispensable. In the first 
xolacc it seemed essential for the regional economic commissions to co-operate. 
23. Despite difficulties, the Agency's activities could bo extended immediately 
in those sectors where there wore no divergencies or dissensions. Work should 
proceed on the instruction and training of specialists, since projects for the 
future use of atomic energy exceeded the capacity of trained staff in all countries. 
The possibility of setting up a regional network of training centers 
should be considered. For that purpose it would be possible to use the services 
of experts made available to the Agency by Member States. Hitherto those 
services had been insufficiently exploited. The Polish delegation was interested 
in the plan under consideration in the Secretariat for setting up a 
permanent center to train specialists in the use of isotopes for medical treatment 
and diagnosis through an institution specially established for that purpose. 

GC(IV)/OR.40 
page 8 


If the Agency could concentrate on training specialists in atomic medicine, 
that particular problem would bo largely solved in 10 to 15 years. Attention 
should also be given to setting up similar centers for training specialists in 
the use of isotopes in agriculture and industry. It would likewise be desirable 
to provide fellowships of longer duration, as they could bo very important 
for countries without adequate higher educational establishments., 


24. The Agency should also encourage the wide use of radioactive isotopes for 
technical purposes. Experience in many countries had shown that it was now 
possible' to use radiation sources very successfully in industry and technology. 
The Agency's task was to collaborate in introducing them widely into the productive 
cycle. 
25. Work on standardizing regulations for radiological protection should be . 
acooleratod, and the Agency rshould continue to provide the necessary apparatus 
and equipment. 
3/ 


26. The Conference on the Disposal of Radioactive Waster^ had revealed differences 
of opinion about the discharge of waste into the sea. The Agency 
could and should help to speed up international collaboration to prevent 
dangerous contamination of water by radioactive waste. 
27. The Agency also had an important role to play in co-ordinating large-scale 
international operations; for oxamplc the setting up of big accelerators, and 
research in plasma physics. After the third regular session of the General 
Conference, talks had been hole with a view to the joint construction of a large 
accelerator? that question had, been discussed recently from the scientific 
and technical angle at the Twelfth International Conference on High Energy 
Physics, organized by the University of Rochester in Hew York. 
2u„ The Agency had already taken the first stop towards international cooperation 
on thermonuclear fusion by setting up an editorial staff for a journal' 
devoted to thermonuclear fusion and plasma physics. The Polish delegation 
wished the Agency success, ar.d hoped that steps would bo taken to co-ordinate 
efforts. 
2/ Held at Monaco from 16 tc 21 November 1959• 



GC(IV)/OR.40 
page 9 


29. Discontinuance of the insane arms race, and total world disarmament, wore 
necessary conditions for the relief of international tension. The first stop 
along that road was cessation of nuclear weapons tests. Disarmament would at 
once reinforce confidence between nations, and produce economic conditions 
favorable to the Agency's aims. 
30. The Polish delegation particularly shared the anxiety of other nations at 
the,rebirth of militarism in a country which had twice plunged the world into 
war, and in ¥/hich voices wore again being raised in a call for arms, atomic 
weapons and rockets. The world was at the crossroads, but Poland believed that 
peace, and peaceful coexistence between nations, would triumph. The Polish 
Government, in its persistent struggle for the peaceful solution of all difficult 
international questions, had repeatedly made proposals for the solution of 
urgent disarmament problems, A rapid conclusion by the three groat Powers of 
an agreement for the cessation of atomic weapons testing would bo an historic 
stop towards the end desired by the whole world - total disarmament - and would 
also permit unhampered development of the Agency and of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Poland was submitting a draft resolution on that subject—' in 
the firm belief that all nations of the world would wish for its acceptance, 


51. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrai nian Soviet Socialist Republic) supported the 
Polish draft resolution. The General Conference was meeting at a time when 
the attention of the whole world was being drawn to the fifteenth session of 
the United Nations General Assembly. Once more the Soviet Union was bringing 
before that Assembly the most important question in contemporary international 
relations - disarmament. Soviet scientists, engineers and other workers on 
the peaceful investigation of cosmic space had been the first to put into orbit 
and bring back to earth a space ship containing test animals. 
32, In the present era of intensive scientific and technical progress it was 


especially important that scientific achievement should be directed towards the 


conquest of nature for the good of mankind, and not towards preparation of the 
moans of destroying everything attained by creative research, prolonged effort 
and the intense work of hundreds of millions of people. Scientific discoveries 
could be peacefully used on one condition only - complete and general 
disarmament. It was therefore perfectly natural and reasonable that the Soviet 
Union should contend for the peaceful coexistence of States irrespective of their 
form of government. 


&J Subsequently issued as document GC(IV)/l31. 


GC(IT)/OR.40 


page 10 


33. The Agency was bound to be concerned by the problem of prohibiting atomic 
weapons. Its work v/ould not develop properly until the throat of atomic war 
had been eliminated. The use of nuclear weapons must bo prohibited for all 
tine;, their production must be stopped, and stockpiles used only as fuel for 
nuclear power plants employed for peaceful purposes. The Agency's interest 
in that aim needed no emphasizing. Scientific achievements would not bo dovotod 
to the services of peace until nuclear weapons wore prohibited and oliminatod 
from the arsenals of all States. The absence of an agreement to abolish atomic 
weapon tests and to eliminate the weapons themselves was a serious obstaclo to 
converting nuclear materials and scientific, technological and other resources 
from destructive to constructive purposes. 
34• The use of various forms of energy had reached an unparalleled level of 


development. In the past twonty-fivo years as much power had been produced 


as in the whole of previous human history. Science and technology had now 


attained such a high level that, wore it not for military expenditure,, they 


could satisfy the needs of everybody living on the planet. It was therefore 
reasonable that the peoples of the world should try to master the latest and 
most important source of power as soon as possible. Only if the production 
and use of nuclear weapons were banned would boundless opportunities really 


open up for the peaceful use of nuclear power. The Agency should intervene 
actively to stop nuclear testing and prohibit nuclear and thermonuclear weapons. 
The Ukrainian people and Government would fully support any proposal or effort 
directed towards peace and the permanent prohibition of such weapons. The 
Ukrainian atomic energy development program was devoted solely to peaceful uses, 
and Ukrainian scientific institutions and higher educational establishments wore 
carrying out much research devoted to peaceful purposes. 


35. His Government attached considerable significance to the Agency's activities. 
The Statute offered groat opportunities, and public opinion throughout the world 
was justified in oxpocting that the Agency would help in the noble aim of using 
nuclear energy for the welfare of humanity. Equipment and specialized materials, 
however, wore not enough without well-trained national specialists, and the 
Agency could do useful work in assisting individual countries in that rospoct. 
The Agency should also help the less-developed countries to draw up national 

GC(IV)/OR,40 
page 11 


atonic energy programs, and assist them to choose the right ways of using that 
energy economically. Its experts should he guided, however, by the specialists 
of the countries where they worked, 


36. The safeguards system submitted to the Conference was contrary to the 
spirit and scope of the Agency's assistance to its Member States. Agency safeguards 
wore apparently to be attached to the materials such countries received. 
Because of their present technological and economic weakness, those countries 
would he unable for some years to develop nuclear weapons, still less to use 
fissionable materials and equipment supplied by the Agency for military purposes. 
37' In the course of his speech, in which he had insisted on the adoption of 
the safeguards system^, the United States delegate had referred only to three 
research reactors and one medium-sized powor reactor. He had not mentioned 
the fact that scores of other reactors in the United States would remain outside 
the safeguards system, including reactors having nothing to do with the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. States that were just beginning work in nuclear energy 
would, however, at once come under control. The system was therefore one-sided, 
and would in fact lead not to unity but to disunity among countries. Agency 
safeguards would be effective only if nuclear weapons were prohibited, their production 
stopped and stockpiles destroyed. 


38.- The Ukrainian delegation had also examined carefully the Agency's program 
and budget for 1961-'. The regular budget estimates amounted to |6 168 000, an 
increase over 1960 of $325 000, In preparing them, the Secretariat had not 
taken into account the requests of the Conference and the Board that any tendency 
towards budgetary increases should be checked. Almost three-fourths of the 
budget was devoted to general administrative costs, most of which were unproductive. 
The budget ought to bo based on that of 1960. The Agency's present 
staff was quite sufficient to carry out the program for the coming as for the 
previous.year. The Agency's main work should be to extend the use of radioisotopes, 
train national specialists, sot up improved types of reactor, and the 
like The Agency's program should deal with important scientific problems, 
rather than with minor matters of no general interest or ambitious schemes outside 
the Agency's present scope. 


^/ GC(l?)/OR„38, paragraphs 21 to 43. 
6/ GC(IV)/ll6. 



GC(IV)/OR,40 
page 12 


39. The Ukrainian Government regarded the Agency as' one of the organs of international 
co-operation. The Ukraine would continue its active participation in 
the Agency's work, which it considered to be hasod on the principles of cooperation 
between all Members, aiming at the maintenance of peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world. 
40. Rising to a point of order, Mr. WSRSHOF (Canada) declared that the 
draft resolution on disarmament submitted by the Polish delegation was out of 
orders not because of its substance, but because it introduced a new subject 
and therefore could not be examined, under item 10 of the agenda- Under 
Rules 15 and 42 of the Rules of Procedure, it should bo referred to the General 
Committee, which might recommend its inclusion as an additional agenda item. 
41o Mr, PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) considered that the Polish draft resolution 
could bo considered under item 10 of the agenda because it was relevant 
to the Agency's general activities, 


42. Mr. FOSTER (United States of America) supported the Canadian delegate. 
43, Mr. NOVIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the Soviet 
delogation fully supported the Polish draft resolution calling for the prohibition 
of atomic weapons tests. It could not agree with the objections raised 
by the Canadian delegation. There was nothing in the Rules of Procedure to 
prevent the Polish delegation from submitting the draft resolution. The Polish 


delegation was not suggesting that a special item dealing with the prohibition 
of atomic weapons tests bo included in the agenda. It only wished to express 
a desire that the Great Powers now negotiating in Geneva on the prohibition of 
atonic weapons tests should speed up their talks and reach some agreement. 
The Soviet Union was ready to do everything in its power to reach that agreement 
as quickly as possible. If the United States and the United Kingdom were 


sincerely concerned to prohibit nuclear tests, there could be no grounds for 
objecting to the Polish proposal, which the Soviet delegation invited other 
delegations to support,, 


44. The PRESIDENT requested the Conference to postpone consideration of 
the question raised by the delegate of Canada and to continue the general debate. 
45•- Mr. LEE (China) congratulated the President on his election. His 
delegation had noted with satisfaction the program which the Agency had carried 



GC(IV)/OR.40 
page 13 


out during the past year and also the efforts it was making to expand its 
activities in the future. His country was among the many to receive help from 
the Agency, which had so far provided the services of one health physicist and 
one nuclear physicist5 a third expert would probably arrive early in 1961. , 
The Agency had also granted his country twenty fellowships3 so far, however, 
only twelve had been ay/arded, by a competitive examination.. 


46. Many more experts in atomic science were needed to accelerate work on the 
national nuclear program. However, his country did not rely entirely on the 
services of experts recruited from abroad^ about fifteen young Chinese scientists, 
physicists and chemists had been sent to other countries to be trained 
in different aspects of nuclear science. Bight had already completed their 
studios and were now working at the Institute of Nuclear Science. 
47* China urgently needed one or two experts in reactor operation, to work on 


its research reactor. A request to that effect had already been forwarded to 


the Agency, and his delegation hoped for immediate action. Installation of. 


the reactor had boon delayed by damage to the control panel during transport, 
but the reactor was expected to become critical in February 1961. 


48. Requests for equipment had also been forwarded to the Agency. With, the 
assistance of an Agency expert, the Chinese Atomic Energy Council had worked 
out a plan for establishing a national radiation protection service. His delegation 
hoped that the Agency would help to provide the necessary equipment. 
The Agency had heavy financial obligations, but the cost of fulfilling those 
requests would be small, and his Government would endeavor to play its part by 
discharging its financial obligations.to the Agency. 
49* It was gratifying to note that several research contracts had already boon 
awarded. His country had made several recommendations for research contracts, 
and had offered the services of exports on the improvement of rice production, 
but had not yet received replies. 


50, The bilateral agreement between the United States Government and his own 


on the peaceful use of atomic energy included special provisions dealing 
specifically with safeguards. The establishment of an effective safeguards 
system was an important aspect of the Agency's work, and its administration by 
the Agency was a logical step which would facilitate the smeeth working of the' 
system. His delegation supported the principles and procedures provisionally 
adopted by the Board, 



GC(IV)/OR.40 
page 14 


51. China had applied radioisotopes in therapy, and in mutation experiments 
for the improvement of wheat, tea, sugar cane and rice. Training courses in 
the application and handling of radioisotopes had heen initiated by the Institute 
of Nuclear Science. One of the Agency's motile radioisotope laboratories 
would arrive in his country before the end of September 1960 and would 
remain for about five months. 
52. The problem of developing nuclear power in his country had had to bo postponed 
for several years because of an abundance of hydroelectric power, which 
was enough to meet the present power demand. However, nuclear power would 
bocomo necessary in five to ten years to meet increasing demands. 
53. Mr. EHABHA (India), after congratulating the President, observed that 
the atom's vast potentialities for war had been amply demonstrated. If the 
Agency had not been created in 1957> the need for it would have been even groator 
in bho present year, since the world situation had still not improved and there 
was still too much emphasis on warlike uses. 
54. There had been much misleading talk about th.e slowing down of programs 
for the development of atomic power because of insufficient advance in reactor 
technology. In fact remarkable progress had boon achieved in reducing the 
cost of nuclear power. That progress could, however, have been much faster if 
the nations with largo technical and industrial capacities had co-operated in 
solving the more difficult problems. The amount spent on peaceful atomic 
research was probably less than a hundredth part of that spent under the defense 
budgets of the world. His Government hoped that the nations concerned would 
spoodily rectify that disequilibrium through a massive co-ordinated effort to 
develop the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The delegation of India would 
oxplore with other delegations during the present Conference the possibilities 
of fulfilling that hope. Until such a decision had been taken and implemented, 
the Agency would not be able to play its full part., 
55. Much of the Agency's work was still preparatory - for example, the drafting 
of regulations for the transport of radioactive materials, and discussions on 
nuclear-powered ships and radioactive waste disposal. All that was, of course, 
useful groundwork, and the Agency should also be congratulated on its progress 
in the fellowship program. A total of 2lS candidates had been placed in 1958 

GC(IV)/OR,40 
page 15 


and 377 in 1959; and the figure for 1960 was a shade higher. The honefiting 
countries had increased from 28 to about 40. The fellows were being trained 
in health physics| the production, handling and application of radioisotopes5 
geology^ radioactive ore prospecting, mining and processing^ the metallurgy 
of uranium, thorium, plutonium and zirconium? reactor physics, nuclear physics, 
nuclear chemistry and radiocheraistry, and other subjects. India was also 
pleased to note that under the exchange program professors had been sent to some 
nine countries. The Agency must never forget the importance of scientific 
exchanges. 


56. The Agency had also increased its technical and research assistance from 
$440 516 in 1958 to 1600 000 for 1961. Additional technical knowledge at the 
present stage could help loss-developed countries to advance their economies 
from a level below the desirable minimum standard to one just above it. The 
Board should bear that point in mind Y/hcn considering technical assistance projects 
and awarding research contracts. 
57• In paragraph 79 of the Preparatory Commission's report it was stated that 
the Agency "should study the need for establishing co-operatively financed 
regional training centers, bearing in mind the particular requirements of the 
countries of the region „.. The Agency should, on the request of interested 
Member States, consider taking an active part in assisting them to plan, establish 
and/or operate such centers." India was pleased to note the Board's 
decision to endorse the request for a Middle Eastern regional radioisotope 
training center for the Arab countries, subject to the Director General's 
arranging a series of courses in Cairo and reporting to the Board on a draft 
project agreement, 


58. He requested particulars of the precise stage of development of the headquarters 
laboratory and its facilities, and suggested that the Director General 
should circulate to all Member States a complete list of the equipment already 
installed at the laboratory and the type of work which it could undertake. 
Perhaps any additional facilities which would bo available in the next six months 
or so could also be listed. 
59. He drew attention to the agreement for co-operation in atomic energy matters 
bot'ivcon the United States and the Soviet Union Governments, because it seemed 

GC(IV)/OR.40 
pago 16 


that there had not yet been any dissemination of information through the Agency 
as a result of that agreement. His delegation hoped that some tangible results 
would soon he made known to all Member States through the Agency. 


60. India was not, and never had been, against the principle of safeguards. 
It insisted, however, that any system of safeguards adopted by the Agency should 
conform to certain basic principles-. The States most advanced in atomic cnorgy, 
and therefore the main contributors to nuclear weapons production, would not be 
affected by any safeguards the Agency could impose. The burden must not fall 
on the industrially less-developed countries, which were in no position to create 
a nuclear weapons threat. Nor must it widen the gap between the industrialized 
and the loss-developed countries and thus increase world tension. He rogrettod 
that the system proposed by the Agency satisfied none of those requirements, 
61. India's achievements showed that it had the necessary scientific and technical 
knowledge to set up low-temperature reactors for the production of plutonium 
for military purposes. But it had no intention of doing so. Its aim 
was to use the atom for producing economic electric power, and' plutonium for 
fuelling future reactors so that it could eventually base its power program on 
thorium. It could clearly now advance without help, though it was willing to 
co-operate with other countries. Its position on safeguards was therefore not 
affected by their probable impact on India5 it held that they must apply 
equally to all countries, 
62. India had never received a satisfactory answer to its grave doubts on the 
practical purposes of the system devised by the Agency. The nain reason now 
given why the Agency should devise a system of safeguards was that it was 
necessary to show the world that such a system could work. He doubted very 
much whether that would serve any useful purpose, and thought that a false sense 
of security and complacency would result from adopting a system which would 
bring under safeguards only those national programs which were a long way from 
the capacities required for the manufacture of nuclear weapons. His delegation 
therefore believed that the establishment of a safeguards system was inherently 
part of the problem of nuclear disarmament. If the nuclear Powers were unwilling 
to accept effective safeguards, they could not expect other countries 
to accept them. 



GC(IV)/0So40 
page 17 


63. For all those reasons the Indian delegation urged the Conference not to 
approve at the present stage the draft safeguards submitted by the Board. 
Until the nuclear Powers had agreed on a general system of safeguards it would 
bo more than adequate if the Agency, in assisting Member States, required 
accounting and inspection for all special fissionable materials supplied. 
64. IT or should safeguards be attached to plant and equipment, since many components 
could be used not only for-reactors but also for non-atomic industrial 
purposes. The impact of such safeguards would fall chiefly on the industrially 
less-developed countries, which could not produce such plant and equipment themselves, 
and only lightly on the industrially advanced countries. Even.if plant 
and equipment were supplied under restrictive conditions and safeguards, there 
was nothing to prevent the recipient from duplicating them, and his ability to 
do so would bo in direct proportion to his industrial development. 
65. It was likewise inexpedient and impracticable to apply safeguards effectively 
to unprocessed source materials such as uranium and thorium concentrates 
or ores, of which there was groat over-production, so that they were freely 
available on the commercial market. Many of the industrially less-advanced 
countries possessed sizeable deposits of those materials and, if onerous conditions 
were attached to their supply by the Agency, they would develop their 
own sources, oven if it cost more. Supply should be subject at the very most 
to an undertaking by the recipient that the materials would be used only for 
peaceful purposes. India therefore urged the Conference to direct the Board 
to adopt an arrangement on those lines, while agreeing that the matter should 
be kept under review. The problem before the world ?;as not to put a puppy into 
a cage in order to ensure that when it grow up it would not bite someone5 the 
problem was how to cage the tiger of nuclear armament which now roamed the world. 
66c His delegation was prepared to discuss that very important subject with 
other countries, and would submit a draft resolution on it-*-/ . The present 
principles and procedures wore strongly opposed by a large section of potential 
receiving countries as well as by many others. To adopt them would therefore 
hamper the Agency's work, 

67. All were aware of the difficulties, but he was convinced that all were 
aware also of the need to take every practical stop to increase the value of the 
1/ Subsequently issued as document GC(IV)/COM.2/27. 


GC(IV)/OR.40 
page 10 


Agency's work. Unfortunately the hopes of several years ago had not been 
fully realized. One cause was beyond the control of the Agency, and the Conference 
could only exhort the nuclear Powers to come quickly to agreements which 
would ensure that all nuclear materials and facilities wore applied to peaceful 
purposes. The other cause could he remedied by calling on Member States to 


incroaso their efforts generally, and to combine thoir powerful forces for the 


solution of important technical problems. 


6Q, Mr. PETBZELKA (Czechoslovakia) said his delegation welcomed the Polish 
draft resolution. Its adoption would not only help the Agency, as the body 
primarily responsible for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear enorgyf it ¥/ould also respond to the urgent need to achieve without 
delay the cessation once and for all of nuclear weapons tests. 

69. The period under discussion represented the Agency's third year, so that 
the criteria by which its work should bo judged must be more rigorous than 
those applied at previous sessions of the Conference. 
70, His delegation could not but regret that the Agency had failed in one of 
its responsibilities under the Statute, namely to assist the less-developed 
countries in the use of atomic energy to accelerate the growth of their national 
economies and obtain bettor living standards. On the contrary, there was a 
growing tendency to divert attention to problems which were of interest only 
to certain advanced countries. 


71. Genuine international co-operation within the Agency was being sacrificed 
to egotistical political interests. Discrimination against the People's 
Republic of China, the Gorman Democratic Republic and some other States could 
not but impair the principle of universality. The same applied to the constant 
refusal to grant the World Federation of Trade Unions the consultative 
status freely granted to less important trade union organisations. Although 
the General Conference at its third regular session had recommended that the 
matter,should be reconsidered,-^ the Board had persisted in its discriminatory 
policy, thereby excluding the constructive participation and assistance of 
95 million working people. The vote in the Board represented an abuse of the 
voting machinery by the United States, which would prejudice the Agency's 
standing and the cause of international co-operation. 
8/ QO(III)/EBS/47. 



GC(IV)/OR=40 
page 19 


72o Previous discussions on safeguards likewise gave good grounds for appre


hension., It would bo in the interests of the loss-developed countries to 


accept only such safeguards as met the criteria suggested by the delegate of 


India, i.e. that thoy should he consistent with the national dignity of every 


State to which they were made applicable, he universally applied; and take 


account of the fact that atomic energy had become an ahsoluto necessity for the 


peaceful development and prosperity of many countries,, In their present form. 


Agency safeguards wore drastic for those countries which least represented a 


danger to peace and were technically and economically incapable'of misusing 


atomic energy for military purposes, while they hardly affected at all Statos 


which had no compunction in endangering world peace by deliberately i/upoding 


the conclusion of an agreement on the cessation of nuclear weapons tests and on 


nuclear disarmament. 


73• Since the Agency had been established;, fissionable materials had become 
freely available on the world market, no safeguards being attached by the 
supplying State. Some Statos insisted on safeguards, which offered a moans 
of maintaining their own superior position and of exercising control over the 
countries to which thoy granted assistance. The Soviet Union, however, was 
supplying fissionable materials and nuclear equipment to loss-developed countries 
without attaching safeguards and without reserving any supervisory rights. 
The proposed safeguards system was accordingly anachronistic and the relevant 
provisions of the Statute must be interpreted in the light of the real situation. 


74. The regular budget continued to increase. Disproportionately high amounts 
had been allocated to projects that had not received proper examination nor 
been properly planned and co-ordinated. Substantially more than had been indicated 
in the information originally supplied was being spent on laboratories 
which had not so far proved of any real benefit to most Member States, 
>75. Technical assistance to the less-developod countries should be increased. 


A new form of technical assistance was roproscntcd by radioisotope training 


centers, where personnel from the less-devclopod countries would be trained at 


far lower than the normal cost5 it was a scheme which merited further extension. 


76. Some of the scientific conferences and meetings organized by the Agency 
had been of real value, more particularly those dealing with urgent problems 

GC(IV)/OR.40 
page 20 


relating to the practical applications of atonic energy in the loss-developed 
countries. The Agency had also gono a long way towards 'becoming an international 
center for the exchange of scientific information. Its scientific and 
technical publications went to show that, properly directed, the Agency night 
play an important rolo in accelerating the development of atomic techniques 
and technology while at the sane time strengthening its own international 
authority. The library was rendering valuable services, and the draft regulations 
that had been elaborated, such as those governing the transport of radioactive 
materials, had been favorably received and much appreciated. A positive 
contribution had also been made by fellowship programs and the exchange of exports 
and scientists. 


77 • As in previous years, Czechoslovakia was again offering the Agency the 


services of ton consultants and experts, and fifteen fellowships for students 


and scientific workers from the loss-developed countries. Scientific and tech


nical publications and scientific films had also been offered. In October 


1960, the Agency symposium on the chemical effects of nuclear transformations, 
at which more than 150 scientists wore expected, would be held in Prague and 
his Government was also prepared to organize a second Agency symposium. 


78. The Agency still had at its disposal the Czechoslovak contribution to the 
General Fund, originally amounting to 200 000 Czech crowns, to bo used in the 
form of deliveries of technical equipment and apparatus. In view of that, he 
had been surprised at the Director General's statement that he had only $40 000 
9/ 
available for technical assistance, for a six-month period^ s the unused Czechoslovak 
contribution amounted to more than half that sum. He hoped such contributions 
would be more promptly utilized in the coming year. 


79. His Government would continue consistently to help the Agency achieve its 
original objectives and to assist in eliminating shortcomings in the firm belief 
that, in the future, the positive elements would prevail. 
80. Mr. THIKRING (Austria) joined with previous speakers in congratulating 
the President on his election. The Austrian delegation had noted the Board's 
annual report and had listened to the comments made on it during the general 
debate with groat interest. The Austrian people had always supported the view, 
on which the Agency was based, that atomic energy should be utilized to increase 
the prosperity of mankind. 
9/ GC(IV)/0E.36, paragraph 31. 



GC(IV)/OR.40 
page 21 


81. Austria had been gratified to see the special mention made in the report 
of assistance given to the Agency by the Austrian authorities (GC(IV)/ll4, 
paragraphs 31 an& 32) and wished to assure the Conference that his country 
would continue to provide assistance to the best of its ability,, 
82, Austria was also grateful to the Agency for the fellowships and tochnical 
assistance that it had provided. 


85. It might be of interest to mention Austria's own nuclear energy program 
and, in particular, the joint program for nuclear studies organized by the Institute 
of Theoretical Physics of the University of Vienna and the Austrian 
Society for the Study of Atomic Energy, which was international both in teaching 
staff and students. The Agency had agreed to invite two guest professors each 
year to lecture and do research at the Institute. If the program developed 
as planned, there was good reason to suppose that in the course of time Vienna 
wouldbecome a center of international research in theoretical and fundamental 
nuclear physics. 
84* Preparatory work had "also been done on drafting laws and regulations, 
especially with regard to radiation protection and third-party liability, 


85. The Austrian universities' reactor in Vienna was nearing completion and 
the SeiberSsLorf reactor was to come into operation during the present session. 
An invitation to attend the opening ceremony had been extended to all delegations 
and he hoped that as many delegates as possible would accept. The two 
centers had been established with the assistance of the United States Government 
on the basis of bilateral agreements which had operated to the entire 
satisfaction of both parties. 
86. The Austrian authorities were at present investigating ways in which arrangements 
could be made to enable increased numbers of students from lossdeveloped 
countries to attend Austrian institutions. 
87. His delegation had been very happy to vote for the admission of Ghana, 
and hoped that the new African States would participate fully in the work of 
the Agency. 
88. Mr. de 5RICE (Spain) congratulated the President on his election. 
Spain was confident that the present session of the General Conference would be 

GC(IV)/OR.40 


page 22 


characterized by a spirit of peace and co-operation. While the existence ox 


differing or opposing political views was unavoidable, and perhaps even neces


sary, such differences should not be allowed to hinder the settlement of important 
practical issues or threaten the co-existence and collaboration that 


formed the very foundation of any international organization* He, personally, 


hold an optimistic view and had no doubt that the Member States represented 
would not fail to meet their responsibilities. 


89. His delegation had heard with pleasure of the United States' intention to 
apply Agency safeguards to certain bilateral agreements. 
90. It was gratifying to see that the number of fellowships would be increased? 
Spain would like to see more of its own scientists and technicians going abroad 
in order to keep in touch with developments which were taking place in various 
countries. 
91. The draft international regulations on the transport of radioactive materials 
and on waste disposal were specially welcome. In the latter connection, 
the Government of Monaco was particularly to be congratulated for its generous 
offer of facilities. The Director General might perhaps consider preparing a 
registration system for the various methods of disposing of radioactive waste especially 
into international waters - and the question of standardizing the 
applicable levels and measurements5 otherwise, international recommendations 
might be difficult to apply. 


92. The Agency was also doing very useful work on health and safety. 
93. It was regrettable that an atmosphere of mistrust had heretofore surrounded 
the discussions on safeguards. The essential criteria were that safeguards 
should be both as specific and as flexible as possible^ bilateral agreements 
so far concluded might offer very useful guidance. 
94 • The Agency should approach all international bodies with which it had 


common interests - not only those within the United Nations family - with a 
view to concluding relationship arrangements, avoiding duplication and allocating 
major responsibilities. The results of such discussions could later be submitted 
for consideration to the Board, 


The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m. 



Distr. 


,

 International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL 

GC(IV)/OR.41 
8 December 1960 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 
OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the NEUE Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1960, at 10.40 a.m. 
President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 
10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors 
for 1959-60 (continued from the 40th meeting) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Argentina 
Brazil 
United Kingdom 
Portugal 
Bulgaria 
Tunisia 
Indonesia 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Morocco 
1 
9 
16 
33 
37 
47 
53 
62 
72 
15 
52 
56 
46 
52 
61 
71 
81 

* GC(IV)/130. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev.3. 


6O-6576 



GC(IV)/OR.41 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD .OF GOVERNORS FOR 1959-60 (GC(IV)/ll4, 
126 and Corr.1, 151) (continued-from the 40th'meeting) 


1, Mr. ESTEVEZ (Argentina) said that the Agency had emerged from its 
initial stage and was entering a period of growth. In many respects., its 
development had taken a turn which could not have been foreseen when the 
Statute was signed in 1956. Although it had not yot become the recognized 
broker in nuclear materials, its role in technical .assistance was growing in 
importance. 


2. Although not oven mentioned in the Statute, technical assistance now had 
a privileged position amongst the Agency's practical activities, particularly 
in regard to the dissemination of knowledge about nuclear science. It was all 
the more to be regretted that, as the Director General had stressed in his 
statement—', the requisite funds were lacking. 
5. Argentina was proiid of having started a first-class training center for 
specialists in atomic onorgy<5 it had been placed at .the disposal of the 
Agency which had already begun to use it. 
4. In atomic matters, his country was wholeheartedly collaborating with the 
other American countries, giving them access to its technical installations 
and training centers and supplying the services of experts, 
5. Argentina had faith in the Agency's futures with universal support it 
could become a major source of assistance to all countries. After occupying 
a seat on the Preparatory Commission and on the Board until the end of the 
third session of the General Conference, Argentina hoped to take its place 
on the Board again in order to participate more actively in the Agency's work 
and contribute to solving the many problems which confronted it. 
6. Among the questions most important for the Agency's future now before the 
Conference, he gave pride of place to technical assistance. Argentina would 
do everything it could to ensure that the needs of countries requiring assistance 
were recognized and earnestly hoped Member States in a position to do so 
would provide the Agency with the resources to meet such needs when, and to the 
extent, necessary. 
1/ GC(IV)/OR.36, paragraph 39. 



GO(IV)/OH.41 
page 3 


7. His Government was very anxious to see practical effect given to the 
provisions of Article XII of the Statute (Agency safeguards). If the fundamental 
objectives laid down for the Agency in its Statute Yrere to bo achieved, 
the problem of safeguards must be faced resolutely and in a rational way. 
Argentina favored the adoption of principles and procedures which had been 
drawn up with technical considerations in mind, 
8. His delegation welcomed Colombia and Chile, which had just ratified the 
Statute? and Ghana, whoso admission had been approved at the beginning of the 
2/ 


session-7. It hoped all the new States that had recently become Members of 


the United Nations would also join the Agency, which would help them in their 
first steps towards using atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 


9. Mr. CUNHA (Brazil) briefly reviewed the Brazilian program for the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy. In addition to elementary courses on 
nuclear energy given as part of university teaching, the training program also 
included post-graduate courses on nuclear engineering, the agricultural uses 
of radioisotopes, electronics and the use of radioisotopes in medicine, biology 
and so on. For that program, Brazil already had a reactor - in operation at 
Sao Paulo since 1957 ~ a-nd would soon have throe more, which wore at present 
under construction. Thanks to Agency assistance, a dosimetry laboratory had 
been opened at Rio do Janeiro. 
10, Prospecting for uranium and thorium ore-bearing deposits was proceeding 
rapidly. The Pocos do Caldas plant would go into operation in 1962 and 


process 10 000 tons of uraniferous ores annually. Among other industrial 
activities, he would mention the annual production of 150 tons of thorium oxide 
and the corresponding rare earths, the manufacture of beryllium oxide and 
artificial graphite, and the production of nuclearly pure uranium. The 


Sao Paulo reactor was producing radioisotopes for medical centers, where they 
were used on an ever-increasing scale for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. 
Various projects carried out with Agency assistance included the design of a 


200 MW(e) nuclear powor station, for which the Government expected to invite 


tenders in January 196l. 


11. He noted with pleasure in the Board's report that the Agency had organized 
scientific meetings on various questions relating to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. In future, more meetings might perhaps bo held away from Agency 
headquarters5 travel costs would then be more fairly shared, while participants 
could see at first hand the special problems of the areas visited. 
2/ GC(IV)/OH.36, paragraphs 25 - 32. 



GC(IV)/OR.41 
page 4 


12. The Director General and his staff wore to be congratulated on the 
excellent results so far obtained. As the Director General had stated in 
his opening speech, the Agency and its Member States had arrived at a turningpoint. 
It was excellent to make available the fellowships, information and 
equipment provided by States which were most advanced and most ready to cooperate, 
but if the Agency was really to do what the Statute intended, it 
must be able to establish its own program and satisfy the requests for 
assistance addressed to it. To that end, Member States must increase their 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund without attaching limitative conditions. 
His own Government would double the yearly contribution it had so 
far been making and, for 1961, pledge $30 000, which the Agency could use as 
it thought best. 
15. The question of safeguards was one of the most important the Conference 
was called upon to discuss. The principle of safeguards had been accepted 
by all Member States when they ratified the Statute but the manner of giving 
effect to it had given rise to lengthy discussions in the Board. The system 
now submitted to the Conference resulted from the combined efforts of the 
Secretariat, the Board and various technical, legal and administrative advisers5 
drawn up to the best of their knowledge and ability by men of goodwill, only 
in practice could its efficacity be tested. It night not be perfect, but it 
at least existed. The Brazilian delegation, which had taken an active part 
in the debates that led to its adoption, believed it had three main advantages8 
firstly, it allowed the Agency to put one of the most important provisions of 
the Statute into practice5 secondly, it told Member States in advance what 
safeguards would apply to projects if Agency assistance was requested for them^ 
thirdly, it would permit the Board to take decisions without prolonged discussions 
and without the risk of acting arbitrarily for lack of clear-cut 
procedures for applying safeguards. 
14. Contrary to what certain States seemed to fear, the acceptance of safeguards 
and the inspections they involved was in no way inconsistent with 
national sovereignty. The Brazilian Government for its part considered that, 
in ratifying the Statute, it had agreed to the incorporation of the principle 
in its national legislation. As soon as the Conference authorized the Board 
to put the proposed system into operation and the Agency was ready to accept 
responsibility for it, his Government would arrange to hand over to the Agency 
the application of any safeguards provided for in its bilateral agreements. 

GC(IV)/0B.41 
page 5 


15. The present generation must try to live up to the faith placed in it and 
respond adequately to the opportunities it was afforded of promoting the health, 
wellbeing and prosperity of all nations. 
16. Sir Roger MAKIHS (United Kingdom) congratulated the Secretariat on 
the admirable way in which it had administered the Agency program during the 
year that had elapsed since the third session. In most branches of activity 
it had been the first full year of normal operation, and a good start had been 
made. 
17.' The general outlook had changed in various ways since the Agency was set 
ups and there was now a bettor understanding of the amount of money and effort 
any atomic energy program, however modest, involved. Generally speaking, it 
appeared unlikely that nuclear power would become economically competitive 

even in the highly industrialized countries before the late 1960's. 


18. In those circumstances, nuclear power programs drawn up a few years before 
had had to bo revised. The United Kingdom Government had decided to slow 
down its own program, but still expected to have a total installed nuclear 
power capacity of 3 500 MW by the end of 1966, placing orders at the rate of 
one nuclear power station a year. New types of power reactor were being 
developed by the Atomic Energy Authority. In short, the United Kingdom, 
without excessive optimism or pessimism, maintained its faith in the future 
of nuclear power. 


19. The fact that the period of discoveries and sensational developments 
seemed to have ended need not be discouraging. As pointed out in the 
excellent report on the development of nuclear power the Board had submitted 
3/ 


to the Conference—' , progress now depended on various important but unspectacular 
technical improvements. 


20. The present period was one of consolidation. That did not imply stagnation. 
On the contrary, the respite would enable atomic energy authorities. 
Governments and international organizations to allay the fears to which the 
advent of the new atomic technology had given rise in the public mind. All 
peoples must consider the inevitable increase in the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes as something quite normal and natural5 at the same time, 
the Agency, in its concern to guarantee adequate radiological protection, must 
intensively pursue its work on health and safety. 
l/ G0(lV)/l23. 


GO(I^)/OE.41• 
page 6 


21. As regards the Board's report, lie considered that, so far as the activities 
from which all Member States would benefit were concerned, the Agency had two 
main tasks. It should facilitate the exchange of information and the spread 
of ideas, through its publications such as its admirable technical review 
series and also through the specialized scientific meetings which it organized 
and in which the United Kingdom took an active part, 
22, The Agency also had an important part to play in working out international 
standards - safety, the handling and transport of radioactive materials, 
insurance and so on -- required in connection with the growing exchange of 
nuclear oquipraent and materials, and in securing agreement on third-party 
liability for land-basod and marine reactors. 


23. His delegation supported the recommendations made in the study on the 
disposal of radioactive waste into the sea, drafted by the group of exports 
under the chairmanship of Mr. Bryniolsson, 
24. It was also glad the Board had been able to put before the Conference a 
document setting out the principles and procedures of Agency safeguards-^ , 
which would enable the Agency to begin to discharge its safeguards responsibilities 
and be of assistance to States which were contemplating project agreements 
with the Agency, He knew that views on that document differed, but did 
not believe that the operation of Agency safeguards, in accordance with the 
Statute which, had been accepted by all Member States, could infringe any 
country's sovereignty or independence, 
25. The European Nuclear Energy Agency (ENEA) would itself administer the 
safeguards on the "Dragon" reactor which EFEA was building in the United Kingdom, 
but the regulations and procedures would bo identical with those of the Agency, 
He noted with appreciation that the United States had decided to submit certain 
of its reactors to Agency safeguards. 
26. As regards Agency activities of more particular concern to the lessdeveloped 
countries, the United Kingdom supported the Board's recommendation 
to fix the 1961 target for voluntary contributions to the General Fund at 
$1,8 million. But it was not enough just to fix a targets it had to be 
reached - and that had not happened in 1959 and seemed unlikely to happen in 
1960. That seriously hindered the development of Agency technical assistance. 
Before the Statute came up for revision, the Agency should carefully consider 
whether that important part of its activities could continue to be dependent 
on voluntary and hitherto irregular contributions. 
4/ GC(IV)/l08/Rev.1. 



GC(IV)/OR,41 
page 7 


27. 
HG welcomed the set of rules governing the grant of technical assistance 
5/ 
, by the Agency^ which the Board had worked out and placed before the Conference\ 
but to ensure sound administrative management, it was also necessary to have 
clear ideas about the purposes for which the United resources available for 
technical assistance should be used. He had some suggestions to make in 
that connection. Firstly, the Agency should help the less-developed countries 
to extend their applications of radioisotopes by means of direct technical 
assistance projects and by organizing training courses for key staff. In 
1958 the United- Kingdom had offered six fellowships for Agency-sponsored 
research workers iri the Atomic Energy Authority's irradiation laboratories, 
and it was again offering six fellowships on the same terms. 

28. Secondly, to determine the nuclear power needs and potentialities of 
Member States, the Agency should assist then to carry out detailed local 
studies and provide realistic data on nuclear power costing. He welcomed 
the survey being made in Finland with Agency participation, and the ostablish-' 
mont of the panel on nuclear power costs, 
29. Thirdly, having awarded almost 1 000 fellowships and found places for 
more than 500 students, the Agency's fellowship program could be said to have 
progressed very satisfactorily5 the United Kingdom had offered places for 
over a hundred. But he felt it would be unwise to divert too many scientists 
and engineers to nuclear activities at the expense of other more immediate 
needs. The Agency had recognized that risk and, as indicated in a recent 
report to the Economic and Social Council on its long-term program—' , it very 
wisely contemplated a levolling-off in the number of fellowships granted, 
30. Fourthly, the Agency's functional laboratory could very usefully complement 
the work of national laboratories and he hoped Member States would take full 
advantage of its facilities.' ' 
31. He believed that the political tensions which had penetrated oven to the 
Agency would gradually diminish. Groat issues, such as disarmament and the 
prohibition of nuclear weapons tests, wore being debated at Few York and 
Geneva^ they were not the concern of the Agency, which was a technical 
institution. However much Member States night be divided politically, they 
5/ oc(iv)/ii3. 
6j Issued as United Nations document 3/33/46< 



GC(rv)/OR.41 
page 8 


should be at>le to roach agreement on questions of research and on the moans of 
improving nuclear technology. In the long run, the success of the Agency and 
the part it played in the international community would depend on its technical 
competence and on the impartiality and efficiency with which it was administered, 


32. It had been said that the Agency had entered a period of consolidation. 
That would not cause it to lose sight of the spirit in which it had been 
founded. The objective which had been sot for it had not changed, oven though 
the road to that objective might be long and hard. The United Kingdom, which 
was firmly convinced that the Agency could attain that noble objective, would 
continue to givo it full support. 
33. Mr. da COSTA (Portugal) said that the Portuguese authorities had 
followed the Agency's development with satisfaction, particularly its technical 
assistance program, on which so much hope was placed. Portugal was glad to 
have been able to provide two exports for Agency missions, and expected to 
make further contributions to the execution of the technical assistance program 
in typos of work for which it had qualified personnel available. In return, 
he hoped that an increasing number of Portuguese students would qualify for 
Agency fellowships. 
34. Portugal was also greatly interested in the idea of placing research contracts 
with specialized institutions in Member States and hoped the Agency 
would expand that program, as it provided a relatively inexpensive means of 
developing the application of atomic energy for peaceful purposes while at 
the same time increasing the Agency's prestige. 
35. The Portuguese delegation welcomed the principles and procedures for the 
attachment and application of Agency safeguards, which the Board had provisionally 
approved after detailed study. It was particularly glad to see that the 
document included provisions under which simplified safeguards could be applied 
to most research reactors; under present condition's, they would be the only 
safeguards applicable to the nuclear activities of most Member States. 
36. Portugal was considering arrangements under which the Agency would 
administer the safeguard provisions of the bilateral agreement it had concluded 
with the United States, 

GC(IV)/OR.41 
pa go 9 


57, Mr. GANEV (Bulgaria) said that, in the exchange of scientific and 
technical information between Member States, the Agency had certainly achieved 
results during the past year. It had organized conferences, symposia and 
scientific meetings which, had contributed to the more extensive use of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes, and had helped to strengthen contacts and friendly 
relations between scientists working on atomic energy. It had drawn up 
regulations for the transport of radioactive materials, and draft conventions 
on civil liability for nuclear damage. The number of fellowships awarded had 


increased, and the exchange of specialists had been expanded. 


38. His delegation did net believe, however, that the Agency had accomplished 
all it might have since its establishment, and that was not due solely to the 
fact that certain conditions or possibilities had been lacking, 
39. Some disquieting trends had developed within the Agency| he was thinking 
particularly of a policy which had the effect of restricting the Agency's work 
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy and preventing the pooling of the efforts 
of all interested States and organizations, 
40, The Director General had stated that the Agency's work during the past 


three years had been one of innovation and exploration,-'-' The Bulgarian 


delegation considered that stage to be over? it was time for the Agency to 
use its entire resources in order to meet its main responsibilities, above all 
by assisting the less-developed countries effectively. 


41, The Agency had spent much time drafting safeguards to prevent the improper 


diversion of nuclear materials. The resulting very complicated system had 


given rise to objections from several States - including Bulgaria - because 


the proposed control would apply only to the insignificant amount of materials 


that were supplied through the Agency, 


42, The Board's report stated that the production of fissionable materials was 
appreciably in excess of requirements. Certain States had accumulated large 
reserves of nuclear materials, unlimited quantities of which could be obtained 
through bilateral agreements. The complicated system of safeguards, the 
application of which entailed an infringement of the sovereign rights of the 
receiving States and considerable expenditure, would encourage many countries 
to have.recourse to bilateral agreements. • The Agency was thus itself erecting 


7/ GO(lV)/OE.36, paragraph 36. 



GC(IV)/0Eo41 
page 10 


obstacles to the fulfillment of one of its most important functions, The 
proposed safeguards would do nothing to restrict the production of nuclear 
weapons - that could be done only by oomplcte and universal disarmament,, 
Hence? the development and adoption of a complicated system of safeguards 
was in no way justified;; for the time being, it would suffice to ensure 


that the relevant provisions of the Statute wore respected. 


45. His delegation believed the subject-matter of research contracts and the 
way in which they were allocated both needed reconsideration, and other moans 
should be adopted for promoting scientific research. At the present time it 
would appear more sensible to provide funds for extending research in the lossdeveloped 
countriesj by establishing radioisotope centers, providing laboratory 
equipment,giving technical assistance to scientific institutions, and so on, 
That would offer a more effective way of raising the level of scientific 
research in those countries and increasing the number of specialists. 
44. It was to be noted that the Agency's attitude towards certain States and 
organizations had not always been equitable. For example, it had given 
technical assistance to South Korea, to South Viot-Nam and to the Chiang 
Kai-shek clique, while discriminating against the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Wam and other States, 
45. The People's Republic of China, the German Democratic Republic, the 
People's Republic of Korea and other countries which wore doing scientific 
work on the peaceful uses of atonic energy wore not yet represented in the 
Agency. The Agency would markedly strengthen its authority by admitting 
those States to membership and by granting consultative status to the World 
Federation of Trade Unions, 
46. In the future as in the past, Bulgaria would give its fullest support to 
the Agency in order to assist it to attain its objectives, 
47. Mr. 5L AMABI (Tunisia) said he was happy to note the marked progress 
made by the Agency during the year 1959-60, The increase in the number of 
fellowships, the many conferences and symposia held, the publication of various 
manuals and the solution of many problems were all items on the credit side. 
However, it should try to supply Member btates with larger quantities of equip235 


ment and uranium . Hitherto, the supply of equipment had been linked with 
the sending of exports:; the Agency should not forget that some countries had 
the experts they needed but lacked the necessary equipment to carry out their 
programs. 



GO(IV)/OR.41 
pago 11 


48, The system of safeguards approved by the Board complicated the supplying 
of enriched uranium to Member States, The proposed measures ignored the fact 
that it was the donor States and not the receiving States which could use 
uranium for military purposes, In suggesting in 1953 that the Agency be 
established President Eisenhower had pointed out that, as a result, stocks of 
fissionable materials accumulated for military purposes would become available 
for economic development. Countries that were developing hesitated to apply 
to the Agency for their uranium purchases because the price asked was too high. 
That problem would bo solved only when the Agency allowed for the fact that, 
because of the cost of amortization, the per calorie price of -uranium could 
not be calculated in the same way as the per calorie price of coal, 


49. Substantial progress had been made in regard to atomic energy in Tunisia. 
The Government had from its own resources constructed one laboratory for medical 
applications of radioisotopes and another for the analysis of radioactive dust 
and rainwater. In collaboration with the World Meteorological Organization it 
had set up a center for the study of radiation, particularly solar radiation. 
With the aid of an expert and cf equipment supplied by the Agency it had 
established a center for agricultural applications of radioisotopes and had 
started a program of practical research on water and fertilizer circuits in 
the soil, 
50. The Government was at present planning the creation of a new university to 
accommodate 4 000 students, and had decided to grant 3 000 scholarships. 
France had made 400 scholarships available to Tunisian students, and some 
hundred more had been granted by the United States and other countries. 
Certain States had agreed to provide buildings and scientific equipment for 
the university. Tunisia was appealing to all its friends to help in equipping 
the university laboratories. Each donor country would have its name inscribed 
on one of the university halls. 
51, During the period covered by the Board's report Tunisia had been visited 
by three expert missions, including a preliminary assistance mission which had 
recommended that assistance in connection with the use of radioisotopes be 
provided, and a mission sent to study the question of establishing a radioisotope 
center in the Middle East. Because of the potential advantages to 
sister peoples in the Middle East, Tunisia did not oppose the proposal to 
establish a center in Cairo but, in the absence of a direct air service with 
Cairo and because the normal language of scientific communication was different English 
in the Middle East, French in Tunisia - could, itself scarcely hope to 
benefit from the canter, 



GC(IV)/OR.41 
page 12 


52. On behalf of his delegation be proposed Iraq for the seat assigned to 
Africa and the Middle East in the elections to the Board. He recalled that 
1960 was the year of Africa, and the question of a wider African representation 
on the Board should he reviewed. He welcomed the presence of the delegate 
of Ghana at the Conference, and congratulated him on his country's admission 
to the Agency. 
53. Mro SIAH (Indonesia) said he did not intend to review the achievements 
of the Agency since its establishment, but be noted with satisfaction 
that, in spite of all the difficulties experienced during its first years, it 
was now shaping well. As a Member of the Board, Indonesia had taken part 
in drawing up the program and budget for 196l and in drafting the Board's . 
annual report^ hence his delegation had no important comments to make on 
that subject, but would nevertheless like to express an opinion on various 
aspects of the Agoncy's work. 
54• I*1 view of the limited resources available it had once been considered 
that technical assistance given by the Agency in the form of equipment and 
supplies should he kept to a minimum. His delegation noted with satisfaction 
that there had been some change in that attitude. It was now apparently 
understood that it was extremely difficult to carry out nuclear research without 
having a considerable amount of specialized equipment, and be was glad the 
Board had recognized that equipment was more important in atomic energy than 
in most other fields, and that a developing country embarking on an atomic 
energy program - as Indonesia was - had to make substantial investments. His 
delegation therefore warmly welcomed the Board's decision to follow, in a 
somewhat more flexible way, the general procedures governing the provision of 
equipment under the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance—'. 


55• I"fc was a matter for satisfaction that the fellowship program had been 
extended so as to utilize the full amount of the funds made available. There 
was no denying the value of that program, particularly for the loss-developed 
countries which it did much to help in attaining the objectives they set themselves 
in connection with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He was happy 
to express his' Government's gratitude to Member States which haa offered Type II 
fellowships. The procedure for awarding fellowships might bo more expeditious, 
however, and the screening of candidates less stringent, since they had already 
been selected by their Governments, 


8/ GC(IV)/ll3, Annex, paragraph 5. 


GC(IV)/0E.41 
page lj 


56. His delegation unreservedly approved the holding of scientific meetings§ 
they provided an effective moans of spreading technical knowledge. They might 
nevertheless be held with advantage more frequently in Asia since, for financial 
reasons, it vras often difficult for the Governments of Asian States to send 
participants to distant countries. The Indonesian delegation had accordingly 
been glad to learn that symposia were to he held at Bombay and Bangkok by the 
end of the year^ it hoped that future symposia in Asia would be held still 
further oast. Indonesia would itself be happy to act as host to a future 
scientific meeting,, 
57. His delegation alsn noted with satisfaction that a number of regional 
intor-governmontal organizations interested in various aspects of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy were co-operating closely with the Agency. That cooperation 
would greatly help the Agency in attaining its objectives. The 
Agency should co-operate, not only with certain organizations, but with all 
organizations whoso work was related to its own5 in particular, it should be 
less stringent in granting consultative status and study the possibility of 
admitting the organizations whose requests had been refused. 
58. For Indonesia, the principle of universality was not just an empty phrase, 
and it was ready to collaborate with all States and with all organizations to 
achieve the noble'aim represented by "atoms for peace". Realizing the 
importance of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, Indonesia had embarked upon 
an atomic energy program and would gratefully accept any assistance. With 
United States help,the Government had begun to construct buildings to house 
the Triga Mark II research reactor which was to be supplied under a bilateral 
agrcomont and, it was hoped, would be operating by the end of 1961, Under 
another project, a sub-critical assembly supplied to Indonesia under a bilateral 
agreement with the Soviet Union was being installed and would go into operation 
by the end of 1960| another, type IRT-3000 research reactor, was to be received 
from the Soviet Union under the same bilateral agreement, and would go into 
service in 1963. Under a further project to be carried out with United States 
aid a laboratory would be built near Djakarta. Finally, the Agency was to 
place a mobile radioisotope laboratory at the disposal of the Government for a 
period of six months. 

GC(IV)/ORo41 
page 14 


59. He was happy to note the increased volume of information disseminated, 
Tout much remained to he dono. For the man in the street the atom was still 
linked with the idea of destruction and fear and it must he one of the Agency's 
main objects to dissipate that prejudice and show the masses that atomic energy 
could also he used for Doacoful purposes. That was the idea behind an 
9/ 


Indonesian proposal^ , which the "Board had approved in a slightly modified form, 
requesting the Secretarial to give effect to it, 


60. Safeguards wore-another important aspect of the Agency's work. Indonesia's 
position on that subject was well known and be would not elaborate on it„ He 
wished to state, however, that while not opposed to safeguards, his Government 
considered that the application of the proposed system should not hamper the 
execution of national programs and should not divide the Member States into 
two groups, one controlling the other,. 
61. The-Agency's staffing policy had certainly improved, hut was still not in 
full conformity with the provisions of Article VII.D of the Statute, particularly 
as far as senior officials were concerned. It was to be hoped that 
the Director General would continue his efforts to improve the system of 
recruiting staff and fully satisfy the conditions laid down in Article VII.D, 
62. Mr, PAVLUCHEMO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) agreed that 
the Agency had done useful work. For example, it had supplied research 
equipment and sent experts to several Member States, provided an increasing 
number of fellowships for the loss-developed countries and organised, very 
successful large-scale scientific conferences, e.g, the Conference on the 
Application of Large Radiation Sources in Industry and especially to Chemical 
1( 


Processes—, and the Conference on Radioisotopes in Physical Sciences and 


3S— 


Industr; 11/ 


63, His delegation nevertheless considered that the Agency's work should be 


substantially improved. The Agency's influence on the development of atomic 


energy and its use for peaceful purposes was still insignificant. The main 


obstacle to an expansion of the Agency's activities was the fact that atomic 


energy was still being used for military purposes. By reason of the con


tinuous manufacture of destructive weapons such as atomic and thermonuclear 


2/ GG(Hl)/73, paragraph 249. 


10/ Warsaw, 8 to 12 September 1959. 


ll/ Copenhagen, 6 to 17 September 1960. 



GC(IV)/0E.41 
page 15 


bombs and intercontinental rockets, disarmament had become the most -urgent 
contemporary problem,, and nothing would more greatly assist the Agency's work 


than a ban on nuclear weapons, and general disarmament,, 


64,, The Agency could and should contribute to general disarmament and to the 
discontinuance of nuclear weapon tests5 be welcomed the Polish draft resolution 
(GC(IV)/l3l) and hoped, it would be approved by all delegations, 


65. Scientists working on the"utilization of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes knew the efforts and resources that were required to develop great 
discoveries and exploit thorn for the benefit of mankind. Only wido international 
co-operation could place the power of the atom at the service of 
peace? progress and the prosperity of nations5 but the attitude of certain 
countries - particularly the United States - which sought to continue the 
cold war, was most prejudicial to the Agency's principle of universality. 
66. The "factors retarding the development of the Agency's work in regard to 
the supply of nuclear fuel" mentioned in paragraph 3 of the Board's report did 
not justify the fact that only very inadequate supplies of nuclear materials 
and atomic equipment had boon supplied to Member States. Countries which 
needed fissionable materials managed to obtain then outside the Agency. In 
reality, attempts were being made to give the Agency increasingly broad supervisory 
functions, involving Agency interference in the internal affairs of 
the States which needed fissionable materials. 
67. The proposed system of safeguards would give no control over countries 
which intended to have nuclear armaments. An attempt was being made to 
establish through the Agency a control system which could not prevent the 
appearance of nuclear weapons in countries that did not yet have them, and. 
could thus in no vra,y contribute to solving the disarmament problem. 
68. The countries which most strongly urged the establishment of that system 
were precisely those which would doubtless not bo subject to any control especially 
the United States, whose declaration of willingness to submit four 
of its reactors to Agency safeguards was mere window-dressing, 
69. A main defect in the Agency was the complete absence of proper planning. 
The subjects of contracts were not systematically chosen but selected in a 
random manner, at the Secretariat's discretion and without the Board being 
kept informed of the results. That procedure should bo radically altereds 
the Board should approve the subjects, and keep itself informed of the results. 

GC(IV)/0E.41 
page 16 


70. There was a further defects the abilities of the staff were not being 
used as they should bo. Of course, it might in some cases be necessary to 
call in experts to solve certain scientific and technical problems. Very 
often, however5 the Agency consulted exports when there was no need to do so„ 
There was no justification for employing a large number of paid consultants 
when the Agency could draw on the services of consultants who had been placed 
at its disposal free of charge, 
71. Broad international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy was 
vital? and the Agency could do much to promote it, Yfith the goodwill of all 
States, such co-operation would open up exceptional prospects and make it 
possible to harness the atom to the service of all mankind. 
72. Mr. SIKACEUR (Morocco) considered that the Agency had made great 
progress with its programs and the tasks assigned to it under the Statute, 
chief among which was the provision of technical assistance to the lessdeveloped 
countries. 
73• Morocco, which was not an atomic Power, expected much of the Agency. It 
had as yet no central authority responsible for atomic energy programs, but' 
the various ministries wore greatly interested in the application of nuclear 
energy in their own spheres. It particularly appreciated the preliminary 
assistance missions sent to atomically less-developed countries and, at the 
request of the Government, the Agency had sent two to Morocco. One had gone 


to study the possibilities of extracting uranium from the natural phosphates 


of which Morocco was a big producer. The-export concerned had reported that 


the technical aspects wore favorable but, because of the world over-production 


of uranium, the lack of markets and present prices, the economic prospects 
were not very encouraging. Ho considered that Morocco's future noods would 
be better served by continuing to prospect, since the mineral resources were 


such that deposits of uranium and other important nuclear minerals might be 
found. The Government did not entirely agree with some passages of the expert's 
report but fully endorsed his conclusions, and would probably ask the Agency 


to supply the necessary prospecting equipment. 


74. The other mission had been concerned with other aspects of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energys training, agriculture, medicine, electricity, and 
nuclear raw materials-. Morocco realized that, in present circumstances, 

GC(IV)/OR.41 
page 17 


nuclear power offered it little. It was so short of qualified staff that the 
construction of a nuclear power station of its own, and the development of the 
medical applications of atomic energy, wore out of the question. The Government 
nevertheless endorsed the mission's recommendations and intended, in two 


largo medical centers, to introduce the use of unsealed sources for diagnosis 
and therapy, and sealed sources for radiotherapy, For that purpose, it would 
request the Agency to contribute by awarding fellowships in the specialized 


training of medical and para-modical staff, and by providing the services of 


experts and some equipment,. It had also asked the Agency, under the Bevised 


Standard Technical Assistance Agreement, to send an expert for six months 
with the necessary equipment for studying soil water content - neutron or 


gamma-ray omitting probes would be very useful for the purpose, 


75• For educational purposes, the nuclear sciences were not yet treated as 


separate subjects in Morocco, but received some attention in the physics and 


chemistry courses of science faculties, 


76, Morocco found difficulty in satisfying Agency conditions for the award of 
fellowships for advanced training and, to overcome the difficulty, was requesting 
the Agency to grant long-term fellowships, 


77• As the mission had noted, Morocco - although its laboratories wore otherwise 
fully equipped - was not equipped for the special analysis of nuclear 
materials, and was therefore asking the Agency to send an export in analytical 
methods for one month to advise the staff and recommend equipment for the 
geological laboratory. It then intended to ask the Agency for another expert 
for six months, and for some equipment, 


78, The country's conventional power resources were such that it did not at 
present need to have recourse to nuclear power, which would have no economic 


interest for it for another ten years. But in view of the present price of 
coal, and the fact that its sources of hydro-electric power might become 
exhausted, it had an interest meanwhile in keeping up with new developments 


in nuclear power generation. 


79. Those wore the modest aims Morocco hoped to achieve with Agency assistance, 
80. A number of young nations, in Africa in particular, had become independent 
during the year. They were now Members of the United Nations and would 
certainly apply for membership of the Agency5 it was to be hoped that the 

GC(IV)/OR.41 
page 18 


year of Africa in tlio United Nations would bo followed by an "African year" in 
the Agency, The question of Africa's representation on the Board would then arise. 
He agreed with the delegate of Tunisia and others who had already mentioned 
the problem that it might perhaps be dealt with by revising the Statute, 
Hc-wover, .account must bo taken even now of the fact that several African 
States were already Members of the Agency, and others would bo shortly? 
pending the revision of the Statute, one of the "floating" seats on the Board 
should be reserved for a representative of the African continent, 


8l, At the third session of the General Conference the Moroccan delegation 


had raised a question which some delegates had considered to be outside the 
12/ 


Agency's terms of references nuclear tests in the Sahara,— He did not 
wish to start a controversy and disturb the serenity of the present debate. 
Ho felt bound to state, however, that Morocco still regarded the question as 
being within the Agency's competence and relevant to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. One of the Agency's objectives was to safeguard the health 
of mankind and protect it against ionizing radiations. The problem remained, 
for the country concerned, despite the United Nations General Assembly resolution 
calling on it to coase nuclear tests in the Sahara, continued to flout 
the wishes of the African countries and ignore the resolution, and was now 
preparing an underground atomic bomb tost in the Sahara, Morocco felt bound 
to protest vehemently, not only on its o\m behalf, but also on behalf of all 
countries of the African continent, and amicably urged the country concerned 
to abandon, its project. 

The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


12/ GC(lIl)/OR.30, paragraphs 39 and 40. 



international Atomic Energy Agency 
Distr. 
GENERAL 

GC(IV)/OR.42 
3 January 1961 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 23 September 1960, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. NADJAEOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


Welcome to a new Member (Chile) 


10 
General debate and report of the Board 
of Governors for 1959-60 (continued 
from the 41st meeting) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United Arab Republic 3 - 17 
Sweden 18 - 24 
United States of America (second statement) 25 - 33 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 

34 - 35 

(second statement) 
Closure of the general debate 36 - 37 


26 
Opening date of the fifth regular session 38 - 39 


* GC(IV)/130. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev,3. 


60-6580 



GC(XV->/OR.42 
-page 2 


WELCOME TO A M W MEMBER-(CHILE) 


1. The PRESIDENT;announced that on 19 September 1<?60 the Government of 
Chile had deposited its instrument of ratification of the Statute with the 
depositary Government. Chile had thus become the 71st Member of the Agency. 
He was sure he was expressing the views of the Conference in welcoming the 
delegate of Chile on the first occasion he took part in its proceedings with 
full voting rights, 
2. Mr. LEA-PLAZA (Chile) thanked the President and the General Conference 
for their words of welcome and assured them that his; country was entering the 
Agenoy in the same spirit of collaboration and dedication to its objectives as 
so many of those present had manifested over the past three years. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1959-60 (GC(IV)/ll4, 
126, 126/Corr.1, 151) ( continued from the 41st meeting) 


3. Mr. NAZIF (United Arab Republic) expressed his delegation's 
appreciation of the efforts undertaken by the Agency in promoting international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The value of 
those efforts had been demonstrated during the first two years of its activities 
and the useful expansion of the program in the third year became quite evident 
when the annual report of the Board of Governors (GC(IV)/ll4) was examined. 
It was also clear from the Programme and Budget for 1961—' that further valuable 
advances would be made in future. 
4. The United Arab Republic believed in international co-operation provided 
that no unacceptable conditions were attached, and considered that it might be 
realized through bilateral and multilateral agreements as well as through 
international organisations. His own country's nucloar energy program had, 
in fact, been initiated by a bilateral agreement with the Soviet Union, as a 
result of which a nuclear physics laboratory was now in operation and a 
2 000 kW research reactor was nearing completion. Farther co~operati on, with 
Norway, had led to arrangements for the establishment of a laboratory for 
producing radioisotopes, now under construction, which would have an annual 
production capacity of 250 curies of various processed and non-pxooeased 
isotopes. That output would meet the needs of the national radioisotope 
center, research institutes, hospitals and industrial organizations, and the 
effect would be to extend the applications of radioisotopes throughout the 
country. 


1/ 0C(IV)/116. 



GC(IV)/OR.42_ 
page 3 


5. Those facilities formed the technical background which his Government had 
had in mind when, with the support of other Arab countries, it had requested 
the Agency to establish a regional radioisotope center in Cairo. The decision 
of the Board to endorse that request was deeply appreciated. The first 
regional course was to be organized by the Agency in Cairo in March 19 61 and 
would be open to all countries to which the Governor from the United Arab 
Republic had referred in his statement at the 191st meeting of the Board, The 
second course would start in September 1961. 
6. Other aspects of the national atomic energy establishment's program had 
bc-en promoted in co-operation with various scientific and industrial organizations 
in Czechoslovakia, Prance, the Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary, 
India, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the 
United States and Yugoslavia. The technical assistance granted by the Agency 
had also proved most beneficial to the program, particularly with regard to 
training, expert advice and equipment. 
7. In return for the assistance received, his country would endeavor to extend 
the benefits of those facilities internationally5 it welcomed scientists from 
all friendly nations, and in particular from the Middle Eastern and Afro-Asian 
countries. 
8. To the present time the Agency's program had been mainly concerned with 
technical assistance and the exchange of information, and its major activities 
had been directed primarily to assisting the loss-advanced countries. The 
receiving countries, being the first to benefit from the Agency, should make 
a positive contribution to its work by assisting in the formulation of Agency 
policy at succeeding sessions of the General Conference, It was the duty of 
the Conference to exercise the clear authority it onjoyed under Article V.D of 
the Statute. In other words, it should-play a more important role in helping 
the Board to perform its functions by giving a clear indication of the desires 
of Member States as a whole. 
9. Technical assistance, for example, was some-nimes given to fill in the gaps 
between various projects already existing in a country. For less-developed 
countries, however, the aim should rather be to carry out specific projects. 
In either case more effective co-ordination was needed between the various 
divisions of the Secretariat concerned with technical assistance. 

GC(IV)/OR.42 
page 4 


10, Gifts in kind should be freely encouraged and accepted,, provided that no 
conditions were inpo&^c, Tl-.o generous gift made by the United States to the 
Agency in was "J. iiaiso-worthy gesture, because it had solved a serious 
problem resulting from the lack of necessary funds, 

11, It had become clear that the most important and critical issue before the 
5/ 


Conference was the Agency safeguards system-^ . His Government had been, and 
still was, opposed to that system since it entertained serious doubts as to the 
wisdom and necessity of creating elaborate and complicated machinery which 
clearly could'not avoid encroaching on the sovereign rights of States, His 
Government believed that the Conference should discuss the matter thoroughly 
before coming to a decision, since the safeguards system would have a vital 
bearing on the future activities of the Agency, in addition to its direct 
impact on Member States to which safeguards might bo applied. 


12, The Agency had already made considerable efforts to carry out the decision 


taken by the General Conference in 1959 to pursue its studios of nuclear power 


development-^, and the results of the Secretariat's work and of the Conference 


5/ 


on Small and Medium Power Reactors-^ represented a much appreciated contribution 
to knowledge on the subject. However, the work done by the Agency did not fully 
satisfy the urgent need to develop nuclear power or meet the requirements of 
the less-developed countries. It would thus be most desirable if the Agency 
could initiate and sponsor research projects which would provide clearer and 
more specific answers to some of the technological and economic problems 
involved, and disseminate the results in a form that could readily be taken as 
a basis for evaluating and studying specific projects. 


15. Article XVIII of the Statute dealt with the procedure for amending the 
Statute by the General Conference, and referred in particular to the question 
of a general review .at the fifth annual session, in 1961, It would therefore 
be appropriate to start work without delay on preparing for that review. The 
United Arab Republic delegation had a number of comments that might be taken 
into consideration when such preparatory work was being done. 
2/ GC(IV)/OR,38, paragraph 28, 
l/ GC(IV)/IO8/R ev.i. 
4/ GC(lIl)/EBS/57. 
£/ Held at Vienna from 5 to 9 September 1960. 



G0(I?)/OR.42 
page 5 


14. Some parts of the Statute should be changed, not only to meet the wishes 
of the majority of Member States? hut also to correspond more closely with the 
facts of the current world situation. A case in point was Article VI, which 
dealt with the composition and functions of the Board of Governors. That 
Article should he amended in such a way as to facilitate the participation of 
new Member States, particularly those from Africa and Asia, in the work of the 
Board. It was impossible to acquiesce in a situation in which at least 15 
countries occupied virtually permanent seats in the Board while Africa and 
the Middle East were represented by only one electoral seat. 
15. Certain other Articles also required amendment. For instance, attention 
should be given to revising Articles XI, XII and XIV. As such revision would 
require a great deal of preparation, his delegation believed it would be 
advisable to adopt at the present session a resolution sotting up a standing 
committee of the General Conference, composed of 15 States, to study the matter 
on behalf of all States Members of the Agency, The committee should be 
entrusted with the preparatory work that would have to precede the general 
review, and its terms of reference should be made suitably flexible so that 
it would be able freely to seek the views of all Members and to make appropriate 
comments thereon. 
16. The program and budget for 1961 showed that the Board and the Secretariat 
had certain apprehensions about the Agency's financing, His own Government 
hoped that the situation would improve in the near future. If some of the 
European countries normally considered as major contributors to other international 
programs would raise their contributions to the Agency to the same 
level, the target established by the Board could be reached without difficulty. 
The United Arab Republic itself had already raised its contribution twice. As 
a further token of its support to the Agency his delegation would at the proper 
time declare its new contribution to the operational budget for 1961. It 
would be seen that once again it had decided to raise that contribution. 
17. The Arab States had unanimously decided to support the candidature of Iraq 
for membership on the Board, in place of the United Arab Republic which was 
due to retire at the end of the Conference, The delegation of the United Arab 
Republic sincerely hoped that Iraq would be unanimously elected. 

GC(IV)/OR.42 
page 6 


18. Mr. CEDERWALL (Sweden) said his Government found the Board's annual 
report encouraging as evidence of what could be achieved with caution and 
foresight. The Board had been fully justified in showing moderation and 
realism when framing the program and budget'proposals now before the Conference. 
A general consolidation of the Agency's activities was surely the wisest course 
to adopt at present in view of the delay, as compared with earlier expectations,, 
in the development of economic nuclear power. 
19. The Swedish Government approved the general direction the Agency's work 
had taken, and evidence of that support could be found in the Swedish voluntary 
contribution to the General Fund for 1960, which was larger than that pledged 
for 1959 an(i rather more than that corresponding to its percentage share in the 
regular budget. The Swedish contribution for 1961 would not be less than in 
the present year, and he hoped that other delegatos would be equally prepared 
to support the Agency's operational program. Without equal readiness on the 
part of all Member States, or at least a majority of thorn, the constitutional 
weakness of the Agency in regard to operational financing would again make 
itself felt. Indeed, whatever motives had led to the distinction between 
compulsory and voluntary contributions when the Agency had first been conceived, 
they had largely ceased to be relevant, in view of the fact that the Agency's 
operational activities had come to be mainly concerned with technical assistance, 
The Swedish Government believed that due weight should be given to those 
considerations when the general review of the Statute took place and that in 
the meantime Governments should take into account, when determining the level 
of their voluntary contributions, the fact that 'funds made available would be 
spent on technical assistance, the usefulness of which was recognized by 
everybody. 
20. The Swedish Government believed that the Agency's complex administrative 
machinery could gradually be simplified. The Conference and the Board should 
consider revising the Statute and their own procedure to allow them to meet 
loss frequently, reduce their business to essential policy-making and conduct 
it with more despatch. • The Secretariat's structure might perhaps be gradually 
better adjusted to its duties. 

GC(IV)/0E,42 


21. Among those duties, technical assistance would remain one of the most 
important. During the preceding twelve months the Swedish Government had made 
arrangements with the Agency for about 15 fellows to study in Sweden. 
22. The Agency's regulatory work on nuclear insurance,, handling of nuclear 
materials and waste disposal was an important advance towards establishing 
generally accepted rules. 
23. Regional and bilateral collaboration was highly valuable in that it 
permitted countries at roughly the same stage of atomic energy development to 
share the costs and benefits of projects which they could not undertake alone, 
but which did not immediately interest the larger membership of a world 
organization. The members of a regional organization might be in urgent need 
of an international agreement on legal questions, but could not wait for the 
unavoidably slower processes in an international body. Regional and bilateral 
co-operation was no rival to world-wide efforts but, given a harmonious 
relationship, would actually promote them. 
24• The problem of safeguards had, of course, a political background. Sweden 


had always supported efforts to agree on disarmament, and would, given proper 


controls, support a general ban on nuclear weapons. For those efforts the 
United Nations was the proper forum5 the Agency was a technical organization 
with practical tasks, and its activities would be best promoted by avoiding 
political controversy. He therefore hoped that the draft resolution 

introduced by Poland (GC(IV)/l3l) calling for a nuclear tests ban wquld not 
be pressed. The control provisions in the Statute wore binding on all 
Membersf delivery of materials and equipment had begun, and rulas? on safe


guards were needed. The Conference should encourage the Bo arc t-c continue 

its efforts to draft safeguards provisions. The problems involved wore new, 
and it was important to gain experience. Thus the application of safeguards 
would have to be adapted to the circumstances in oach particular case. At 
first the rules would bo provisional, and would have to be revised in the light 
of experience. The important thing was to make a start. 


25• Mr. MoCOME (United States of America), in response to statements on 
his country's policy, said the United States was party to about 44 bilateral 
agreements with about 42 countries. It was actively negotiating with most 



0C(IV)/OR.4? 
page 8 


of its bilateral partners to transfer the safeguards arrangements to the .Agency 
as soon as the latter was prepared to administer them. Meanwhile all its 
partners were happy with the agreements, as their spokesmen had shown. The 
initiative of both sides would greatly benefit the coiintrios and the Agency 
alike. 


26, The data given at the J9"th- plenary meeting on the number and size of 
235 
reactors and the quantity of uranium aJ transferred by the United States under 
bilateral arrangements--' were out of date. In fact; 764.3 kg of enriched 
uranium-&? contained in fuel elements or in other forms had boon delivered 
for all purposes under bilateral agreements, and firm,requisitions for an 

235 


additional J510.4 kg of contained enriched uranium f to bo delivered in the 
immediate future, were in United States, hands. Of the,amount actually 
delivered, 534 kg had been provided for 43 experimental, test or power reactors 
of capacity up to 60 000 kW, 

27. In addition, the United States had delivered 1.2 kg of plutonium, 35-7 g 
of separated uranium ?' and 364 tons of heavy water,to other countries. 
Twenty-three tost or research reactors wore operable, and 26 more were under 
construction. 
28. Since January 1949? moreover, 13 3^6 shipments of isotopes had been made 
to foreign countries, including 5 000 shipments to ~$6 loss-advanced countries, 
In facilities of the Atomic Snorgy Commission 2 9^0 foreign scientists, 
including 1 £00 from less-developed countries, had boon trained in the United . 
States. The United States had donated 78 technical libraries to foreign 
countries, including 35 to less-advanced countries, 
29. Although the attendance of the chairman of any country's atomic energy 
commission at the General Conference required no explanation, it had been 
alleged that he himself had come to Vienna primarily to use his influence to 
secure favorable consideration of, and action on, the safeguards proposals. 
The United States Government was deeply interested in safeguards and would 
continue to support the Board's draft as an important initial step towards one 
of the Agency's most important objectives, but had absolutely no intention of 
"•"Tiposing its will on a single Member of the Agency. 


6/ GC(IV)/OR.39, paragraph 21. 



GG(IV)/OR.42 
page 9 


30. Disarmament and cessation of nucloar tests, and the Polish draft resolution 
on that subject, were not appropriate subjects for discussion or action by the 
Conference. The disarmament question stood high on the agenda of the United 
Nations General Assembly, and negotiations on cessation of nuclear tests would 
shortly be resumed at Geneva. The United States Government and the American 
people were fully committed to the objectives of disarmament. Only one day 
previously President Eisenhower had urged before the General Assembly active 
and immediate negotiations for guaranteed world-wide disarmament, and proposed 
that all production of fissionable materials for weapons purposes be stopped 
under appropriate verification procedures. Time and again the American people 
and their Government had urged that the efforts of mankind be spent not for war 
but on food, clothing, shelter, medicine and schools. The United States had 
stopped its tost program almost two years previously when the nuclear test 
cessation negotiations had been started. Since it was an open country, everyone 
knew that since then it had conducted no such tests. The world could not 
tell what others, whose policy and tradition wore to maintain a closed country, 
wore doing. 
31. The United States therefore felt it urgent that the negotiations should.be 
consummated quickly, fairly and in accordance with the basic objectives stated 
by the Heads of Government. It sought implementation of Mr. Khrushchev's 
words of 23 April 1959 expressed in letters to President Eisenhower and Prime 
Minister Macmillans "It is my opinion that ... we arc quite able to find a 
solution to the problem of discontinuing tests .,. and to establish such controls 
as would guarantee strict observance of the Treaty". That solution, 
unfortunately, had not yet boon reached. Nevertheless, a United States 
delegation would shortly bo returning to Geneva to resume negotiations, in the 
fervent hope of agreement on the controls necessary to ensure observance of a 
treaty. 
32. Speakers had asked to what extent the Agency had boon informed of the 
results of the Soviet Union-United States exchange agreement announced to the 
Agency a year before. He had made extensive journeys through the Soviet Union 
as momber of a mission comprising several other scientists, and the preliminary 
observations of the mission had boon transmitted to the Agency. Reports of 
subsequent visits of United States scientists to the Soviet Union had also been 
made available, and his Government intended to keep the Agency fully informed 
of all future exchanges. 

GC(IV)/OR.42 
pago 10 


33. If the Agency was to succeed,, its Member States must lay aside political 
matters not of direct concern to its activities and dedicate themselves to the 
problems which it had been created to solve. The United -States delegation was 
fully preparod to work diligently and uninterruptedly to achieve the Agency's 
policies? objectives and programs. 
34. Mr. MELYMOY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
United States delegate had brought forward a whole now sot of figures revealing 
a significant increase in assistance granted through bilateral agreements. - One 
could not help asking why all that work of assistance to other countries was 
being carried out not through the Agency,, but by-passing it. The fact was that 
countries had good reasons for being nervous of accepting assistance through 
the Agency. The main one was fear of inspection. ' In the draft safeguards 
system submitted to the Conference? countries were in fact divided into two 
groups; inspecting countrios, and countries subject to inspection. Safeguards,, 
it had been said by certain delegates,, should not create an atmosphere 
of distrust or suspicion. How was it possible, however, to talk of trust when 
certain countries were producing atomic weapons and refused to stop -producing 
them, although they did not hesitate to point out the danger of such woapons 
being produced by other countries? What they wore, in fact, proposing was that 
they should go on piling up atomic weapons and perfecting their production and 
dosign, while other countries were to give an assurance, not only that they 
would not produce such weapons, but that they would allow the first group of 
countries to inspect all their scientific and oxporinental plants and would 
publish all their scientific achievements and discoveries, since the "inspecting 
countries" could never bo sure that such discoveries would not be useful for 
the continued improvement of their own military potential. It had been stated 
that the proposed system of safeguards was in accordance with the Statute. 
However, it was sufficient for any unprejudiced person to look at Article XII , 
of the Statute to soe that the system of safeguards which had been devised 
differed sharply from what was envisaged in the Statute. It did not relate 
to a single specific Agency project, whereas, according to the Statute, safeguards 
were to bo linked to specific Agency projects. The safeguards proposed 
amounted .in fact to a complicated, all-embracing system of control, which, like 
a spider, -would ensnare in its web all science and all scientists. It thus 
presented a very real danger of slowing down scientific 'development as a whole. 
No one to whom' science and his country's sovereignty wore''dear could ever agree 
to such a system of safeguards or control. 



GC(IV)/OR.42 
page 11 


35.. The Conferenoo should adopt 1shc Polish draft resolution. The widespread 
uso of nuclear energy for peaceful, progressive purposes could be achieved only 
if nuclear weapons were banned. During the disarmament negotiations, as soon 


as a disarmaments agreement had been adumbrated and a generally acceptable form 
for such an agreement had been evolved, the Western Powers had in fact proceeded 


to wreck the chances of its coming about. 


36. The PRESIDENT declared the general debate closed. He suggested that 
item 10 of the agenda be kept open to allow the General Conference to examine 
the Polish draft resolution at a further plenary meeting, without reference to 
any committee, 
37. It was so decided. 
OPENING DATE OF THE FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


38. The PRESIDENT reported that the General Committee had recommended 
that Tuesday, 26 September 1961, be fixed as the opening date of the fifth 
regular session of the General Conference. 
39. The recommendation of the General Committee was adopted. 
The meeting rose at 4.30 P.m, 



international Atomic Energy Agency 
Distr. 
GENERAL 

GG(IV)/OR.43 
3 January 1961 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 


FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 29 September 1960, at 10.40 a.m. 

President: 
Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


Welcome to a new Member (Ghana) 
1 


21 
The Agency's annual reports to the United 
Nations General Assembly 


22 
The Agency's annual report to the Economic 


4-5 


and Social Council of the United Nations 


for 1960-61 


23 
Election of members to the Agency's Staff 6 -8 
Pension Committee 

14 
Rules to govern the provision of technical 9 -12 
assistance by the Agency 

15 
The Agency's accounts for 1959 13 -15 

17 
Amendment of the Rules of Procedure 16 -19 

* GC(IV)/130. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev.3. 
60-6584 



GC(IV)/OR,43 


page 2 


WELCOME JPO A NSW &BMBT3R (GHANA) 


1. The PRESIDMT,announced that on 2& September 1960 Ghana had deposited 
its instrument of acceptance of the Statute with the depositary Government 
and had thus become the seventy-second Member of the Agency. He was 
sure he was expressing the views of all delegations in offering Ghana the 
heartiest congratulations of the General Conference. 
THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORTS TO THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
(G0(lV)/lll) 


2= The PRESIDENT put to the vote draft resolution A concerning the 
form of the Agency's annual reports to the United Nations General Assembly, 
and also draft resolution B dealing with the report for 1959-60§ both drafts 
were set out in the Board's proposals (GC(IV)/lll). 


3• Draft resolutions A and B were adopted unanimously. 


THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORT TO THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS FOR 1960-61 (GC(lv")/ll2) 


4- The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution set out in document 
GC(IV)/ll2s the text was similar to that of the resolution adopted by 
the General Conference on the sa.me subject at its last regular session—' . 


5• The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


6. The PRESIDENT stated that Mr. Pardo (Argentina), elected by the 
General Conference in 1959 to serve on the Staff Pension Committee, would be 
unable to continue in office to the end of the period which would end with 
the opening of the fifth regular session of the General Conference. Before 
proceeding to elect a successor, he wished to express the General Conference's 
gratitude to Mr. Pardo for his services on the Committee. 
7. Mr. Fujiyama (Japan) had been proposed to replace Sir. Pardo. 
8. Mr. Fujiyama (Japan) was elected a member of the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee. 
1/ GC(III)/RES/41. 



GC(IV)/OR.43 
page 3 


RULES TO GOVERN TH3 PROVISION OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE BY THE AG3NCY 
(GC(IV)/137) 


9. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, submitted the Committee's report on item 14 of the agenda 
(GC(IV)/137). 
10. He took advantage of the occasion to pay tribute to the ability of the 
Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Committee, to thank its members for their 
valuable work, and to express his gratitude to the Secretariat staff who had 
greatly facilitated the editing of the reports he had been called upon to 
make on the various items considered by the Committee. 
11. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the two draft resolutions set out in 
the Committee's report, dealing respectively with the provision of equipment, 
in technical assistance projects, and the guiding principles and general rule 
to govern the provision of teohnical assistance by the Agency. 
12. The two draft resolutions were unanimously adopted. 
TIH! AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1959 (GC(IV)/l39) 


13- Mr., USMMI (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, submitted the Committee's report on item 15 of the agenda 
(G0(IV)/139). 


14. The PRESIilBNT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
paragraph 3 of the Committee's report. 
15* The draft resolution was unanimously adopted. 


AiVDNDMMT OF THE RUL^S OF PROCEDURE (GC(IV)/l38) 


16. Mr. USFANI (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, submitted the Committee's report on item 17 of the agenda 
(GC(IV)/138). 
17. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in the 
Annex to the Committee's report. 
18. The draft resolution was unanimously adopted. 

GC(IV)/OR.43 
page 4 


19. Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pointed out that 
the practical application of the amendment to Rule 13 of the Rules of Procedure 
(sub-paragraph (e) of the resolution just adopted) would provoke 
numerous difficulties. As the Board generally met in September5 just before 
the General Conference, it would be almost impossible to give effect to the 
provision authorizing the Director General, with the consent of the Board, to 
request the inclusion of supplementary items on the Conference agenda, up to 
thirty days before the opening of a regular session, and it would remain a 
dead letter. It could only hamper the work of delegations taking part in 
the Conference. As it had already stated in the Administrative and Legal 
2/ 


Committee-7 , his delegation therefore considered the amendment pointless. 


The meeting rose at 11.-20 a.m. 


2/ GC(IV)/COM.2/OR.l8, paragraph 31. 



Distr. 


international Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL 


GC(IV)/OR.44 
16 December 1960 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 


FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 
OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-FOURTH PLEANRY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 30 September 1960, at 10.30 a,m. 
President Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 
Item of the 
agenda* 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 
Right of Cuba to vote at the fourth regular 
session of the General Conference 
1-5 
16 The Agency's relations with inter-governmental 
organizations 
6-13 
18 Agency safeguards 14 48 
11 The Agency's programme, budget and Working 
Capital Fund for 1961 
49 57 
19 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 
in 1961 
58 60 
24 The use of funds provided to defray the Agency's 
administrative and operational services costs in 
1960 under the United Nations Expanded Programme 
of Technical Assistance 
61 62 
13 Scale of Members' contributions for 1961 63 - 64 

* GC(IV)/l30. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/31/Rev.3. 


60-6631 



GC(IV)/OR.44 
page 2 


RIGHT OF CUBA TO VOTE AT THE FOURTH REGULAR SESSION OF THE GENERAL CONFERENCE 


1. Mr. LUJAN (Venezuela), speaking on a point of order, moved that the 
delegation of Cuba he permitted to vote a.t the fourth regular session although, 
as indicated in a note by the Director General--', the Cuban Government was in 
arrears with its payments to the Agency. 
2. The PRESIDENT recalled that, in accordance with Rule 56 of the Rules 
of Procedure, the point of order had to be decided immediately. 
3. As explained in the Diroctor Genoral's note, Cuba was in arrears with its 
financial contributions to the Agency and was therefore debarred under Article 
XIX.A of the Statute from voting in the Agency. The situation had not changed 
since the note was issued. Hov/ever, the second sentence of that article 
provided that "The General Conference may, nevertheless, permit such a member 
to vote if it is satisfied that the failure to pay is due to conditions beyond 
the control of the member," 
4. He would, therefore, put to the vote the Venezuelan motion that Cuba be 
authorized to vote at the fourth regular session of the General Conference. 
5. The proposal was adopted by 27 votes to none., with 27 abstentions. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH INTER-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (GC(IV)/l20, 121, 
134, 135, 136/Rev.1? 141) 


6. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution on the proposed 
agreement for co-operation between the Agency and the European Nuclear Energy 
Agency of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (ENEA), submitted 
by the Administrative and Legal Committee (GC(IV)/l35). 
7. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
8. Mr. WEINSTEIN (Observer for the European Nuclear Energy Agency of the 
Organisation for European Economic Co-operation), speaking at the invitation 
of the President, thanked the General Conference on behalf of his organization 
for adopting the co-operation agreement. The fundamental aim of ENEA was the 
production and peaceful use of nuclear energy and. i+. was therefore appropriate 
that it should collaborate with the Agency, Its mombors belonged to a geographic 
region which contained many countries highly advanced in atomic technology, and 
l/ GC(IV)/l26, Annex A. 



GO(IV)/OR.44 
pa go 3 


it had accordingly to deal with special regional .aspects of technical cooperation, 
health and safety, third-party liability and other problems. The 
two organizations had already developed informal relations to their mutual 
benefit. The co-operation agreement would help them to carry that co-operation 
still further. 


9„ The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution.on the proposed 
agreement for co-operation between the Agency and the Inter-American Nuclear 
Energy Commission of the Organization of American States .(lANEC), submitted by 
the Administrative and Logal Committee (GC(IV)/l4l). 


10. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
11. Mr. CUNHA (Observer for the Intor-Amorican Nuclear Energy Commission 
of the Organization of American States), speaking at the invitation of the 
President, expressed IANSC's appreciation of the action just taken by the 
Conference. IAN3C had boon established to foster co-operation among its 
own members, and its work could now bo greatly extended. 
12. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to vote on the draft 
resolution on the representation of inter-govornmcntal organizations at the 
fifth regular session, submitted by the Administrative and Logal Committoo 
(GC(IV)/l56/Rev.l). 
1J. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


AGENCY SAFEGUARDS (GC(IV)/IO8/REV.1, 142) 


14. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to consider the Administrative 
and Legal Committee's report (GC(IV)/l42), which included a draft 
resolution on Agency safeguards. 
15. Mr. BHABHA (India) said the draft resolution was unsatisfactory in 
many ways. The introductory part and paragraph 1 of the operative part 
merely "took note" without deciding anything. On paragraph 2, a 5-Powor 
•2/ 
draft resolution—' had been submitted but not voted upon; in terms of numbers, 
however, the countries which had supported it represented a substantial proportion 
of the population of the world. 


16. The proposed system of safeguards was non-discriminatory in form but would 
be very discriminatory in practice. His delegation wished particularly to underline 
the view that safeguards should be applied to source and fissionable 
materials only, not to equipment. 
2/ GC(IV)/COM,2/27. 



GC(IV)/0B„44 
pa go 4 


17. The safeguards problem must bo viewed as a whole. To adopt the propo.:oc 
principles and procedures (GC(IV)/108/EGVO1) at the present time would have 
the effect of widening the gap between the developed and the less-developed 
countries. If the Conference decided to refer the safeguards system to the 
Board for the latter's guidance, it would he only logical to ask the Board to 
take account also of the 5-Powor draft resolution to which be had referred, 
18. 
Mr. SMELYAHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
3/ 
15-Powor draft resolution-^ submitted by the United States and its allies in 
various military-political blocs had'been approved by a majority of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee-^, 


19. As the United Arab Republic delegate had pointed out in the Committee, 
the sponsors of the draft resolution had been unwilling to make any compromise 
on safeguards with the countries of Asia and Africa which had submitted the 
5-Power draft resolution. By using procedural machinery they had even prevented 
the Afro-Asian draft resolution from being voted upon, although it would 
seem important to know how many countries were in favor of it. That attitude 
reflected the position of those States which, disposing of a majority of votes,, 
thought they need take no account of the opinion of the minority, even though 
that minority in fact represented most of mankind, 
20. His delegation considered, as a matter of principle, that it was improper 
for the Conference to invite the Board to give effect to the proposed safeguards 
system, even with the reservation that in so doing the Board should 
take due account of the points of view expressed during the Conference, 
Rules relating to control and inspection - since their application affected 
the sovereign rights of States - should first be approved by the Conference, 
as were other important documents, 
21. It was particularly worthy of note that the countries which had voted in 
favor of the 15-Power draft resolution were mainly countries which had bilateral 
agreements with the United States, Did not that show that those 
countries desired to free themselves as speedily as possible from the American 
control provided for in such agreements, despite the praise they had lavished 
on them? The Soviet Union also had bilateral agreements, and not with socialist 
countries only. It was not by chance that not a single one of those countries 
3j GO(IV)/COM.2/22. 
4/ GC(IV)/COM.2/OR,22, paragraph 50. 


GC(IV)/0H.44 
pa go 5 


had expressed the intention of transferring its agreement with the Soviet Union 
to Agency controls it was because the Soviet Union did not impose the burden 
of control on countries which co-operated with it. Countries which had agreements 
with the United States, on the other hand, wore socking ways to throw off 
one yoko and to assume another which thoy thought would be easier to bear, 


22, Under one of the Soviet bilateral agreements, an atomic reactor for 
research and radioisotope production was being built in the United Arab 
Republico There were similar agreements with Iraq, and Indonesia, No one 
who had any acquaintance with such reactors could suggest they represented a 
danger to peace. Why then was it necessary to place them under control? Only 
the day before another reactor, using highly-enriched uranium, had gone into 
operation in neutral Austria, If the proposed control system were put into 
effect. Agency inspectors would have to be dispatched to that reactor every 
two months to check whether the uranium was in the reactor or whether it was 
being used for the manufacture of nuclear weapons. By the very fact of being 
subjected to control, a neutral country was thus placed in a humiliating position 
- placed under controls established by States which were producers of 
atomic woapons. A more absurd situation would bo difficult to imagine„ 


25- Scientists always welcomed now possibilities for scientific research, and 
when the sciontists at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) 
in Geneva had put their now accelerator into operation he had sent them sincere 
congratulations. But be would not bo at all happy if research reactors which 
wore to bo constructed came under control. Strict control did not create the 
conditions for creative scientific work;; it placed groat and unnecessary 
obstacles in the way of such work, 


24. 
During the general debate, the United States delegate had stated that his 
15/ 
country proposed to place its bilateral agreements under Agency control,-^ 
That was nothing but an attempt to shift the most unpleasant functions - those 
of control - onto an international organization, or rather to continue to 
exorcise the same control but under the flag of an international organization, 


25= That explained why only the military allies of the United States had come 


-forward in defense of control, >Tono of the supporters of the safeguards 
system proposed by the Board had boon able to put forward a single argument 
in favor of control. They had put forward purely political considerations, 
defending the proposal as supporters of their ally in the aggressive bloc. 


5/ GC(IV)/OR,42, paragraph 25, 



GC(IV)/OR.44 
page 6 


26, It had boon asserted that the adoption of Agency safeguards would have a 
beneficial psychological effect,, It would certainly have a psychological 
effect? but of what kind? The establishment of safeguards, while certain 
countries wore still producing nuclear weapons, would lull the vigilance of 
the peoples of the world and make thorn loss active in the struggle to have 
nuclear weapons banned while,, for very naive and credulous people, the 
illusion would bo created that the first stop had boon taken towards disarmament. 
Much had been said about that "first stop". In fact, however, it could be 
stated with a full sense of responsibility that not oven the smallest step had 
boon takon towards solving the problem of disarmament. 


27. Who were the opponents of the proposed safeguards system? - the neutral 
countries of Asia and Africa, Even small European countries such as Austria, 
Sweden and Switzerland evidently did not fully approve the proposed principles 
an-d procedures and had submitted a joint amendment—', Controls and safeguards 
applied to the peaceful uses of atomic energy would load to a division of the 
world into controlling countries, which would act under the screen of the 
Agency, and countries subject to control, 
280 The Soviet delegation continued to believe it would bo premature to 
establish safeguards in respect of Agency assistance as long as nuclear weapons 
were not banned, the more so as that assistance constituted r\o throat to peace 

235 


either by its extent or the amount of uranium in the fissionable materials 
supplied, 


29. For those reasons, the Soviet delegation could not, and would not, voto 
for the draft resolution submitted by the Administrative and Legal Committee. 
30, Mr. WERSHOF (Canada) made the following statements^ 


(a) 
"As the representative of a Government which has firmly and consistently 
supported the saforuards proposals developed by the Board 
of Governors and set out in document GC(IV)/l08/Rev,1, I do not 
intend hero t"' repeat at length the arguments which, to the host 
6/ GO(IV)/COM.2/26. 


jy This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request undor Rule 
92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(IV)/OR,44 


of my ability, I presented to the Administrative and Legal Committee, 
I would merely express the earnest hope that the General Conference 
will endorse the action taken by that Committee and will adopt the draft 
resolution no.w set out in document GC(IV)/l42„ When this resolution 


is adopted, the Board of Governors will be required to take into account 


the various views expressed at this Conference before,giving effect to 


the principles and procedures for the attachment and'application of 


safeguards. 


"Some delegations in the Administrative and Legal Committee urged that 
there was no need for what they chose to call "undue haste" in this matter, 
that still more months should bo devoted to developing a sot of principles 
and procedures by which the plain requirement of the' Statute should bo 
carried out, The Canadian delegation does not see the matter in that 
light, Mr. President, We believe that the proposals prepared by the 
Board will enable the Agency adequately and efficiently to fulfil the 
obligation imposed by the Statute to apply safeguards to Agency-assisted 
projects. 

"We further hope and believe that the implementation of these safeguards 
proposals by the Agency will encourage Member States to maintain or assume 
safeguards obligations in their bilateral transactions. As the Conference 
knows? the Canadian Government hass since the signing of the Agency's 
Statute, insisted upon the inclusion of a safeguards clause in its 
bilateral agreements and has looked forward to the time when the Agency 
would bo able to take over the administration of these safeguards. As 
I pointed out in my speech in the Administrative and Legal Committee;, 
Mr, Presidenfc5 it has not always been easy for Canada to maintain thisstand, 
and it would have to bo reconsidered if other suppliers should 
fail to follow a similar course, 


"As for the speech by the distinguished delegate of India, I would merely 


say once again that the Canadian Government is convinced that the fears 


and worries which be has regarding safeguards are simply not correct, 


although wo realize that be hold.s those opinions sincerely. If we 


thought for one moment that the- application of safeguards would have 


the bad consequences for any country, and especially for under-developed 


countries, which he fears, wo would not bo in favour of them. The 


Canadian Government is absolutely convinced that in practice nothing 


is going to happen that will do the slightest harm to any Member of this 


Agency, and that on the contrary benefits are going to fl^w to all the 


countries belonging to this Agency> including, and especially including, 


the under-developed countries, 


"With regard to the eloquent speech by the distinguished delegate of the 


Soviet Union, it is a groat temptation to" me, because I am afraid I like 


making speeches, to answer all the points be has made, but I will resist 


that temptation. The distinguished representative of the Soviet Union, 


in addition to being one of the most eminent atomic scientists in the 


world and a member of the Board whom all of us have grown to admire, is 


also a very fine orator. But this particular speech I have now heard, 


I would say, at least ten times, beginning with the Conference on the 



GC(IV)/OR.44 
pago 8 


Statute in 'Mow York in 1956. The Canadian Government disagrees with each 
and every point which he has made in all of those ten speeches, including 
the one we have heard this morning. I would only say again, as I said 
in the Administrative and Legal Committee, that even though the distinguished 
delegate of the Soviet Union usually starts hy saying the Soviet Union is 
in favour of safeguards because it signed the Statute, actually every 
argument that he makes? 'and that he made this morning, is an argument for 
not having signed the Statute, and for deleting all the safeguards provisions. 
The countries represented hero, which I think are most of the 
countries who believe that the Statute should be carried out, cannot in 
my opinion accept at this stage any of the arguments advanced hy the 
distinguished delegate of the Soviet Union, 


(f) 
"Mr. President, the Canadian delegation strongly urges that the General 
Conference should adopt the draft resolution sot out in document GC(IV)/142s 
and 'by so doing make its contribution to the achievement of the objectives 
of the Agency, as set out in Article II of the Statute," 
31. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) said he had not intended to repeat his 
Government's views on safeguards, but felt bound to reply to the tendentious 
and misleading remarks made by the delegates of India and the Soviet Union. 
The difficulties encountered in trying to reach a compromise on safeguards 
during the past two years had not been due to any lack of goodwill on the part 
of the United Kingdom, which had not sought in any way to impose a system of 
controls without the agreement of the countries likely to be subject to it. 
The criticisms put forward by. the Soviet Union delegation had been largely 
met in the Board's proposals, which, representing a compromise solution, were, 
for good reason, not free of inconsistencies. The Board's proposals represented 
a synthesis of what was practical and politically feasible and could not 
be used to establish what had been described as stringent controls. 
32. The Indian objections to the form of the draft resolution submitted by 
the Administrative and Legal Committee wore difficult to understand. Thu 
wording of paragraphs (d) and (e) of the preamble would ensure the widest 
possible flexibility. The text used could not boar out the imputation that 
the real intention was to impose control without the consent of the countries 
asking for assistance. In any event those countries would be able to express 
their views in the course of negotiations with the Agency. 
33• The most cursory perusal of the principles and procedures would show that 
there was no justification whatsoever for the assertion that control in regard 
to research reactors would be onerous for the scientists working there, sinco 
in effect they would be required to do nothing more than maintain records which 
would be necessary in any case - and to report periodically to the Agency, 



GG(lV/)/0K„44 


54„ It was instructive, to examine the voting on the draft resolution in the 
Committee„ In the first place> the affirmative votes had boon well in excess 
of a two-thirds majority and had been cast by countries from every region of 
the world,including the majority of less-developed countries. The five countries 
which had abstained from the vote all belonged to the less-advanced country 
group9 and might have boon expected to vote against the draft resolution had 
they boon convinced by the arguments of its opponents. Of the fourteen 
countries which had voted against the Iraft resolution, only five or six 
might be regarded as less-dcvclojod. There was therefore no foundation for 
the claim that the Board's proposals represented an attempt to impose the views 
of Member States of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, The voting in the 
Committee provided the best answer to the suggestion that the less-devolopod 
countries had found the draft resolution unacceptable, 


35. Ho had indicated in the Committee that approval of the Board's proposals 
was only a step on the road to controlled disarmament.—' Without wishing to 
exaggerate the importance of that stop, be emphasized that it would bo only 
consistent for delegations genuinely interested in securing peace and controlled 
disarmament to support the draft resolution which, be hoped, would 
obtain an even greater majority in the plenary meeting, 
36, Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) regretted that, owing to the intervention 
of the United States, the 5-P.wor draft resolution submitted in the 
Committee had not oven boon put to the vote. That seemed to indicate that the 
Board would bo subjected to strong pressure to resist any changes in the principles 
and procedures it had proposed. Had the invitation in paragraph 2 of 
the draft resolution contained in the Committee's report been sincerely meant, 
the United States would not have opposed a vote being taken on the ^-Tnwer 
draft resolution, which expressed a different point of view to its own. In 
fact paragraph 1 of the Committee's draft resolution seemed to imply that the 
General Conference should not discuss the principles and procedures at all, 

37• The less-devolopod countries would never be able to accept a "system" of 
safeguards? a concept which did not appear in the Statute. The Board was 
furthering the interests of the atomically more advanced countries, and for 
the first time decisions on a major issue wore to bo taken by the Board without 
reference to the Conference, That was particularly dangerous when the 


8/ GC(IV)/COM.2/OR,20, paragraph 26, 



GC(IV)/OR.44 
pago 10 


Board's proposals offered no completo solution of the problem of inspection 
and left the whole matter to the discretion of the Director General. The 
exercise of such discretion would he wholly incompatible with the principle 
of State sovereignty. By adopting the Committee's draft resolution, the 
Conference would be assuming a heavy responsibility, with grave consequences 
for loss-developed countries which might not bo fully aware of the implications 
of the Board's proposals as far as inspection was concerned, 


38. The assurance that there was nothing to fear, because under paragraph 5 
of the draft resolution the Board was required to report on its reviev/ of the 
principles and procedures after two years, carried little weight, seeing that 
the review was to be carried out by the Board itself. It was more usual to 
entrust that typo of review to some other, independent body. Clearly no real 
revision of the principles and procedures was likely to be made - which meant 
that the Conference was now being asked to approve principles and procedures 
that wore likely to become definitive. The Conference would thus be relinquishing 
its right to examine the whole matter in the future without oven having had 
an opportunity of doing so at the present stage. That was likely to lead to 
discrimination against less-advanced countries which would be subjected to 
stricter control, more extensive inspection and greater interference in their 
internal affairs than the more advanced countries? a gross abuse of the 
Agency's functions and one inspired by purely political considerations. 
39. His delegation would have been willing to support the 5-P.wer draft 
resolution had it boon given an opportunity of doing so, and would vote against 
the resolution submitted by the Committee. 
40. Mr. FOSTER (United States of America) whole-heartedly associated 
himself with the remarks made by the delegates of Canada and the United 
Kingdom. Ho did not propose to discuss the arguments put forward by the 
opponents of the Committee's draft resolution which had been repeated on many 
occasions. The Conference could bo confident, however, that the Board was 
receptive to new ideas and would give the most careful consideration to all 
the views expressed during the present discussion. Ho felt certain that be 
spoke also for the other delegations which had joined his own in submitting 
the draft resolution. A start must bo made to develop safeguards and be 
warmly commended the Committee's draft resolution for adoption. 

GC(IV)/ORo44 
page 11 


41. 
Mr. BORISSVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) recalled his 
9/ 
delegation's attitude in the Committee to the safeguards document-7 . The 
proposed system of safeguards was not in. accordance with the spirit and letter 
of the Statute, and tended to affront the dignity and honor of countries 
receiving assistance from the Agency and to infringe their sovereignty. The 
proposed principles and procedures wore imperfect - as was recognized oven by 
the authors of the draft resolution, paragraph 2 of which invited the Board, 
before giving effect to the document, to take into account the views expressed 
in the General Conference. Thus, a vitally important document would in its 
definitive form be elaborated by the Board without subsequent 'approval by the 
Conference, which was a higher organ of the Agency. But the Board, as had 
been pointed out by a number of delegations, was composed in the main of the 
providers and not the recipients, the controllers and not the controlled. 
Such an approach was neither logical nor democratic. For that and other 
reasons which had been indicated earlier, his delegation rejected the 15-Power 
draft resolutions a document as important as the safeguards document could 
and must be approved by the General Conference itself, after all the points 
of view expressed thoro had been taken into consideration. 


42. The delegates of Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States had 
endeavored to disguise the wolf in sheep's clothing, but their efforts had been 
in vain. Many delegations, including those of most of the less-developed 
countries, had convincingly shown that the proposed safeguards system was 
discriminatory and.that it was directed in the main against the less-developed 
countries, However, the United States and its partners in military and 
political blocs had chosen to ignore the opinion of most of the countries which 
were recipients of Agency, assistance, and had not even allowed the Committee 
to vote on the 5-Power draft resolution. While professing willingness to 
collaborate by taking into consideration all opinions expressed on a very 
important Agency activity, they were in fact endeavoring to impose a system 
which was not acceptablo to many countries. For those reasons, the Byelorussian 
delegation would vote against the draft resolution. 
43. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution on Agency safeguards 
set out in the report of the Administrative and Legal Committee 
(GO(IV)/I42): 
2/ GC(IV)/COM.2/OE.19P paragraphs 72 - 78. 



GO(IV)/OR.44 
page 12 


44. At the request of Mr. Michaels (United Kingdom), a roll-call vote was taken, 
Sudan, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote 
first. 


The result of the vote was as followsg 


In favors Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand;, Turkey, Union of South Africa, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
States of America, Venezuela, Viot-Nam, Argentina, Australia, 
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,, Chile, China., Denmark, 
El Salvador, Finland, Prance, Federal Republic of Germany, 


• Greece, Guatemala, Holy See, Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Israel, 
Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, 
Portugal, Spain. 
Againsts Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, 
Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Ceylon, Cuba, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, 
Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq., Morocco, Poland. 
Romania,. 


Abstaining; Tunisia, Ethiopia. 


45• The draft resolution was adopted by 43 votes to 19, with 2 abstentions.' 


46. Mr. BAUM (Yugoslavia) said, with reference to the remarks of the 
United Kingdom delegate, that his delegation had explained quite clearly in the 
Committee the reasons for which it had abstained during the Committee's vote on 
the 15--Power draft resolution-—'. It had done so in a spirit of conciliation. 
However, it could not support that draft resolution, although it did contain a 
number of acceptable elements. Eis delegation would have voted for the 
5-Powor draft resolution in the Committee had it been put to the vote. 
47• Mr. DIAH (Indonesia) recalled that his delegation had also abstained 
in the vote on the 15-Powor draft resolution in the Committee. It was not 
opposed to safeguards in principle, but could not support the draft resolution. 
As there had been some misunderstanding of the Indonesian position, be had now 
voted against the draft resolution. 


10/ GC(IV)/COM.2/OR.22, paragraph 3. 



GC(lv)/OR.44 • 
page "i-3 


480 Mr. HASANI (Iraq.) said that, expecting the 5-Power draft resolution 
to bo put to the vote, his delegation had abstained in the vote on the 15-Power 
draft resolution in the Committee. As the 5-Vowcr draft resolution had not 
been put to the votcs his delegation had now felt obliged to vote against the 
Commit tee' s draft resolution., 

THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME, BUDGET AMD WORKING CAPITAL FUND FOR 1961 (GC(IV)/l43) 
49 „ Mr. NOWACICI (Poland), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, introduced its report (GC(IV)/l43)„ The Committee recommended 
for adoption the draft resolutions sot out in the sovon Annexes to the 
report. 


50. Mr. WSRSHOF (Canada) said his delegation would abstain if a vote 
Yirore taken on the draft resolution contained in Annex IV, as it believed the 
Conference should not prejudge the question of establishing an international 
center for theoretical physics. 
510 The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolutions contained in 
Annex I of the Committee's report, 


52. Part I of draft resolution A was adopted by 46 votes to 7. 
53• Fart II of draft resolution A was adopted by 52 votes to none, 


54= Draft resolution A ("Budgetary appropriations for the.financial year 


1961") as a whole was adopted by 54 votes to none. 


55 • Draft resolution B ("Use of the Workinp; Capital Fund in 1961") was 


adopted by 56 votes to none. 


56. Kr. LBSZCZYNSKI- (Poland) said his affirmative vote did not imply 
approval of the increases in the regular budget. His delegation believed the 
Agency's activities could be expanded without increasing administrative 
expenditure. 
57- The draft resolutions sot out in Annexes II to VII of the Committee's 
report (Transport of radioactive materials; The sale of the Agency's scientific 
publications in the local currencies of Member States; The establishment 
of an international center for theoretical physics; Consultation of the 
Scientific Advisory Committee by the Board of Governors; Exchange of 
scientific abstracts; Preparation and distribution of radiation and neutron 
standards) were adopted. 



GO(IV)/0H.44 
page 14 

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND IN 196l (GC(IV)/l40) 


58, The PRESIDENT announced that be had been informed that the delegate 
of Venezuela had been authorized by his Government to pledge a voluntary contribution 
of $8 200 to the General Fund for 1961. That would bring the total 
pledges to date to $999 704. 


59- He invited the Conference to vote on the draft resolution Bet out in the 
report of the Committee for Pledges of Voluntary Contributions to the General 
Fund (G0(lV)/l4O). 


60. The draft resolution on voluntary contributions to the General Fund in 
1961 was unanimously adopted., 
THE USE OF FUNDS PROVIDED TO DEFRAY THE AGENCY'S ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATIONAL 
SERVICES COSTS IN 1960 UNDER THE TOUTED NATIONS EXPANDED PROGRAMME OF TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE (GC(IV)/l32) 


61. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote on the draft resolution 
set out in the report of the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee 
(G0(IV)/152). 
62. The draft resolution on administrative and operational services costs 
under the United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance was adopted 
by 40 votes to 4? with 8 abstentions. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1961 (GC(IV)/l24, 145) 


63. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote on the draft resolution 
set out in the report of the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee 
(GC(IV)/145). 
64. The draft resolution on the scale of Members' contributions for 1961 was 
adopted, by 54 votes to none. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



Distr. 


GENERAL 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(IV)/OR.45 
5 January 1961 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday; 30 September 1960, at 3.15 p.m. 

President: Mr, NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


20 Election of Members to the Board of 1-22 
Governors 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 23 - 61 
Governors for 1959-60 (continued from the 
44th meeting) 


* GC(IV)/130. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev.3. 
60-6588 



GC(IV)/OR,45 
page 2 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS. TO THE .BOARD OF GOVERNORS (G0(lV)/ll8, 127) 


1. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider item 20 of the 
agenda relating to the election of Members to the Board of Governor's."' A 
report on that subject by the General Committee (GC(IV)/l27) was before the 
Conference. In that report the General Committee informed the Conforonco 
that, under Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure, it would have during its 
present session, to elect to the Board five Members from two goographicaj 
aroass Africa and the Middle East, and South-East Asia and the Pacific, with 
duo regard to equitable representation on the Board as a whole of the Members 
in the areas specified in Rule 83. He drew the Conference'3 attention to 
paragraph 3 of the General Committoe's report, which listed the Members already 
designated by the Board or elected by the General Conference. Rule 79 
of the Rules of Procedure provided that the elections should be by secret 
ballot and that there should bo no nominations, 
.2.. At the invitation of the President, Mr. Masmojoan (Monaco) and 
Mr. Humbert (Switzerland) acted as tellers. 

3. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to elect a Member from 
the area "Africa and the Middle East". 
4. A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as followss 

Number of ballot paperss 64 


Invalid ballots% 5 

Number, of valid ballots% 59 

Number of Members votings 59 


Required majoritys 30 


Number of votes obtained1 
Iraq. 54 
Thailand 2 
Tunisia 2 
Turkey 1 


5. Having obtainod the required majority, Iraq, was, elected a Member of the 
Board of Governors. 

GC(IV)/OR.45
page 5 


6. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to elect a Member 
from the area "South-East Asia and the Pacific", 
7. A vote was taken by secret ballot.. 
The result of the vote was as follows s 
Number of ballot paperss 64 
'Invalid ballots% 15 
Number of valid ballots% 51 
Number of Members votings 51 
Required majority; 26 
Number of. votes obtained % 

Thailand 49 
Burma 1 
Viet-Nam 1 


8. Having obtained the required majority, Thailand was elected a Member 
of the Board of Governors. 
9. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to fill the three 
remaining elective places on the Board of Governors. 
10. 
A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows? 
Number of ballot paperss 64 
Invalid ballots% 3 
Number of valid ballotss 61 
Number of Members votings 61 
Required majority? 31 
Number of votes obtained§ 
Argentina 56 
El Salvador 55 
Federal Republic of Germany 47 
Ghana 14 
Cuba 4 
Chile 1 
Yugoslavia 1 



GC(IV)/0E.,45 
page 4 


11, Having obtained the required majority, Argentina, El Salvador and the. 
Federal Republic of Germany wero oioct;od Members of the Board of Governors. 


12c The PRESIDENT declared the election closed and thanked the tellers. 


!3' EL'^IE^^^k (Czechoslovakia) said he wished to make a statement 
on the election that had just taken place,, 

3-4. .¥?-^Q.^yA-1^ (France)? on a point of order, said that under Rule 74 


of the Rules of Procedure the presiding officer might not permit Members to 


explain their vote when the vote had been taken by secret ballot, 


15. Mr. PPiTRZijULKA (Czechoslovakia) said that he did not want to explain 
his vote? but to present a statement concerning the "floating" seats on the 
Board of Governors,, 
16, Mr_._F0NTAIKE (France) said that such a statement would not be 
relevant or within +be scope of item 20,, the item under discussion. The 


Czechoslovak delegate could be permitted to make a statement on another agenda 


item oi" on .a new itemp in the latter case he should first ask for the inclusion 


of the now icen in the agenda, 


W* EL^MS^^PI?! (United Kingdom) and Mr, da COSTA (Portugal) supported 
the French point of order, 

18, 'jr. NOyiKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) protested against 
the abtompts to prevent the Czechoslovak delegate from speaking,' and asked 
which Rule of the Rules of Procedure or' Article of the Statute justified 
the election of the Federal Republic of Germany to a "floating" seat and the 
transfer of Spain from that seat to the one formerly occupied by the Netherlands. 


19, The PRESIDENT decided that if the statement which the delegate of 


Czechoslovakia wished to make was a general one dealing with the election of 
Members.to the Poord of Governors,, it was not covered by the provisions of 


Rule 74. 


20, There wag no opposition to the President's decision, 


21, .The PSj^SIDENT invited the delegate of Czechoslovakia to make his 
statement. 



GC(IV)/OR.45 
page 5 


22. Mr, PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) made the following statements-' 
(a) 
"In connection with the just concluded election to the Board of 
Governors, I have the honor, on behalf of the delegation of the 
Bulgarian People's Republic, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the Hungarian People's 
Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Romanian People's Republic, 
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republios, to make the following statement and wish to request that in 
accordance with Article 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference it be entered in the records of our Conference. 
(b) 
"As is evident from document GC(IV)/l27? "^-e General Committee, dealing 
with the question of what geographical areas should under Article VI,A,3 
of the Statute have their representatives elected in the Board of Governors, 
decided that Spain and Mexico, elected at the third General Conference on 
the so-called 'floating3 seats, shall for the forthcoming period represent 
the area of Western Europe and Latin America, respectively. Inasmuch as 
the proposal to consider Spain and Mexico as the representatives of the geographical 
areas concerned is made in document GC(IV)/l27? and inasmuch as no 
State of the given areas raised any protest, the delegations on whose 
behalf I speak assume that this is done with the approval of the Member 
States of the areas concerned, in our case the countries of Vfestern 
Europe and Latin America* 
(c) 
"The delegations of the Bulgarian People's Republic, the Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the 
Hungarian People's Republic, the Polish People's Republic, the Romanian 
People's Republic, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics deem it necessary to declare that this 
practice can in no way influence the consensus of opinion embodied in 
document PC/OR,6l? page 9 and document GC/l/OR,2, page 2 to the effect 
that each of the geographical areas as referred to in Article VI,A.3 of 
the Statute may be represented in the Board of Governors only by the 
State which has been approved by a majority of the member countries of a 
given area, which means that at no time in the future shall the aroa of 
Eastern Europe be represented by any State -which has not received the 
approval of the majority of States of Eastern Europe," 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF TILS BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1959-60 


(GC(IV)/114, 131, 148, 149/RCV.2.) (continued from the 44th meeting) 


23. The PRESIDENT recalled that at the 42nd plenary meeting the General 
Conference had decided to examine at a subsequent plenary meeting the draft 


resolution introduced by Poland (GC(IV)/l3l) and entitled "The participation 


of the Agency in international efforts to secure the prohibition of.nuclear 


2/ 
weapons"—' . He now invited comments on the Polish draft resolution. 


1/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 


2/ GC(IV)/OR,42, paragraphs 36 and 37. 



GC(IV)/OR,45 
page 6 


24. Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pointed out that 
1960 marked the fifth anniversary of the opening of negotiations between the 
atomic Powers on the banning of atomic and thermonuclear weapons tests, 
25. The United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation 
had concluded in its report that nuclear experiments were highly dangerous to 
mankind, He quoted the following passage from the reports 
"Radioactive contamination of the environment resulting from explosions of 


nuclear weapons constitutes a growing increment- to world-wide radiation 


levels. This involves new and largely unknown hazards to present and 


future populations."1/ 


26. Unfortunately, the negotiations on the banning of tests had so far been 
unsuccessful, although there were no objective reasons to prevent the conclusion 
of an agreement. The failure of the long negotiations was due to the unwillingness 
of the Western Powers to abandon the armaments race and the creation of 
new types of atomic and thermonuclear weapons, 
27. At the beginning of 1958 "the United States and the United Kingdom had 
stated that there was no way of enforcing an agreement on the prohibition of 
atomic and thermonuclear weapons•tests. They had also stated that it would be 
perfectly possible to carry out atomic explosions in secret even after their 
prohibition. The Soviet Union had always considered that,, at the present stage 
of science and technology, it was impossible to carry out secret underground 
explosions, and was still of that opinion. In an attempt to find a 
solution, a group of experts had been convened at Geneva in 1958 an& bad 
confirmed the view of the Soviet Union, 
28. The recommendations drawn up by the exports on practical control methods 
had been approved by the Governments of the Soviet Union, the United States 
and the United Kingdom. However, the United States, on the grounds of alleged 
new data said to have been obtained during recent tests, had claimed that it 
was impossible to detect secret underground tests of atomic and thermonuclear 
weapons. After lengthy discussions, the United States had yielded a certain 
3_/ United Nations document A/3838, paragraph 54, 



GO(IT)/OR.45 
page 7 


amount of ground by proposing to exclude from the agreement not the totality 
of underground explosions., but only those equal to or loss than 20 000 tons of 
TNT, 


29. Anxious to speed, up the conclusion of the agreement5 the Soviet Union had 
agreed to such low-power explosions being excluded and experiments' with nuclear 
devices carried out in order to assist in drawing up detection methods. It 
had proposed that, while the experiments wore going on and detection methods 
were being drawn up, the atomic Powers should not conduct low-power underground 
explosions. However,, che United States and the United Kingdom had not accepted 
that proposal; with the result that the negotiations between the three atomic 
Powers on the banning- of atomic and thermonuclear woapons had oonrj to & standstill, 
30. The United States and the United Kingdom had placed two obstaclos in the 
way of an agreement to halt the testing of atomic weapons, First? they had '*• 
refused to commit themselves to ceasing underground tests of atomic weapons 
during the period required for carrying out experiments with nucloar devices 
and the ensuing period for drawing up methods of detecting low-power nuclear 
explosions. Secondly, they had refused to allow all the participants in the 
experiments to inspect the nuclear devices used, 
31. Haturaliy, the prohibition of atomic weapons tests could net put a final 
stop to the armaments race, nor prevent an atomic world war, That would be 
possible only after the banning of atomic weapons? their withdrawal from 
State armaments and the destruction of all stocks. Only then would all nuclear 
material and all scientific and technical installations be employed for 
peaceful purposes. 
32. With, those considerations in mind, the Soviet delegation wholeheartedly 
supported the draft resolution submitted by Poland? -which called upon the 
States at present engaged in negotiations at Geneva to discontinue nuclear 
•weapons tests, 
33• Certain delegates maintained that the General Conference was not the 
proper forum for discussing the banning of atomic and thermonuclear weapons 


GC(IV)/OR.45 
page 8 


tests. That argument could not be sustained. The struggle for peace, disarmament 
and the safeguarding of humanity from the risk of contamination.byradioactive 
fall-out was the noble aim towards which all organizations, 
whether national or international, and indeed all mankind, should strive, 


34. Mr, PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) said that the Polish draft resolution 
was an expression and a proof of the ever-growing movement throughout the 
world, including the United States, in support of an immediate and lasting 
cessation of nuclear weapons tests. The opponents of the draft resolution seemed 
unaware that the banning of tests would prevent the production of now and increasingly 
destructive weapons? halt the rising level of environmental 
contamination and make it possible to devote new resources to the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, Moreover, the restoration of trust among nations would 
go a long way towards ending the armaments race, thus releasing new resources 
for improvement of living standards. The British economist Orr had estimated 
that, if every State would agree to cut its military expenses by only ~LOfo} 
those resources would amount to 4 000 million pounds sterling in the first 
year alone, Mr. Siegbert Kahn had estimated that the armaments race cost 
annually 100 000 million dollars, 
35. Only if an agreement en the cessation of nuclear explosions was concluded 
and nuclear weapons were completely prohibited could nuclear energy be fully 
harnessed in the service of peace. The Agency had boon entrusted with the 
noble task of promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy which, to use the 
language of the Preparatory Commission's Report, "has been, in the years since 
the Second World War, the object and the symbol both of the highest hopes and 
n4/ 


of the deepest fears of mankind"-', 


36. It clearly followed from Article III.B.l of the Statute that the Agency's 
work was closely related to the basic problem of international life - the 
problem of peace and security. The Agency should strive to further all agreements 
that would eliminate the use of nuclear energy for warlike purposes, in 
accordance with its Statute and within the framework of its close relationship 
_4_/ GC,l/l, paragraph 1. 



GC(IV)/OR,45 
pf-ffo 9 


with the United Nations General Assembly and Security Council. That was the 


fact ignored by those delegations, especially that of the United States, which 


held that the General Conference was .not competent to consider and adopt the 


Polish draft resolution.. In truth the draft resolution was based explicitly 


on Articles II and. III0B,1? which wore among the Statute's nosfc relevant pro


visions. Moreover, bhat it fitted perfectly within the task entrusted to the 


Agency "oj the United Nations was clear from Article I, paragraph 1, of the 

r)/ 


agreement between the two organizations-^? 


"The United Nations recognizes the International Atomic Energy Agency .,, 
as the agency, undor the aegis of the United Nations , „ ., responsible for 
international activities concorned with the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in accordance with its Statute," 


Ths opponents of the Polish draft resolution were apparently blind to the rare 


opportunity the Agency was being offered to demonstrate that it could fulfill 


its obligations. 


37' ^o assertion that the Agency was a purely technical organization was a 


paradox. Many delegations had been obligod to recognize that safeguards wore 


a political issuec Those same delegations wore now apparently prepared to 
violate the provisions of Article IV,C of the Statute, which bound all Members 


of the Agency to "fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed by them in 


accordance with this Statute". 


38, The assertion that adoption of the Polish draft resolution would un


favorably affect the disarmament' negotiations at Geneva was sheer nonsense 


It was really a clumsy excuse by these who did not; wish the negotiations to 


succeed. The draft resolution was supported- by the Soviet Union, which was 


a participant in the negotiations and had declared scores of timos that it 
wished for their success. 


39• Western scientists did not refrain from comment on political questions 
such as the banning of nuclear weapons tests. In the April 1960 issue of the 
United States magazine "Foreign Affairs" Professor Dyson, of Princeton and 
Cornell Universities, had called upon the United States to continue exploration 
of nuclear weapons technology, including tests, until a reliable international 


5/ INPCISC/ll, 



GC(l7)/0Eo45 
page 10 


control system had been established. Mr. Leo Szilard, in an article published 


in the "Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists" for February 1960 entitled "How to 


Live with the Bomb", had stated that be saw no reason why the tests should be 


stopped. Mr. I. I. Rabi, in the August 1960 issue of the magazine "The 


Atlantic", had stated that a minority of scientists laid their hopes for peace, 


paradoxically enough, in a mutuality of terror which would immobilize all 


aggressive impulses in the nations of the world. He had added that 


"With sufficient effort, atomically advanced nations would in time possess 
stores of atomic weapons so cheap and so plentiful that they could overcome 
.. the resistance of less advanced nations with the same ease with which the 
Spaniards conquered Peru". 


40. 
It was thus clear that certain influential circles in the United States 
did not hesitate to resist cessation of nuclear tests, Mr. Jay Orear, 


Chairman of the Disarmament Committee of the Federation of American Scientists, 


was therefore right when he wrote that under such conditions nuclear war would 


become inevitable, 


41. 
In conclusion he urged all delegations to vote for the Polish draft 
resolution, which was an important step towards genuine international co


operation for the purpose of bestowing on all mankind the benefits of the 


peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


42. Mr. WERSHOF (Canada) made the following statements-^ 
(a) 
"I wish to speak briefly on the draft resolution which was introduced by 
Poland in the course of the general debate, and to introduce the motion 
and procedural proposal (GC(IV)/l48) submitted jointly by my own and 
other Governments. 
(b) 
"It is a matter of public record that the Canadian Government is ready 
and anxious to make its full contribution towards early and effective 
action on disarmament. By the same token the Canadian Government is 
vitally interested in the success of the three-Power negotiations which 
are currently in progress in Geneva with the object of bringing about a 
cessation of nuclear tests. As the Canadian Secretary of State for 
External Affairs put it in his statement to the United Nations Disarmament 
Commission on 16 August 1960, Canada, in common with other nations, looks 
upon progress in these matters 'as a means of increasing international 
security, reducing international tension and easing the heavy burdens 
which preparations for defence have placed on all nations'. 
6/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 



"GO (TV")/OR, 45 
page 11 


(c) 
"It is because we are serious in our desire to see agreement reached on 
the matters covered in the Polish draft resolution that we are opposed 
to discussing them in bodies such as this General Conference which are 
functionally not qualified to discuss them in such a way as to contribute 
to their solution* We are particularly opposed to dealing with these 
matters in this forum' at a time when the leaders of many nations have 
come together in the General Assembly of the United Tfetions to explore 
further the avenues along which progress towards disarmament is most 
likely to bo reached quickly and effectively. 
(d) 
"You will recall that a resolution similar to that submitted by Poland 
this year was submitted %cy the delegation of Czechoslovakia to the 
General Conference in 1959-2/ •, At that time the General Conference 
decided that it would not bo desirable to adopt a substantive resolution 
on the matters raised in the Czechoslovak draft resolution,2/ 
The Canadian delegation believes that the decision taken by the Conference 
last year was the right decision and that we should take a 
decision in similar terms thi-s year. That is why wo have co-sponsored 
and now introduce the motion sot forth in paragraph 1 of documont GC(IV)/l48 
and v/hy we urge all those who arc genuinely intcrostcd in early progross 
on disarmament and the cessation of nuclear tests to join with us in 
supporting that motion and also the proccdttral proposal relating to 
priority in voting which is sot forth in paragraph 2 of that document, 
I will road the motion and the procedural proposals 
1, Motion? The General Conference notes that the matters 
raised in the preamble and operative paragraph 1 of the 
draft resolution in document GC(IV)/l31 continue to be 
under active discussion in other more appropriate international 
forums and that it would be premature to consider 
undertaking the study envisaged in operative paragraph 2 
of the draft resolution, and decides that it is not? in 
these circumstances, desirable to adopt any substantive 
resolution on these matters. 


2. 
Procedural proposal under Rule 77 of the Rules of Procedures 
That the General Conference decide that the motion contained 
in paragraph 1 above should bo put to the vote before the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(IV)/l31. 
It will bo noted that the five sponsors are the five Western members 
of the ton-Power Disarmamont Conference which was for some time in 
session in Geneva. 


(e) 
"I ask for a roll-call vote on the procedural proposal and on the motion 
which I have introduced," 
43. Mr, MGLLER-CONRAD (Poland) asked what was so dangerous and explosive 
in his delegation's draft resolution as to justify the motion submitted in 


respect of it by a group of Atlantic countries. The Polish draft resolution 


2/ GC(IIl)/89 and Add.l. 

8/ GO(III)/OR.55, paragraph 52. 


GC(IV)/OR,45 
page 12 


contained nothing that was not fully lawful, nothing that was oven faintly 
objectionable, The ontiro world demanded .cessation of nuclear tests. To go 
against the current would he political suicide, though that prospect did not 
seem to deter the Atlantic countries from resorting to the lew procedural 
tricks of provincial lawyers in order to "guillotine" the Polish draft resolution. 
The General Conference, which had just elected to the Board a 
militarist and rovanchiste country like the Federal Republic of Germany, was 
bound to adopt the draft resolution if it did not want to see the Agency's 
prestige founder, 


44. Mr, FOSTER (United Stat os of America) recalled that his delegation 
had already specified, in reply to certain statements, the position of the 
9/ 


United States on disarmament and on the Polish draft resolution— . As had 
been repeatedly made clear by President Eisenhower, the United States was fully 
committed to the objectives of disarmament. At the same time the United 
States Government was convinced that the entire question of, disarmament, in— 
eluding the questions raised in the Polish draft resolution, were not appropriate 
nor constructive subjects for discussion and action by the General Conference, 
The introduction of political problems into the business of the Conference was 
deplorable and could only disrupt its useful substantive work, For those 
reasons the United States, in common with four other Member States, had submitted 
their motion and procedural proposal, under -jyhich the Conference would 
decide not to adopt any substantive resolution relating to the matters raised 
in the Polish draft resolution, 

45* At the third regular session Czechoslovakia had submitted a draft resolu


tion similar to the present Polish one5 the General Conference had then by an 


overwhelming majority voted for a motion to the same effect as the present 


5—Power one. The United States urged the Conference to follow that wise 


precedent. 


46, A few days previously, President Eisenhower had stated before the General 


Assembly of the United Nations that international control of atomic energy and 


general and complete disarmament could no more bo accomplished by rhetoric than 


could the economic development of nowly-indopendcnt countries| that both those 


immense tasks called for serious, painstaking, costly, laborious and non


propaganda approaches. It was in the same spirit that the United States 


2/ GC(IV)/OR,42, paragraphs 30, 31 and 33, 



G0(1V)/OR,45 
page 13 


delegation urged the General Conference to accept the. 5"Power motion as the 
most appropriate way of disposing of,a political matter which could only disrupt 
the useful technical work of the Agency, 


47, ¥x, ZHMUDSKY ("Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
ending of nuclear tests and the prevention of an atomic vrar was an intensely 
serious problem which preoccupied hundreds of millions of human beings. Hone 
could deny that the question had two aspects? legal and moral, 

48. Although the Agency was not directly responsible for solving the problem 
of maintaining and strengthening peace, it was bound by its Statute to submit 
to the competent organs of the United Nations suggestions for the maintenance 
of peace and security in the world, Any action taken for the purpose of 
reducing non-peaceful uses of nuclear energy would make it easier for the 
Agency to discharge its essential task. That was the object of the Polish 
draft resolution, which called on the Agency to submit to the United Nations 
an apx^oal in full conformity with the Statute, 
As a


49• scientist, be had been very surprised at the statement of the United 
States delegate that the text under discussion was something other than an 
appeal by the Agency to the United Nations—' . The Ukrainian delegation no 
longer know what to believes the United States delegato either did not understand 
those matters or was pretending not to understand them, The Agency was 
the international organization which, more than any other, ought to appeal to 
the General Assembly.of the United Nations, the Security Council or any other 
United Nations organ when there was a danger to peace. During the general 
debate the United States delegate had stated that the Agency was not called 
upon to solve the question of a ban on nuclear tests and should fchereforo not 
appeal to the United Nations,—' His attitude was contrary to the most 
elementary rules of logic\ one might as well give up the attempt to settle 
any question in international organizations, since their decisions were taken 
only as a result of exchanges of opinions and in a spirit of compromise, and 
not by the representative of a single State, If the Agency adopted the 
principle proclaimed by the delegates of the United Statos and Canada, it would 
have to maintain a strange neutrality in the present case. In reality the 
attitude of those two countries was a serious obstacle to the maintenance of 
peace„ 

10/ GC(rv)/OR,42, paragraph 30. 



GC(IV)/OR,45 
pago 14 


50. The present question, however, also had a moral aspect. The scientists 
and. diplomats participating in the General Conference had a moral responsibility 
towards their own peoples. Before speaking against peace or turning the cold 
shoulder to it in an international tribunal, it was therefore necessary to 
weigh one's words carefully. 
51. The war had transformed entire cities and villages of the Ukraine and other 
countries into heaps of rubble. It had taken millions of victims everywhere. 
One could not, ono had no right to, forget the pastf the most sacred moral 
duty was to use every available moans for preventing a destructive atomic war. 
He was personally acquainted with the horrors of wars two irremovable bomb 
splinters were a physical reminder to him of the moral duty to fight for world 
peace. The Ukrainian delegation would bond every effort and use every possible 
moans to ensure that the way of peace was not chosen too late. It was convinced 
that history would condemn those who sought by procedural maneuvers 
to prevent others from making their contribution to the cause of international 
peace and security. All those who understood the deep moaning and true 
development of social progress in the world should give proof, not merely by 
words but also by deeds, that they belonged to the camp of peace and were 
prepared to fulfill their sacred duty towards humanity, 
52. Mr. LALL (India) said that the first question was whether the Polish 
draft resolution really came within the Agency's functions. In arguing that 
it did not, the Canadian delegate had cited the rejection of the Czechoslovak 
draft resolution at the third regular session. But since then, as was 
indicated in paragraph (a) of the Polish draft resolution, a new development 
had occurred which deprived that precedent of all validity, namely the 
unanimous adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of a resolution on 
the cessation of nuclear and thermonuclear tests. The decision for the discontinuance 
of those tests was therefore now part of United Nations policy. 
If. the Agency wished "to conduct its activities ,,. in conformity with the. 
policies of the United Nations" (Article III.B.l of the Statute) it should, as 
indicated in the very title of the Polish draft resolution, participate in 
international efforts to secure the prohibition of nuclear weapons. That 
prohibition would bo of real importance to the Agency, for it would much increase 
the amounts of nuclear material available for peaceful purposes. 

GC(IV)/OR.45 
x>^ lb 

53. He did not soo how the sponsors of the 5-POWQT motion could refuse to reaffirm 
a principle to which they had subscribed in the,General Assembly, whore 
the resolution he had mentioned- .'had 'boon adopted unanimously. Their attitudo 
was all the more surprising since the Polish draft resolution was a more exhortation, 
placing no blame or praise on anyone in connection with disarmament. 
54'. • The 5"Power motion asked the General Conference to note that the matters 
raised in the preamble and in paragraph 1 o'f the Polish draft resolution wore 
already under discussion in other international forums. The greater part of 
those provisions, however, merely restated clauses of the Statute, Certainly 
the question of nuclear tests was on the agenda for the current session of the 
General Assembly - it had boon placed there, incidentally, at India's request ~ 
but how could the Statute of the Agency bo discussed in other international 
bodies? 


55* It should not be forgotten that the Agency was not a specialized agency 
as defined in Article 57 of "the Unitod Nations Charter. At the Conference on 
the Statute the Western Powers had tried without success to make it a purely 
technical organization. It was the only member of the Unitod Nations family 
roquirod to forward reports directly to the General Assembly; precisely 
because its functions wore closely connected with the problem of international, 
poaco, It would be most appropriate if its next report to the United Nations, 
and if necessary a special report, could show that it had re-affirmed the 
policy of a nuclear test ban. 


56. The Indian delegation would thorofore vote for the- Polish draft resolution, 
.and appealed to the sponsors of the ^-TO-WQT motion to reconsider their 
position and not to provont the Conference from adopting that resolution, 
which was in no way a propaganda maneuver, 
57. Mr. PAVLUCHENKO (Byeloruss-i-arr Soviet Socialist Republic) said he 
could not recognize the validity of any of the procedural means by which 
certain delegations were attempting to prove that the draft resolution had 
no direct boaring on the Agency's activities. The Conference could make no 
bettor effort to achieve the Agency's noble aims than to appeal to the States 
at prcsont negotiating on the discontinuance of nuclear tests to conclude an 
agroomont for that purpose as soon as possible, A settlement of that question 
would help to make the Agency's activities more fruitful. 

GC(IV)/OR,45 
page 16 


58, At its fourteenth session1the United Nations General Assembly had unanimously 
adopted two extremely important resolutions? Resolution 1378 on general and 
complete disarmament, and Resolution 1402 on the suspension of nuclear and 
thermonuclear tests. It was therefore impossible, without violating the 
provisions of Article III of the Statute, to assert that the Polish draft 
resolution had no hearing on the basic problems raised by the Agency's present 
and future activities. 


59• The frightful destructive force of contemporary weapons, the unprecedented 
speed of the armaments race and the accumulation by' States of huge stocks of, 
mass-destruction weapons threatened the future of mankind. For that reason, 


•the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests would mark a first step towards a 
solution of the entire disarmament problem. 
60, The immediate cessation of nuclear weapons tests would also affect the 
very distant future, by eliminating the threat to mankind constituted by the 
harmful effects of ionizing radiation. 


61. For all those reasons the Byelorussian delegation considered it desirable 
and appropriate that the General Conference should adopt the draft resolution 
submitted by Poland. The prohibition of nuclear weapons would free the 
immense material, scientific and technical resources at present used for the 
production of means of mass destruction and make them available for the 
production of material goods, thus offering the Agency great opportunities for 
future activity. 
The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 



Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL 
GC(IV)/OR.46 


4 January 1961 


General Conference ENGLISH 

FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


Item of the 
agenda* 


7 
10 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Saturday, 1 October 1960., at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 


Welcome to a new Member (Colombia) 


Applications for membership of the Agency 


(continued from the 43rd meeting) 


General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1959-60 (continued from the 
45th meeting) 


Paragraphs 


1-2 


3 -8 


9-43 


* GC(IV)/130, 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev.3. 
60-6592 



GC(IV)/0E.46 
page 2 


WELCOME TO A NEW MEMBER (COLOMBIA) 


1. The PRESIDENT announced that on 30 September 1960 Colombia had 
deposited an instrument of ratification of the Statute with the depositary 
Government and had consequently become the seventy-third Member of the Agency 
on that date,, He welcomed the representative of Colombia, who was now 
present for the first time as the delegate of his country. 
2. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia) thanked the President and the General 
Conference for the welcome extended to his country and to himself personally. 
In ratifying the Statute, Colombia fully realized the responsibilities it 
was undertaking and hoped to be able to give satisfactory proof of its 
goodwill and faith in the Agency by participating whole-heartedly in the 
latterls activities over the coming years, 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (G0(lV)/l46, 147) (continued from 
the 43^d meeting) 


3. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider two new applications 
for membership, those of Senegal and Mali (GC(IV)/l46 and 147). 
4. Mr. FONTAINE (Prance) pointed out that during the past year the 
Government at Dakar had been kept in touch with the Secretariat's work by 
the French delegation. In the firm belief that Senegal would make a 
valuable contribution to the Agency's work, the French Government strongly 
supported its admission, 
5. He also urged the Conference to grant the application of Mali which, a 
few hours after its admission to the United Nations, had sent a telegram 
requesting that it be admitted to membership of the Agency. 
6. Mr, FOSTER (United States of America), Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics), Mr. MITRA (India), Mr. da COSTA (Portugal), 
Mr. EL ANNABI (Tunisia) and Mr. BREW (Ghana) associated themselves with the 
delegate of France in warmly supporting the applications of Senegal and Mali 
for Agency membership, 
7. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote on the two draft 
resolutions submitted by the Board recommending the approval' of Senegal and 
Mali for membership of the Agency, 
8. The two draft resolutions .were unanimously adopted. 

GC(IV)/0S.46 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1959-60 (G0(lV)/l26 
and Corr.1, 131, 148, 149/Rev.2) (continued from the 45 "th meeting) 


9. The PRESIDENT recalled the decision at the 42nd plenary meeting to 
discuss the Polish draft resolution covering the participation of the Agency 
in international efforts to secure the prohibition of nuclear weapons 
(GC(IV)/l3l) at a plenary meeting without reference to any committee-^. 
Since then, a motion and procedural proposal relating to the Polish draft 
resolution had been submitted jointly by Canada, France, Italy, the United 
Kingdom and the United States (GC(IV)/l48). Both documents were now open 
for discussion. 
10. Mr. DIMITRIU (Romania) said Romania believed that the Agency, under 
Articles II and III.B.l of the Statute, was not only fully authorized, but 
actually required to participate in international efforts to secure the 
prohibition of nuclear weapons, and that it would be failing in its duty if 
it did not do so. 
11. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) said he had no wish to pursue the 
history of the negotiations for an agreement on the suspension of weapons 
tests, which were, in fact, much more complicated than had appeared from what 
2/ 


had been said by the delegate of .the Soviet Union-7. Essential to any 
agreement on weapons tests and disarmament was the belief of all parties that 
it could be fully implemented. That belief could only be founded on a 
rational conviction that each party was fully prepared to discharge the 
obligations it undertook. That conviction could in turn be founded only on 
the acceptance by all parties of effective controls and inspection. 


12. As the British Prime Minister had said two days earlier to the United 
Nations General Assembly, the United Kingdom would gladly allow any form of 
inspection and control that was accepted by the Soviet Unionf the sacrifice 
of some sovereign rights was a small price to pay for peace. But words 
alone would not ensure peace. Disarmament, both nuclear and conventional, 
and the suspension of nuclear weapons tests were under discussion in other 
1/ GO(IV)/OR,42, paragraphs 36 and 37. 
2/ GO(IV)/OR.45, paragraphs 26 - 30. 



GO(IV)/OR.46 
page 4 


bodies specially set up for the purpose. With all due respect to the 


intelligence and knowledge of the delegates pre'sent, they involved problems 
which were outside the competence of the Conference, 


13o His delegation did not believe the negotiations on the suspension of 
tests or weapons tests had failed or were likely to fail. The discussions 
in Geneva had been resumed and the British representative had just made an 
important compromise proposal designed to overcome a major difference botv/een 
the parties. It would be neither wise nor diplomatic for the General 
Conference to adopt a draft resolution exhorting those taking part in the 
Geneva discussions to greater efforts, 


14. He therefore believed the Conference should proceed as it had done at 
the previous session, and for that reason had joined'with the delegations of 
Canada, France, Italy and the United States in submitting the motion and 
procedural proposal now before the Conference.15. 
Mr. LEE (China) said there could be no doubt that the United Nations 
was the only international body which could attempt to deal' with disarmament 5 
hence, the question could not legitimately be considered as coming within the 
Agency's terms' of reference or properly be the subject of a General Conference 
resolution. 
16. Mr. GAHEV (Bulgaria) recalled that his delegation had already 
expressed its views on disarmament during the general debate^. The Polish 
draft resolution did not suggest that the Conference could decide the 
discontinuance of nuclear weapon testing, but merely that it should join 
with others in demanding that nuclear weapons should be banned - a matter in 
regard to which the Agency could not remain indifferent. 
17. It was obviously difficult for the United States and the other States 
sponsoring the motion and procedural proposal to take an open stand against 
the desire of all mankind that nuclear tests should be outlawed5 that was 
why they were proposing on procedural grounds that the Polish draft resolution 
should not be considered, 
jj/ GO (IV)/OR.41, paragraph 42. 



GC(IV)/OR.46 
page 5 


18. His delegation considered the Conference could and should take an 
affirmative decision on the Polish draft resolutions the vote should he on 
the substance of the question, i.o, for or against a ban on nuclear tests, 
19. Mr. FURITCJCHI (Japan) strongly opposed any proposal that the Agency 
should engage in purely political activities, however meritorious they might 
be in themselves. Only by remaining aloof from such questions could it hope 
to achieve the praiseworthy aims embodied in its Statute. 
20. Mr. NAKICENOvTC (Yugoslavia) regretted the controversy which had 
arisen. It had been said that the Agency was a technical organization, not 
competent to deal with political matters. The distinction seemed illogical. 
The Agency's special responsibilities and the body of specialized knowledge 
it represented involved a clear duty to speak out. The safeguards policy 
adopted properly reflected an acknowledgement of that duty and formed a very 
useful precedent for the present case. The Agency was the organization best 
placed to emphasize the vast possibilities for developing the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy that would be released by disarmament3 in any event? it 
should leave nothing undone that might contribute to world peace. For those 
reasons, his delegation could not support the joint motion and procedural 
proposal. 
21. Mr. PIAH (Indonesia) said that as nuclear bomb tests had been 
carried out not very far from Indonesia, his. country had a special interest 
in the present discussion. The Polish draft resolution was fully in 
accordance with the spirit of Article III.B.l of the Statute and with the 
resolution recently submitted to the United Nations General Assembly by 
President Sukarno, Mr, Nehru and others. His delegation would vote against 
the motion and procedural proposal and in favor of the Polish draft resolution. 
22. Mr. LENDVAI (Hungary) said that several speakers had put forward 
excellent reasons why the Agency should make itself heard on the question of 
discontinuing nuclear weapons tests. The Indian delegate, among others., 
had clearly demonstrated the competence of the General Conference<, under the 
Agency's terms of reference, to adopt a resolution in the terms proposed by 
Poland—'. The Hungarian Government believed that the question was one that 
4/ GC(IV)/OR.45, paragraphs 52 - 56. 



GC(IV)/OR.46 
page 6 


fundamentally affected the Agency's ability to carry out its obligations 
under the Statute, since the very existence of nuclear weapons tests 
constituted a grave obstacle to the success of the Agency's work. 


23. He fully supported the Bulgarian delegate's comment that the attempts 
made to shelter behind objections of form showed that various delegations 
did not agree with the substance of the proposal5 in other words, they 
wished to leave the way open for continued atomic bomb tests. 
24. The confidence referred to by the United Kingdom delegate could only be 
attained by stages, but several delegations were refusing even the first step 
towards creating that confidence. The attitude Member States adopted 
towards the Polish proposal was the touchstone of their sincerity on the 
question of nuclear weapons tests. For its part, the Hungarian delegation 
strongly supported the Polish draft resolution and equally strongly opposed 
the joint motion and procedural proposal. 
25. Baron van LYNDEN (Netherlands) proposed that, in accordance with 
Rule 77 of the. Rules of Procedure, a vote should be taken on the motion and 
procedural proposal before the Polish draft resolution was voted upon. 
26. Article III.B.l of the Statute had been quoted more than once and, in 
his opinion, wrongly interpreted. Everyone agreed that the prohibition of 
atomic weapons would release vast resources for the peaceful exploitation of 
atomic energy, but the problems involved were political ones-and should 
accordingly be dealt with by the United Nations itself. 
27. Mr. KELLER-CONRAD (Poland) observed that all delegations agreed on 
the desirability of putting an end to nuclear weapons tests. The only real 
argument put forward against the Polish draft resolution vras that its subject 
matter was outside the Agency's terms of reference. He thought.that argument 
had already been successfully demolished by the delegate of India. 
28. It had been suggested that the draft resolution had been introduced for 
propaganda purposes. Ho thought no apology was necessary for propaganda in 
the cause of world peace and appealed to the sponsors of the motion and 
procedural proposal to withdraw them and support the Polish draft resolution. 
29. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote separately, by rollcall, 
first on the procedural proposal and then on the motion set forth in 
document G0(lV)/l48. 

GC(IV)/OR.46 
page 7 


JO, A roll-call vote was taken on the procedural proposal. 
The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, having been drawn by lot by 
the President, was called upon to vote first. 

The result of the vote was as follows? 
In favors Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, 
Prance, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Holy See, 
Iceland, Iran,, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Monaco, 
Netherlands, Nov/ Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, 
Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 
Turkey, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela, Vict-Nam, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil. 


Against % Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Poland, 
Romania, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, 
Bulgaria, Burma. 

Abstaining? Ethiopia, Tunisia, Ceylon. 


Jl. The procedural proposal was adopted by 42 votes to 16, with 3 abstentions. 


32. A roll-call vote was taken on the motion. 
The United Arab Republic, having boon drawn by lot by the President, 
was called upon to vote first. 


The result of the vote was as follows% 

In favor% Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Groat Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela, Viet-Nam, Argentina, 
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, 
Colombia, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, France, Federal Republic 
of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Holy See, Iceland, Iran, Italy, 
Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, 


GC(IV)/OR.46 
page 8 


Against? United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Burma," 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovak. Socialist 
Republic, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia,.Morocco, Poland, 
Romania, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, 


Abstainings Ceylon, Ethiopia, Tunisia. 


33• The motion was adopted by 41 votes to 16, with g abstentions. 


34. Mr. MELLER-COIffiAD (Poland) said that, notwithstanding the terms of 
the motion which had just been adopted, he wished the Polish draft resolution 
to be put to the vote, 
35. Mr, WERSHOF (Canada) moved, under the terms of Rule 77 of the Rules 
of Procedure, that no vote be taken on the Polish draft resolution. 
36. After a procedural discussion, the PRSSIDEM1 put the Canadian motion 
to the vote. 
57 • The Canadian motion was adopted by 39 votes to 15. with 5 abstentions. 


38. The PRESIDENT said that, under the terms of Rule 63 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he proposed to permit consideration of the draft resolution 
submitted jointly by Ethiopia, Ghana, Iraq, Morocco, Tunisia, the Union of ., 
South Africa and the United Arab Republic concerning equitable representation 
of the "Africa and Middle East" area on the Board of Governors (GC(IV)/l49/ 
Rev.2). 
39. Mr. EL AMABI (Tunisia) said that the substance'of the p'fopos'al was 
not new? it attempted to crystallize discussions which had been.going-on for 
a long time in the Board, The representation of Africa and the Middle East 
on the Board had beon inadequate from the outset and with the admission of 
new African States to membership of the Agency it had become even more so. 
There wore now 14 States from that area in the Agency, but apart from the 
Union of South Africa - which was nominated as a producer of source materials only 
one of them was represented on the Board. In his view, two further 
seats should be provided. 

GC(IV)/0E,46 
page 9 


40. He recalled that, at the Conference on the Statute, the Tunisian 
delegation had drawn attention to the inadequacy of African representation 
on the Board and the United States delegate had urged that no action should 
he taken until more African States had been admitted to the Agency. That 
had now taken place, and there was support in many quarters for removing 
the existing injustice and granting Africa the representation to which it 
was entitled. 
41. Mr. SINACEUR (Morocco) called on delegates to indicate by a 
unanimous vote that they wished the Board to give full consideration to the 
matter. 
42. The joint draft resolution (GC(IV)/l49/Rev.2) was unanimously adopted. 
45. Mr. SINACEUR (Morocco); on behalf of the sponsors, thanked the 
Conference for its unanimous vote. 
r-•


International Atomic Energy Agency 

Distr. 
GENERAL 
GC(IV)/OR.47 General Conference 5 January 1961 

ENGLISH 
FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Saturday, I October 1960, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
25 The matter of the grant of consultative 
status with the Agency to the World 
Federation of Trade Unions 
1-62 
12 The development of nuclear power 63 64 
5 Credentials of delegates to the fourth 
regular sessions 
(b) Report of the Credentials 
Committee (continued from the 
37th meeting) 
65 66 
27 Clotting of the session 61 76 


* GC(IV)/130. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IV)/INF/3l/Rev.3. 
6O-6596 



GC(IV)/OR.47 
page 2 


THE MATTER OF THE GRANT OF CONSULTATIVE STATUS WITH THE AGENCI TO THE WORLD 
FEDERATION OF TRADE UNIONS (G0(IV)/l28, 133? GC(IV)/INF/29) 


1. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia), introducing his delegation's draft 
resolution (GC(IV)/l33)> observed that the matter of the grant of consultative 
status to the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) was casting a shadow 
over the General Gonference and some of its positive results. That was not 
the fault of the socialist or neutral States,, but of the United States., whose 
attitude had been particularly discriminatory. 
2, He recalled the Conference resolution of 8 October 1959 > recommending 
the Board to reconsider the question of granting consultative status to WFTU. 
The United States had exerted strong pressure to persuade a majority of the 
Board to reject WFTU's application! at the meeting held in June 1960, it had 


succeeded, and the Board had taken a negative decision. The only supporting 
argument the United States had advanced was that no now factor had arisen which 
would justify reversing the Board's first, negative decision. A majority of 
the Board had sot a dangerous precedent, completely ignoring the Conference 
resolution and the fact that the Agency's highest authority had questioned the 
grounds for the previous decision, if not actually disapproving it. 


3. With regard to the principles involved,, there were three essential 
factors.le
First, WFTU satisfied all the conditions laid down in the Rules 
ss 
2 


on the Consultative Status of Non-Governmental Organizations with the Agencj 
It was an international non-governmental organization of world importance the 
oldest and largest trade union federation -with over one hundred million 
members, spread throughout most of the countries represented at the Conference. 


In particular? it organized thousands of the workers, technicians and 


scientists of atomic industries in many countries, It had declared its 
willingness to support the Agency, whose objectives and functions it recognized, 
and take part in Agency activities. It had on many occasions shown its 
interest in the peaceful uses of atomic energy* For instance, it had sent a 
delegation to the first United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy held in Geneva in August 1955?and an observer to the 
Conference on the Statute of the Agency, On 17 December 1959 it had set up 


1/ GC(III)/RES/47. 
2/ GC(II)/R3S/20, Annex. 



ftC(lv)/0?,-47 
page 3 


a trade union committee of experts on the peaceful uses of atomic energy,, 
mainly to study working conditions and health and safety problems? the 


committee's findings would doubtless be of considerable practical value to 


the Agency, 


4. Secondly, as consultative status had been granted to two far less important 
trade union organizations, i.e. the International Confederation of Free Trade 
Unions (ICFTU) and the International Federation of Christian Trade Unions (iFCTU), 
the refusal to grant it to WFTU seemed all the more unjustified, and constituted 
flagrant discrimination not only against WFTU, but more specifically against 
thousands of trade union members working in atomic industries. The political 
climate of the Agency and its practical work must necessarily suffer as a 
result of such discrimination. 
5. Thirdly, WFTU enjoyed consultative status with the United Nations and the 
main specialized agencies. Whenever it suited their convenience, certain 
Y/estern Powers proclaimed that the Agency should follow the example of the 
other United Nations organizations, but it was otherwise in the case of WFTU. 
The United States delegate claimed that Yi/FTU had changed in character since 
obtaining consultative status with the United Nations. That was not trues 
there had been no change in its principles, purposes or practical activities 
since its establishment in 1945* Nor could anyone deny the positive results 
of "fFTU's co-operation with the organizations which had granted it consultative 
status. 
6. For all -those - to him irrefutable - reasons, he asked, delegates to be 
objective and realistic and to respect the opinions of others, which was the 
very basis of international co-operation, 
7. The Czechoslovak draft resolution reproduced almost word for word the 
resolution on WFTU adopted by the General Conference at its third regular 
session. The preamble reiterated the main pertinent factsf the operative 
part was based on the views expressed at the third regular session and 
recommended the Board, yet again, to reconsider its position. 
8. The Conference could have been asked to take its own decision, but that 
would have meant amending the rules on the grant of consultative status. The 
Czechoslovak delegation had therefore opted for the alternatives a Conference 

GC(IV)/OR.47 
page 4 


recommendation, inviting the Board to take a positive decision. That 
recommendation was in conformity with the provisions of Article V.D of the 
Statute. He felt sure that delegations which really y/ished to represent the 
interests of the working people in their own countries, and which had a sense 
of law and justice and did not want an unfortunate political atmosphere in the 
Agency, would support his delegation's draft resolution, 


9. Mr. BMELYAHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Hcpublics) said that the 
grant of oonsultative status to WFTTJ was being considered by the Conference 
for a second time solely because of the discriminatory attitude adopted by 
the Board at the instigation of certain States. The Board had granted 
consultative status to 17 non-governmental organizations including ICPTU and 
IFCTU, neither of which could compare with WFTU in membership or international 
standing. The Soviet Union was opposed to discrimination in the Agency or in 
'
'' any other' organization, 


10. The Agency should be universal in character ~ that was why the Conference 
had drawn up the rules,on the consultative status of non-governmental organizations 
with the Agency. WFTU had been one of the first to apply for consultative 
status. It had then 95 million workers in 48 countries5 now it had 
over 100 million, in 70 countries,, including some which had just become 
independent. 
11. It was known that WFTU was much concerned with the -peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. It had sent a delegation to the first Geneva conference and an 
observer to the Conference on the Statute of the Agency. At its twentieth 
session, in 1959, the Executive Committee had set up a trade union committee 
of experts to encourage and co-ordinate trade union activities connected with 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. WFTU was prepared, through the Agency, to 
supply experts who could assist countries needing their particular qualifications, 
and could make a very appreciable contribution to the work of many of the 
Agency's scientific meetings. 
12. In fact, however, certain delegates did not even ask whether 7/FTU 
satisfied the essential conditions for consultative status with the Agency 
but opposed its grant because in their eyes it was guilty of fighting for 
peace and for the banning of nuclear weapons. The best proof of that was the 

GC(IT)/OR.47 
pago 5 


statement made to the Board by the Governor from the United States in July 1959 
when he had stated, without the slightest ambiguity;, the reasons for which it 
would be inexpedient to grant consultative status to '.TFTUs it was campaigning 
against war and for the reduction of armaments, the banning of atomic weapons 
and the utilization of atomic energy for exclusively peaceful purposes. 


13. Certain other delegations had claimed that the grant to WFTU of consultative 
status with the United Nations and certain specialized agencies did not 
constitute a precedent. But when it came to approving the credentials of the 
Chiang Kai-shek clique, they referred to the United Nations and insisted 
vehemently that its example must be followed - an attitude that could only be 
considered, not logical, but cynical, 
14. The United States' attitude was in the spirit of the cold war and dictated 
by certain circles in the United States which did not want any relaxation of 
international tension. 
15- His delegation fully supported the draft resolution submitted by 


Czechoslovakia with the object of settling at long last in a positive manner 


the question of granting consultative status with the Agency to WFTU. It 
only wished to repair the injustice which had been done to Y/FTU through the 
fault of the United States delegation. He hoped that the General Conference 
would show good sense and adopt the Czechoslovak draft resolution despite the 


efforts of the United States. 


16. Mr, FOSTER (United States of .America) said he would not reply to the 
accusations made against his Governmentj he would loave it to others to decide 
whether it was the United States which was responsible for continuing the cold 
war. Hor would he attempt to bring into true perspective the exaggerated 
claims that had been made on behalf of WFTU, 
17. The usefulness? and indeed the only point, of granting consultative status 
to any non-governmental organization lay in its ability to present an 
independent point of view. As at present constituted,, WFTU could not claim 
to be an independent international association of trade unions? it was an 
instrument of the foreign policy of the Government of one country which it 
served as a political propaganda machine. To be convinced of that fact it 
was only necessary to refer to the records of the discussions of tire WFTU 

GC(IV)/OR.47 
page 6 


General Council, which had met in Peking in June 1960,' Those records were 
full of•political invective against the United States Government and against 
the Governments of most States Members of the Agency. Thoy contained 
inflammatory statements encouraging subversion and violence, which were 
contrary to the interests of the Agency, whoso primary 'concern was the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy. Several oxcorpts - which he quoted - from the 
records of the WFTU General Council illustrated those points. It was on that 
basis that the United States maintained that WFTU was not, under the Agency's 
rules, a legitimate non-governmental organization. Again, because of its 


subversive political activities in the territories of two Member States, WFTU 
had been"asked to withdraw its headquarters, first from ono and then from the 
other. A legitimate trade union association would not have been engaged in 

such improper activities, 


18. The fact that WFTU had at one time boon grantod consultative status with 
the United Nations or with specialized agencies.was irrelevant and should not 
affect the decision of the Conference in any way. That status had been 
granted at a time when many Governments wore still inclined to give WFTU the 
benefit of the doubt in the matter of its standing as a legitimate labor 
organization. Its true character had meanwhile become clear, 
19. It had been called illogical, discriminatory, and ovon a violation of the 
Statute to grant consultative status, to other, trade union organizations and 
deny it to WFTU. That argument was itself illogical% it was nowhere provided 
that consultative status must automatically bo granted to all organizations 
which applied for it. The Statute merely stated - in Article XVI.A - that 
the Board, with the approval of the Conference, was authorized to establish. 
an appropriate relationship with any organizations the work of which was 
related to that of the Agency, On the basis of those provisions, the Board 
and the Conference had jointly approved a set of rules to govern relations 
between the Agency and non-governmontal organizations. Those rules provided 
that the Board should differentiate ~ or, if it wore preferred, discriminate between 
applicants to whom it would be in the interest of the Agency to grant 
consultative status and applicants whose admission would not serve the Agency's 
interest5 they nowhere provided that if one organization satisfied the desired 
conditions the Board must automatically accord the same treatment to any other 
organization which claimed to represent similar interests. 



GC(IV)/OR.47 


20. He could not agree that the resolution adopted at the third regular 
session implied a criticism of the Board or a request that it go hack on its 
decision of 1959. To he convinced that he was right it was only necessary 
to refer to the statements made at that time by the delegates of the United 
Kingdom, Canada,, and Pakistan, and even hy the delegate of the Soviet Union. 
21. In conclusion, be reaffirmed his Government's position with regard to 
WFTUs it was an organization whose aims and purposes did not conform with the 
spirit, purposes and principles of the Agency% it was ahle neither to represent 
the interests of workers independently, nor to provide an independent, as 
distinct from a governmental, point of view? it woxild make no constructive 
contribution to the Agency's work. WFTU did not satisfy the conditions laid 
down in paragraph 2 of the rules on consultative status, and hence could not 
be granted that status. 
22. The Board had twice rejected the application of WFTU hy an overwhelming 
majority. It was a carefully considered and fully justified decision which 
the Conference should uphold hy rejecting the Czechoslovak draft resolution, 
2J. Mr. HOVACU (Romania) observed that the Board had granted consultative 


status, without opposition, to 17 non-governmental organizations, two of which 
were trade union organizations. Only WFTU had been refused, and for obviously 
political reasons, although it was the largest world-wide organization of 
workers? the refusal was due to those who nover ceased repeating that the 
Agency should bo an exclusively technical "organization. 


24. When it suited them, the same delegations maintained that the Agency should 
follow the practice of the other United Nations organizations. Why not then 
follow the example of the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the International Labour 
Organisation (lLO) all of which had granted consultative status to 77FTU? 
25. The only valid criterion must be whether WFTU satisfied the conditions laid 
down in the rules on consultative status, in particular paragraph 2 thereof. 
By adopting Resolution GC(lIl)/RES/47, "the General Conference had expressly 
recognized that "the 7/orld Federation of Trade Unions recognizes the objectives 
and functions of the International Atomic Energy Agency and declares its support 
for the practical work of the Agency". Moreover, the Executive Committee of 
WFTU had established a committee of experts to study health and safety problems 
affecting workers in atomic industry. 

GC(l?)/OR.A7 
page 8 


26. His delegation therefore unreservedly supported the Czechoslovak draft 
resolution. 
27. Mr. PAVLUCHEIKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) reminded 
the Conference that WFTU represented 100 million trade unionists in 70 
countries, working in the most diverse occupations including; in many, countries, 
atomic energy industries. 
28. Contrary to the spirit of the Conference resolution adopted at the third 
regular session, the majority of the Board - to koop in step with the United 
States which, for political and ideological reasons, was opposed to WFTU - had 
once again taken a discriminatory decision. 
29. The United States' efforts to prove that the WTTU program was not in 
conformity with the aims and principles of the Agency could not he taken 
seriously. That program was, in fact, in full accord with the Agency's 
objectives and functions as laid down in its Statute, Moreover, WFTU 
supported Agency activities, not by empty words, but by practical action. In 
1949j well before the Agency's establishment, the control of atomic energy in 
order to ensure its use for exclusively peaceful purposes had been an item in 
the WFTU program. At its fourth Congress, in 1956, WFTU had set up a 
committee of exports and workers qualified in radiation protection^ in 
Decembor 1959, ab its twentieth session, the Exocutivo Committee had decided 
to establish a trado union committee of experts on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
30. Since the Agency had been set up WFTU, in official communications, had 
frequently expressed its desire to co-operate with a view to improving working 
and living conditions for workers| and likewise its desire to participate in 
the Agency's work and consult on questions affecting the working masses, 
especially those employed in atomic industry. Its co-operation v/ould also be 
valuable because of the fact that no other trado union organization included 
so many scientific workers. 
31. During the. fifteen years it had. existed, WFTU had received a wide measure 
of international recognition. It was a world organization which enjoyed 
consultative status with the United Nations, UNESCO, ILO and FAO. Why, then, 
could it not be granted consultative status with the Agency? 

GC(IV)/OR.47 
pu.g'0 9 


32. His delegation believed the Conference should,, at the present session, 
take the decision proposed in the Czechoslovak draft resolution. 
33. Mr. SEBES (Hungary) thought that the Board's refusal to grant 
consultative status to WFTU was contrary to the spirit of Resolution GC(lIl)/RES/47. 
In referring the question back, the Conference had obviously expected the Board 
to take an affirmative decision. The fact that it had not done so was mainly 
the fault of the Governor from the United States,, though he would have found 
it very difficult to support his opposition by valid argumonts. 
34. Many United Nations organizations had to their own profit granted 
consultative status to WFTU, For example, at the forty-fourth International 
Labour Conference, the WFTU representative had played an active and constructive 
part in the discussions which led to the adoption of the proposed recommendations 
concerning the protection of workers against ionizing radiations. Why was the 
Agency reluctant to obtain similar co-operation? 
35• I"t was stated in paragraph 2 of the Annex to the Board's report 


(GC(IV)/INF/29) that WFTU was "not, in fact, able to represent the interests 


of workers or to state an independent, as distinct from a governmental, point 


of view". How could it be claimed that an organization which grouped over 
100 million trade unionists in 70 countries did not represent the interests of 
its members? The opposition to WFTU was really ideological. The Conference, 
however, should base its decisions on the Statute and any relevant Agency rules, 
not on the ideological positions of certain delegations. WFTU satisfied the 
prescribed conditions^ the Conference should repair an injustice, and now at 
long last grant WFTU the status it applied for. 


36. Mr. FURUUCHI (Japan) said his delegation's position on the matter 
under discussion had never changed. Did WFTU satisfy the criteria laid down 
by the Agency? In particular, were its aims and purposes in conformity with 
those of the Agency? After carefully weighing what had been said about the 
activities of WFTU, be was still satisfied that they did not. WFTU was a 
political organization dedicated to the infiltration of communist ideas into 
the free world, whereas the Agency's task was to promote the technical 
applications of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. His delegation therefore 
considered it would be neither right nor sensible to adopt the Czechoslovak 
draft resolution. 

GC(.TV)/OR.47 
page 10 


37, Mr. DOBREV (Bulgaria) said it was clear from the statements of the 
delegations which opposed the grant of consultative status to WFTU that their 
grounds were solely ideological and political since they had no real data to 
adduce. The fact that WFTU constantly campaigned for peace, for the cessation 
of nuclear weapons tests, for complete and universal disarmament and against 
colonialism and imperialism was no argument against granting it consultative 
status. Many delegations attending the Conference represented States which 
were working actively for peace and complete disarmament5 but that certainly 
did not prevent them being active Members of the Agency. 


38. The Bulgarian delegation appealed to the Conference to end the discrimination 
exercised against WFTU at the instigation of the Western Powers, in 
particular the United Statesf it would vote in favor of the Czechoslovak 
draft resolution. 
39. Mr. ROCHAHAPURANAHM (Thailand) thought that the Board must have 
had good reasons for twice refusing consultative status to WFTU, WFTU was 
not what it claimed to be and its aims were unrelated to those of the Agency. 
Ho would not prolong a discussion which should never have taken place and was 
only a pretext for making political propaganda. He would only remind, the 
Conference that WFTU had attacked the United Nations a few years before for 
having gone to the help of Korea, and was still attacking it. His delegation 
would vote against the Czechoslovak,draft resolution. 
40, Mr. WERSHOF (Canada) said his delegation would vote against the draft 
resolution, submitted by Czechoslovakia. Ho regretted the differences of 
opinion that had arisen, but they were sincere and had their origins outside 
the Conference. The role of Y/FTU in the discussions at present dividing the 
communist countries from the Western democracies was so polemical and partial 
that it could not be regarded as a trade union organization independent of 
government control. At its congress in Poking in Juno 1960, WFTU had done 
nothing to dispel the impression that it. was governed by factious political 
intorests. Canada hoped to keep the Agency free from such disruptive 
influences5 it seriously doubted the advisability of granting consultative 
status to WFTU, and was not prepared to support the application. 



ac(iv)/oa.47 
page 11 


41. HG challenged the interpretation some delegates had placed on Resolution 
GC(lIl)/RES/47. That resolution said exactly what it meant and no morcf 
it did not indicate that the Board should reach any particular conclusion 
after its reconsideration of WFTU's application. 
42. Mr, ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said his delegation 
unreservedly supported the Czechoslovak draft resolution. He had only one 
point to add to the arguments already advanced; it was of vital importance to 
millions of workers that the Agency should do everything in its power to raise 
their standards of living, promote scientific research and draw up regulations 
to protect the health of all whose work involved atomic energy. Those wore 
the sectors which offered the best opportunities for technical co-operation 
between WFTU and the Agency. 
43. The proposal of the United States and Canadian delegates not to grant 
consultative status to WFTU was wholly political in inspiration. Both those 
delegates showed excessive seal in their defense of law and order, but thoir 
methods were unworthy., going so far as to violate the most elementary rules 
of propriety. Their advocacy of collaboration was all the more loud in order 
to conceal thoir intention of avoiding it in practice. 
44. If the Agency was really to become a groat international forum., its policy 
must be, not to discriminate; but to develop relatione with all international 
organizations. His delegation sincerely hoped the question of granting 
consultative status to W3TTU would be decided affirmatively, 
45, HIT. MoKMGHT (Australia) dcpl ored the present discussion, following 
as it did so many fruitful scientific and technical discussions. The application 
of WFTU was political in origin, since the organization &&& no real interest 
in the Agency's work. The fact that other international organizations had 
granted it consultative status was no argument why the Agency should do likewise? 
that had happened ten years ago, and the circumstances had changed. 
The decision taken at the third session to refer the matter back to the Board 
had been a procedural decision which in no way prejudged the principle 
involved. The.Board's decision had again boon negative and there the matter 
should rest. His delegation therefore opposed the Czechoslovak draft 
resolution. 



GC(IV)/0E.47 
page 12 


46. Mr. WARDROP (United Kingdom) said his delegation was against 
granting consultative status to WFTU, not simply because of its communist 
ideology - whatever anxieties his delegation might fool regarding that ideology 
and the resultant policy - but rather because of its true nature:.and 
activities, WFTU was not a non-governmental organisation5 it was in roality 
-a governmental organization under the orders of Soviet leaders whose avowed 
object was universal communism, and had its tactical role to play within their 
grand strategy. It was an instrument of political, social, industrial and 
psychological warfare, designod to infiltrate the non-communist world and 
undermine its foundations. 


47• When WFTU had obtained consultative status with the United Nations and 


several specialized agencies, it had still had, at any rate on the surface, a 
univorsal character. It had brought independent trade unions together with 
those of communist allegiance, and who could toll what benefits such a body 
might have brought to mankind? But in 1949 the froo trado unions, frustrated 


in their efforts to establish sincere collaboration without ulterior motives, 


had had no option but to withdraw and form their own association, the 


International Confederation of Froo Trade Unions (ICFTU), 


48. The supporters of WFTU wished to give the impression that the refusal to 
admit that organization was duo to some plot hatched by a reactionary capitalist 
clique. The reality was very different. British workers were free to express 
their opinions and to choose their own line of conduct. In 1958 a motion had 
boon submitted to the Trade Union Congress calling for the resumption of 
contacts with WFTUj that motion had been rejected by a large majority5 in 
1959 a similar motion had boon rejected by an overwhelming majority, and in 
1960 no such motion had boon submitted. In 1959 the spokesman of the' Council 
of the Trade Union Congress had said in effect that the Council, though in no 
way engaged in an anti-communist campaign, was bound to recognize that WFTU, 
as an instrument of the Communist Party and Governments, had nothing in^ 
common with the International Confederation of Free Trado Unions which was an 
independent organization, responsible only to the unions. The United Kingdom 
delegation, though entitled to speak only for its own country, could not help 
fooling that that statement by the authorized representative) of the British 
workers would be widely acclaimed throughout the world. 

GC(IV)/0E.47 
page 13 


49. Without any desire to score debating points, still loss to pass judgment 
on anyone's sincere beliefs, the United Kingdom delegation was therefore 
compelled by the facts of the case to vote against the grant of consultative 
status to WFTU. 
50. Mr. SPAWIDBS (Greece) said that, after very carefully studying the 
Board's report on the application for consultative status submitted by WFTU, 
his delegation had decided to vote against the Czechoslovak draft resolution. 
51. The attitude of his delegation was based on a number of considerations. 
In the first place, the reasons put forward by WFTU in support of its application 
had not convinced the Greek delegation of the justice of that application. 
It was clear from the letter addressed by WFTU to the Board that the ideas 
underlying it wore contrary to those of the majority of States Members of the 
Agency, and that the participation of WFTU in the work of the Agency would bo 
calculated to hinder it in the performance of its functions, the most important 
of which was to expedite the contribution of atomic energy to peace. To grant 
consultative status with the Agency to WFTU would be a political act which the 
majority of Member States could not accept. It was true that WFTU enjoyed 
consultative status with the United Nations and with several specialized 
agencies, but the United Nations was a universal organization, whereas the 
Agency, by its very nature, was restricted. 
52. Another consideration which determined the attitude of the Greek delegation 
was a moral one. It could not be forgotten that WFTU had accused the United 
Nations forces fighting in Korea of resorting to bacteriological warfare - an 
accusation which had been fully disproved, 
53. The Greek delegation regretted to note that each year the Conferonce 
wasted valuable time in a sterile political debate on the question under • 
consideration. It could put its time to bettor use by tackling the great 
tasks before it. 
54. Mr. MELLER-CONRAD (Poland) said his delegation supported the 
Czechoslovak draft resolution all the more strongly because it had boon 
instrumental in having the question of the grant of consultative status to 
WFTU placed on the agenda. To deny that status to the most important trade 
union organization in the world would bo a shamefully discriminatory and 

GC(IV)/OR.47 
page 14 ' 


outrageously arbitrary measure, from which both, the work and the reputation 
of the Agency would suffer. In the middle of the twentieth century, when the 
working class was advancing triumphantly, the Conference ?/ould be acting like 
the British House of Commons had done at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century, waiting till 1825 before it recognized the legal existence of the 
trade unions. The United Kingdom delegate had spoken of the freedom enjoyed 
by British workers, but it should not be forgotten that they had won that 
freedom by blood and tears. 


55* Ho categorically denied the United States statement that WFTU was the 
instrument of a Government. On the other hand, the United States delegate 
should know that the French Government had recently had to take action against 
the European representative of the American Federation of Labor, whoso 
activities were injuring French interests. For the benefit of what Government 
was he-hatching plots in a foreign country? 


56, The number of workers employed in atomic industry was continually 


increasing, A largo proportion of those workers wore affiliated to WFTU, 


and they should, in justice and equity, have a say in the preparation of 
Agency measures which would directly concern them. 


57• The trade unions of many Member States were internationally represented 
by WFTU alone. Were they to bo denied the right to make their voices hoard 
in the Agency when they were so usefully collaborating with other international 
bodies - ILO in particular? That would be like going back to the practices 
of the Inquisition, whereas the Agency had been established to put the atom at 
the service of all mankind, 


58. The workers of JO countries wore watching the Conference, and they would 
call the delegates of their respective Governments to account. He was a trade 
unionist himself, and was proud to belong to WFTU5 be urged delegates to show 
understanding and to accord WFTU its statutory, legal and political right to 
consultative status with the Agency, 
59> Mr. DIAH (Indonesia) recalled that during the general discussion his 
delegation had supported the principle of universality. If the Agoncj was to 
accomplish its allotted tasks, it must accept all offers of co-operation, 
WFTU enjoyed consultative status with the United Nations and with several 


GC(IV)/OR_._47 
page 15 


specialized agencies. It subscribed to the aims and purposes of the Agency, 
and had indicated its support for the Agency's practical work. Hence the 
Indonesian delegation saw no reason to reject WFHJ's application for consultative 
status and would vote for the Czechoslovak draft resolution. It urged 
all delegations to put questions of prestige aside and to base their decision 
solely on practical considerations. 


60. The PRESIDENT put the Czechoslovak draft resolution (GC(IV)/l33) to 
the vote. 
61. 
The draft resolution was rejected by 34 votes to 17-> with 6 abstentions. 
62. Mr. URANOVICZ (Hungary) deeply regretted the result of the vote just 
taken. He was glad to note, however, that the discussions had confirmed the 
bankruptcy of the arguments advanced by the United States delegate. • Despite 
the rejection of its application, WFTU would continue its fight against 
monopolies and against the oppression of the working classes. The decision 
just taken by the Conference was not in the best interests of the Agency. 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLEAR POWER (G0(IV)/l22, 123, 144) 


63. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to examine item 12 of the 
agenda. The relevant report of the Programme, Technical and Budget 


Committee 
(GC(IV)/l44) 
contained a draft resolution which the Committee 
recommended to the General Conference for adoption, 


64. 
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE FOURTH REGULAR SESSION 


(b) 
REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(IV)/l29, 150) (continued from 
the 37th meeting) 
65. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the second report of the Credentials 
Committee (GC(l7)/l50) was a simple statement of facts. The draft resolution 
which the Committee recommended to the Conference for adoption appeared on 
page 2 of the report. If there was no objection he would take the draft 
resolution as being adopted unanimously. 
66. 
It was so decided. 

GC(IV)/OR,47 
page 16 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


67. Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), speaking on 
behalf of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary, Poland, Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Soviet 
Union, congratulated the President on the excellent manner in which he had 
conducted the discussions during the present session of,the General Conference. 
Thanks to the President's personality, and to the gT'asp, tact and patience be 
had shown during the Conference, it had boon possible to overcome many 
difficulties - sometimes major ones. On behalf of all the delegations 
montioned he also thanked the Secretariat for providing the technical services 
essential to the work of the Conference. 
6d. Mr. NAKICBNOVIC (Yugoslavia) congratulated the President on the 
constructive atmosphere he had succeeded in creating in the Conference, The 
program for 1961 showed that the Agency's approach was now more realistic, and 
the Yugoslav delegation hoped its work would be successful. For its part, 
Yugoslavia would continue to support the Agency in all activities relating to 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

69. Mr. BDELSTAM (Sweden), on behalf of the delegations from Western 
Europe, and Mr. ROCHANAPURANANDA (Thailand), on behalf of the delegations from 
South-East Asia and the Far East, Mr. BREW (Ghana), on behalf of the delegations 
of Australia, Canada, Ceylon, India, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Union of South 
Africa and the United Kingdom, Mr. HINDAWI (Iraq.), on behalf of the delegations 
of the Arab countries, and Mr, LUJAN (Venezuela), on behalf of the delegations 
of the Latin American countries and the United States, congratulated the 
President on the skill with which he had conducted discussions that had sometimes 
been difficult, and thanked him for having brought the work of the 
Conference to a successful conclusion. They also expressed their gratitude 
to the Vice-rPresident:, the Director General and all members of the Secretariat 
who had contributed to the success of the session. 
70. The' PRESIDENT thanked the delegations, but stressed that the session 
could not have been brought to a successful conclusion if it had not been for 
the indefatigable efforts of the Director Genoral, the members of the General 
Committee, the Secretariat and all Agency staff. lie again thanked the 
Austrian Government and the Vienna Municipal Authorities for their co-operation 

GC(IV)/0E.47 
page 17 


and generous hospitality, and expressed his gratitude to the representatives 
of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and intor-govornmcntal 
organizations and to the observers for non-governmental organizations! he 
hopod that the international organizations already granted consultative status 
by the Agency would soon bo joined by others. Ho likewise offered his thanks 
to the representatives of the Press and other information media who had worked 
to keep the public informod of the progress of the work of the General 
Conference. 


71. The Conference had disposed of all the items on its agenda. It had 
adopted some resolutions unanimously. Others, and in particular those dealing 
with controversial questions., had been adopted by simple majority, but it was 
precisely in regard to such questions that unanimity was especially desirable. 
The scientific and technical character of the Agency could not of course be 
neglected, but neither could the fact be ignored that fundamental discoveries 
in nuclear physics had not boon utilized for the purposes scientists had had 
in making them, but exploited by certain political circles for destructive ends. 
As it was difficult to separate technical problems from political problems, 
scientists and politicians must co-operate. Insofar as the fourth session of 
the General Conference had resulted in a better understanding of the need for 
such co-operation on an international scale, it would have contributed to the 
subsequent development of the Agency as an intor-govornmental organization • 
responsible for creating a climate favorable to the peaceful development of 
atomic energy, 
72. He hopod that the future work of the Board would be fruitful, and that 
delegates, on their return home, would spare no effort that might assist the 
Agency in the noble task of placing a/tomic energy at the exclusive service of 
human welfare and world peace, 
73• He felt sure the Agency would overcome its present difficulties and that 
its future accomplishments would be even more satisfactory. 



GO(IV)/OR.47 
page 18 


74. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure; he invited the 
delegates to observe one minuto of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
75• All present rose and stood in silence for pno minuto. 

76, The PRESIDENT then declared closed the fourth regular session of 
the General Conference. 


The meeting rose at 6.1J3 p.m. 



