International Atomic Energy Agency GC(V)/OR.48 
20 November 1961 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FORTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 26 September 1961, at 10.35 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) 
President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 


agenda* Paragraphs 
1 - Opening of the session 1-11 
2 Election of the President 12 - 23 
3 Credentials of delegates to the 


fifth regular session 


(a) Appointment of the Credentials 
Committee 24 - 25 
4 Election of the Vice-President: 26 - 30 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 31 - 36 
6 Applications for membership of the 
Agency 37 - 67 
7


 Statement by the Director General 68 - 94 


* GC(V)/152 and Add.1, 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(v)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5869 



GC(v)/ORo48 
page 2 


OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared open the fifth regular session of 
the General Conference2. 
In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
Conference to observe one .minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
Referring to the tragic death of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
he believed the Conference would wish to express its profound sorrow and 
convey its sympathy to the families of the victims of the accident, which had 
plunged the United Nations into mourning. 
3. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed all delegates of Member States, 
observers from other States, and representatives of the United Nations and 
of the inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations. He thanked 
the Federal Chancellor of Austria, the President of the National Assembly, 
the members of the Austrian Government and senior Austrian officials who had 
graciously consented to attend the opening of the session. 
5. During the four years which had elapsed since the establishment of the 
Agency, 76 States had, by becoming Members, testified to its usefulness. 
There was every reason to believe that in the very near future a number of 
other States, including Members and non-Members of the United Nations, would 
jjoin the ranks of the Agency. Atomic energy constituted a powerful force, 
which could make a mighty contribution to the- preservation of peace and the 
promotion of prosperity throughout the world. 


6. The positive results achieved Vy the Agency should not be forgotten, 
particularly in the organization of scientific meetings, the supply of 
technical assistance to developing countries, the organization of regional 
training courses in the uses of radioisotopes, the exchange of information, 
and regulatory activities. It was true, however, that much remained to be 
done, as the Board of Governors had stated in the introduction to its annual 
report to the General Conference—'. The Agency had not been able to carry out, 
to the satisfaction of all, a. considerable number of functions laid down 
in Article III of its Statute. 
l/ GC(V)/154, paragraph 1.. 



GC(V)/0E.48 
page 3 


7. Important results could be achieved provided international co-operation 
continued to grow. Nobody could doubt the usefulness of organizations like 
the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) or the Joint Institute 
for Nuclear Research at Dubna. Similar co-operation could be achieved 
in other parts of the world. Co-operation between the more advanced countries 
would serve to give a new impetus to nuclear research and to solve the problem 
of controlled fusion of light elements, thus making vast power resources 
available to mankind. By ever intensifying its efforts in that direction, 
the Agency could encourage the further development of research and the 
application of scientific discoveries. To achieve that purpose required 
considerable effort and a spirit of goodwill on the part of all Member States, 
particularly the Great Powers. 
8. It was regrettable that all the resources available were not used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes. Too many resources were still devoted to 
the production of nuclear, weapons, which was still growing, whereas existing 
weapons had for long been sufficient to hurl the world to its doom. Mankind 
was much more aware of the destructive potentialities of atomic energy than 
of its constructive possibilities. There was, however, a close link between 
those two aspects. Unfortunately, at the Conference, or in the Board, some 
people were afraid to face the problems involved and made no effort to find 
a reasonable solution. 
9. In view of the grave situation now existing in the world^ the international 
authority of the Agency would be considerably enhanced if the 
Conference were to make an appeal against the use of atomic energy for 
military purposes. By doing so, it would be following the example set 
by the General Assembly of the United Nations when it had, on 20 November 1959? 
adopted a resolution on general and complete disarmament which called for 
2/ 
the banning of nuclear weapons—'. -"


2/ Resolution 13?8(XIV), 



GC(V)/OR,48 
page 4 


10. The break-up of colonial empires and the emergence of newly independent 
States were extremely important events. The role and importance of those 
new States should be reflected in the structure of the Agencys it was 
logical that the governing body of the Agency should include representatives 
of those countries which had the greatest need of assistance in using atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. It was likewise desirable that the Agency 
should hold more frequent consultations with the representatives of countries 
in which scientific research was being carried out. The problems that were 
the subject of such research wore highly complex and their rapid solution 
could be found by combining the efforts of all. 
11. He expressed the hope that the fifth regular session of the Conference 
would be successful and that atomic energy would be used exclusively to 
enlarge the prosperity of mankind. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


12. Mr. MITRA (India) nominated Mr. Quihillalt (Argentina) for the 
office of President of the Conference. Mr. Quihillalt, who occupied the 
high office of Chairman of the Argentine National Atomic Energy Commission, 
was well known to'the Member States of the Agency, in the establishment of 
which he had played an active part. In view of his talents, ability and 
devotion to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he was clearly fitted to 
assume the office of President. 
13. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia) warmly supported the proposal by the 
delegate of India. Mr. Quihillalt possessed remarkable organizing ability 
and had made a considerable contribution to the development of nuclear 
research in Argentina. Furthermore, his election would be a fitting tribute 
to the Latin American countries, which were devoting all their efforts to 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
14. Mr. NOVAC0 (Romania) stated that his delegation supported the 
nomination of Mr. Quihillalt. 
15. Mr. SEAEORG (United States of America) emphasized that Mr. Quihillalt, 
in the various posts he had filled, had always been greatly esteemed for his 
courtesy, the soundness of his judgment and his deep knowledge of the problems 
at issue. In appointing him to the Presidency, the Conference would be 
doing no more than recognizing his merits. 

GC(v)/OR.4'8 
page 5 


16. Mr. Quihillalt (Argentina) was, by acclamation, elected President of the 
General Conference for its fifth regular session. 
17. Mr. Quihillalt (Argentina) took the Chair. 
18. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for the honor which they had 
done to his country and to himself. The task with which he had boon entrusted 
was difficult in itself, hut seemed all the more so in view of the 
exemplary fashion in which, his predecessors had discharged it. 
19. In the name of the Conference, he expressed his gratitude to Mr- Hadjakov, 
the delegate of Bulgaria, who had so brilliantly filled the office of President 
at the fourth regular session. Ho thanked the Austrian Government and the 
Municipality of Vienna for the generous hospitality extended to the Conference. 
20. The fifth regular session marked the end of four years of the Agency's 
work. During the work of drafting the Statute, great hopes had been entertained 
regarding the Agency's capacity satisfactorily to carry out the tasks 
to he assigned to it, hut certain doubts had also been expressed in that 
connection. Although it had now to be admitted that the economic exploitation 
of atomic energy had not developed as quickly as expected and that the 
funds voluntarily contributed to the Agency by Member States had not reached 
the desired level, there could be no disappointment with the Agency's 
achievements. It should be given credit, in particular, for the considerable 
assistance which it had provided in many directions. 
21. The course followed up to the present had not always been the one 
expected^ in some respects that was to be regretted, but in others it was 
a matter for congratulation. Reference should be made to the moral support 
afforded by the Agency, the value of which could bo fully appreciated only 
by those who were working in circles which wore'not particularly distinguished 
for their understanding of atomic problems. The mere establishment of the 
Agency had made it possible for many who were conscious of the importance 
and urgency of developing the uses cf atomic energy to obtain resources 
and facilities of which they would otherwise have been deprived. The Agency 
also engendered a much needed optimism and brought a welcome stimulus to 
numerous scientists working in isolation in various parts of the world. 

GC(V)/0E.48 
page 6 


22. For all those reasons it had to he recognized that the efforts made and 
the resources invested had not boon lost. All those who had benefited, in 
one way or another? from the work of the Agency fully appreciated the personal 
and material contributions which had made that work possible. 
23o He wished to express his faith in the future of the Agency and was 
confident that he was speaking for all Member States in emphasizing the 
value of the benefits which had been obtained from it already and of the 
further benefits which could be expected from the programs of technical 
assistance? research contracts, exchange and training? health protection? 
evaluation of nuclear power prospects and so on. He firmly believed that the 
Agency would be able progressively to carry out all the tasks which had been 
assigned to it and? in conformity with its Statute? to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace? health and prosperity throughout 
the world. 


CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE FIFTH REGULAR SESSIONS 


(a) APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 
24. The PRESIDENT proposed that the Credentials Committee should be 
appointed immediately in accordance with Rule 23 of the Rules of Procedure 
and should consist of representatives of the following States% Colombia? 
El Salvador? France, Lebanon, Romania? Thailand, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics? the United Arab Republic and the United. States of America. 
25. The proposal was unanimously adopted. 
The meeting was suspended at 11.23 a.m. and resumed ax 11.55 a.m. 


JLJCTION OF TH~J VIC'J-PRJSIDL'KTS 


26. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the eight Vice-President:. 
27. Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) nominated the following Statess France? Ghana? 
India? Indonesia? Japan? Tunisia? the Union of Soviet Socialist 'Republics 
and the United States of America. 
28, Four of those States had already taken part in the preparatory work 


for the establishment of the Agencyi the others had always taken the 


keenest interest in its work. 


29. Mr. BITTENCOURT (Brazil) seconded the nominations. 
30° The States nominated wore elected to the eight Vice-Presidencies. 



page 7 


APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


31. . - The.PRESIDENT said that, to comply with Rule 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure, the Conference had to elect four additional members of the General 
0ornsittoc. He.invited nominations. 
3?° Mr. '-JUKI (Japan) nominated the following States2 Canada, Chile,' 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and Yugoslavia, 


33* Mr. SINACEUR (Morocco) seconded the nominations. 


34* The- States nominated were elected to the Gcncra.1 Committee and the 
Committee itself duly appointed in compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 
of the Rules of Procedure. 


35. Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) noted that the 
General Committee had the following compositions The President of the 
.General Conferences the eight Vice-President:, the two President: of the main 
Committees and four other members. What did they represent? Of the 
fifteen members, eight - which vra,s more than half - were representatives of 
countries belonging to military and political blocs led noy the United States. 
That meant that a particular group of countries was trying, as usual, to get 
control of the key positions in .an international organization. Clearly' 
such a political attitude could hardly load to normal relationships or 
contribute, to effective international collaboration. He noted that in 
addition to those representatives of Western military and political groups, 
the General Committee included five representatives of the non-committed 
countries and only two representatives of the socialist countries. It was 
clear that such a composition took no account of the importance of the 
socialist countries on the world scene nor of their immense contributions 
to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


36. During their unofficial negotiations with the representatives of the 
Western States, the delegations of the socialist countries had pointed out 
certain anomalies in the list of members for the General Committee. Their 
attempts to improve the situation had, however, met with no success. They 
had found that their Western interlocutors had had no desire, to find a 
reasonable solution, no desire to create the requisite conditions for fruitful 
collaboration at the Conference. In order not to complicate the work 

GC(V)/OR,48 
page 8 


of the session, the delegations of the socialist countries had abstained from 
presenting in plenary session formal proposals to modify the list upon which 
a vote had been taken. Nevertheless, the delegation of the Soviet Union now 
wished to draw the attention of Member States to a flagrant injustice, which 
was gravely detrimental to the activities of the Agency. 

APPLICATIONS FOE MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(V)/166) 


37• The PRESIDENT proposed that, although the agenda had not yet been 


adopted, the Conference next take up the application by the Republic of the 


Congo (Leopoldville) for membership of the Agency, since many delegations 


considered that the application should be dealt with as early as possible 


in the session. 


38. The Conference had before it a recommendation by the Board (GC(v)/166). 
According to paragraph 2 of that document, the Board had considered the application 
for membership submitted by the Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville)$ 
it had determined that that State was able and willing to act in accordance with 
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. The Board 
accordingly recommended that the Conference approve the Congo for membership 
of the Agency and submitted a draft resolution to that effect. 
39° Mr. MITRA (India) warmly supported the draft resolution submitted 
by the Board on the following groundss in the first place it was highly 
desirable that an African country which had recently achieved independonce 
should participate as soon as possible in the Agency's works; furthermore, 
with regard to atomic energy, the special situation of the Congo made its 
admission to the Agency particularly desirable^ lastly, since the United 
Nations was so directly interested in developments in the Congo, that country 
should be represented as soon as possible in all the agencies which were 
associated with the United Nations in one way or another. 


40. It was common knowledge that many countries, including India, were 
convinced of the need for the Agency to increase its membership, in particular 
by admitting more African countries. He was especially glad to be able to 
support the application for admission submitted by the Republic of the Congo, 

GC(V)/QE.48 
page 9 •' 


41. Mr. SBABORG (United States of America) supported the Board's 
recommendation that the Republic of the Congo he admitted to the Agency. 
Ho was sure that the Republic would give the Agency valuable assistance, and 
he welcomed the admission of a new African State. Thecfact that an amendment 
to the Statute increasing the representation of the "Africa-and-the Middle 
East" area on the Board was under consideration showed,the increasing 
importance of that area. The United States delegation was sure that the 
Agency would receive further applications for admission from countries in 
the same area and that it could make an important contribution to the 
progress of the African countries. 
•42. 
, Mr. ElflSLYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that his 
delegation was happy to support the application for admission submitted by 
the Republic of the Congo* 
43- During the past year that sorely tried country had hold the attention 
of all mankind. It was in the Congo that the desire of the•imperialist 
powers to hinder the establishment of liberty and, independence for a young 
African State had been most openly shown. 'The colonizers had endeavored to 
keep in their own hands the Republic's rich natural resources, including 
its very largo deposits of nuclear raw materials. To that end, they had 
resorted to new forms of colonialism without, however, changing its substance. 
There was no escaping the fact that in events in the .Congo,.the. United Nations 
had played the rather contemptible part of a servant of the imperialist ,. , 
Powers and had acted against the interests of the Congolese people. Had 
it not been for that policy of the Western Powers,- which had led to bloodshed 
and strife in the Congo, that country could have become a Member of the 
Agency the previous year. The tragic course of events in the Congo proved 
that -international organizations should bo based on the principle of equal 
representation of the interests of the throe existing groups of States. 


44° The Soviet delegation welcomed the representatives' of the Congolese 
Government, which claimed to be the successor to the first Central Government 
of the Republic of the Congo, headed by that great patriot Patrice Lumumba. 


45• The Soviet delegation hoped that the delegation of the Congo would help 
to further intcrnatienal collaboration, particularly in regard to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, in the interests of the consolidation of 
peace and international friendship. 



GC(V)/OR.48 
page 10 


46. Mr. MAHMOUD (United Arab Republic) and Mr. BREW (Ghana) warmly 
supported the draft resolution and expressed their conviction that the Congo 
would play an important part in the Agency's activities. 
47. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that his 
delegation was most gratified by the Board's decision to recommend the 
admission of the Congo to the Agency. 
48, The Ukrainian delegation was very happy to welcome the representatives 
of a people that was fighting for its country, its unification and its 
national independence. In welcoming the admission of the Congo to the 
Agency, lie expressed the hope that that State and its people would contribute 
to the cause of peace and world prosperity. He also hoped that the country's 
great natural resources in atomic raw materials would be used mainly to 
develop the -industry and economy of the Congo and to increase the well-being 
of its sorely tried people. 


49• Mr. LEE (China) associated himself with the delegates who had 
supported the application for admission submitted by the Congo. He was 
sure that the Republic would make a most useful contribution to the Agency's 
work. 


50. The PRESIDENT put the draft resolution (GC(V)/166) to the vote. 
51. The draft resolution was unanimously adopted. 
52.' The PRESIDENT congratulated the Republic of the Congo (Leopoldvillc) 
on its being approved for membership of the Agency. He added that the 
Republic would become a Member upon deposit of an instrument of acceptance 
of the Statute in accordance with Article XXI.C. 


53. Mr. KAHAMBA (Congo - Leopoldville) thanked the Conference for its 
decision. 
54. Since gaining its independence on 3 June 1960, and following its 
admission to the United Nations, the Congo had become a member of nearly all 
the specialized agencies and had signed several international conventions. 
He nevertheless considered it a great honor to havo been admitted by the 
Conference to membership of the Agency. 
55= For "the Congo, admission to the Agency was not merely an honor that 


conferred certain rights. The Congo was aware of its responsibilities and 
wished to fulfill the obligations devolving on Member States. 



GC(V)/OR,48 
page 11 


560 The reason why the Congo had applied for admission to the Agency was 
that it knew it could not remain aloof from twentieth-century developments 
in nuclear energy. Since it was a producer of raw materials, the presence 
of the Congo in the Agency could not he attributed to self-interest5 it was 
prompted hy the more distant objective of furthering international co-operation, 


57• At the present time, no country could continue to live in isolation 
without condemning itself. That seemed just as true of industrialized 
countries as of countries in course of development. Furthermore, collaboration 
between the two groups, both in political and in economic and technical 
matters, seemed to be the guarantee of moral and material progress by the 
economically weak peoples. 


58. The natural resources of the Congo should serve to improve both living 
conditions in the Republic itself and the well-being of humanity as a whole. 
59° It should be noted that the Congo did not intend to rest content with 


the role of a prt>ch±cer of raw materials. It did not wish to go on being 


exploited by foreign interests. It was aware that certain States, which 
were trying to maintain their political influence in some regions of the 
Congo, were keenly interested not only in copper but also in uranium. 


60. The Congo did not intend to expel foreigners from its territory, but 
they must understand that it was now an independent State that valued its 
natural resources and wished to manage its own affairs. 
61. Moreover, the Congolese people were convinced that the use of atomic 
energy for economic purposes could become a reality in the Congo in the 
near future. Possibilities in that field wore unlimited and international 
co-operation should enable the Congo, like other countries in course of 
development, to take advantage of the new source of energy. 
62. The Congo believed it could also play an important part in another field that 
of research and training. It possessed, in Lovanium University at 
Leopoldvillc, the first reactor in Africa, and laboratories which had made 
it possible to give training courses in the use of radioisotopes in 1960. 
Those courses, which had lasted five weeks, had been attended by some 
40 students from nine African countries. 

GC(v)/uEc48 
page 12 


63. Near the reactor there wore laboratories, a library and a documentation 
center where research workers and scientists could'meet and which might 
become a .permanent center of training and research for students from Africa 
and other continents. 
64. The Congo was in a position to undertake useful work in connection with 
the peaceful use of atomic energy and particularly of radioisotopes. It offered 
an immense field of work and already had substantial facilities available. 
65. The reactor which was already in service would, enable the center to 
prepare a very large part of the necessary isotopes. If production was to 
meet the needs of all users, the center must develop normally and according 
to a well-defined plan. It was urgently necessary to install a radio-chemical 
laboratory for general use. The plans for that laboratory must be finalized, 
preferably-.with the co-operation of all the participants, In addition, the' 
resources at the disposal of the existing laboratories must be extended and 
improved. 
66. Commitments had, been entered into by Belgium before the Congo had 
become independent, by which the latter was still .bounds that applied in 
particular to the agreements concluded by Belgium with the United States of 
America and with the United Kingdom, Having become an independent and. 
sovereign country, the Congo felt free to examine and revicY/ those agreements, 
particularly as that attitude appeared to.bo in keeping with the views of 
the two countries concerned. It would conclude other agreements which 
would be more in keeping with its new status and its national interests. 
It should, however, bo emphasized that the Congo would never allow its 
natural riches to bo used by any country for non-peaceful purposes. 
67. In conclusion ho paid a tribute to Mr. Hammarsjk'old, v/ho had met his 
death in tragic circumstances while carrying out his mission of peace in 
the Congo. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GE1TERAL 


68. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, after congratulating the President on his 
election, both personally and on behalf of the Secretariat, and welcoming 
the Federal Chancellor of Austria, the President of the National Assembly 

GC(v)/0fi.43 
page 15 


and other eminent Austrians, said that the Conference was meeting in the 
shadow of a tragedy which had shaken the worlds the untimely death of 
Mr. Dag Hammarsjkold, Secretary-General of the United Nations„ A man of 
tireless energy, brilliant intelligence and unswerving courage, he was both 
the idol and the ideal of international civil servants. In Mr. HammarsjkSld 
the United Nations had lost its leader and its personification^ it was to be 
hoped that the present sorrow and anxiety would soon give place to the calm 
confidence and the will to peace which had emanated from the Secretary-General. 


69- For the fifth and final time he was addressing representatives of 
Member States assembled in the Conferences and he thought it would be well 
to review the four years of his period of office. In some major respects 
the Agency had developed along different lines from those contemplated by 
the framers of the Statute and by the Preparatory Commission. In 1957 there 
had been optimism in regard to the prospects for the peaceful development 
of the atom and for the lessening of its military uses. That optimism had 
proved excessive. Nevertheless the Agency had been able to channel its 
energies into peaceful programs which were no?/ beginning to bear fruit. 
The void created by the temporary lull in reactor progress had been 
effectively filled by dynamic activity in technical assistance. 

70. The Agency had carried out a highly successful fellowship program which 
had enabled more than 58O students to receive full training^ another 
320 fellows were still receiving training. It seemed likely that the number 
of fellowships would level off at about 350 awards per year. It was reasonable 
to expect that States would rely increasingly on national or regional 
training centers as they became available, and on technical assistance projects 
within their own borders rather than on the educational institutions of 
countries abroad. 
71. Prom its inception the Agency had sought to broaden its activities to 
cover the whole traditional realm of technical assistance, including the 
provision of experts and equipment, the despatch of visiting professors and 
the organization of training courses. Unfortunately, technical assistance had 
decreased during the current year owing to lack of funds. Many countries, 
particularly developing countries, were greatly in need of help-in order to 
raise the standard of living of their population. Nuclear science, with 
its great versatility, could give them valuable assistance, particularly by 
the use of radioisotopes in medicine and agriculture, and the less developed 



GC(V)/OR.48 
page 14 


countries wore becoming increasingly aware of the'advantages offered by 
membership of the Agency. Since 1957 the number of Member States had 
increased from 60 to 775 tut there were still more than 20 States 'which had 
not joined the Agency, thereby forfeiting the opportunity of obtaining its 
help. 


72= The Secretariat had prepared a document entitled "A review of the 
Technical Assistance provided by the Agency in 1959 and 1960"-^ which summarized 
the resources made available by States and showed how they had been 
distributed. But contributions in the form of fellowships, services and 
equipment, however generous, were not enough. In order to have the 
necessary flexibility in assisting .the developing countries, the Agency 
needed greatly increased contributions of money. There had been no 
discrimination or favoritism in the distribution of the available resources. 
All the eight geographic areas mentioned in the Statute had received assistance 
from the Agency, in the following decreasing order'of amounts. Africa and 
the Middle East, South-East Asia and the Pacific, Eastern Europe, the Par East, 
Latin America, Western Europe, South Asia and North America, 


73. The Agency's program for promoting research into the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy had steadily evolved since 1957° In 1959 and 1960, research 
contracts amounting to approximately $800 000 had been placed with Member 
States. Contracts to the value of 1625 000 would be awarded in 1961, 
bringing the total for the first four years to about one and a half million 
dollars. • • 
74- The Agency had devotee) a considerable part of 'its efforts to promoting 
the practical applications of radioisotopes. A large proportion of 
fellowships were awarded to specialists working with radioisotopes, isotope 
training courses wore being organized in various pa,rts of the' world, and a 
number o'f technical assistance exports were engaged in teaching the appropriate 
techniques. A number of scientific meetings arranged by the Agency had been 
devoted to that subject - in particular, two regional symposia on the uses 
of isotopes in agricultural entomology and tropical medicine. The Secretariat 
was supplementing that work by carrying out 'a number of studies on certain 
special applications of large radiation sources for the radiotherapy of cancer 


1/ GC(v)/1FE/37o 



GC(v)/ORo48 
page 15 


or the eradication of insect pests. The small laboratory at Headquarters had 
concentrated on measurements of radioactive contamination and provided Member 
States with standard radiation sources. The laboratory at Seibersdorf was 
now completed and had begun work. The Agency was also playing an active 
part in the new field of the application of radioisotopes to the solution of 
hydrological problems. 


75* The Secretariat had given full attention to the resolution adopted by 
the Conference at its fourth regular session concerning the establishment 
of an international center for theoretical physics-". A panel of theoretical 
physicists had warmly endorsed that resolution and the Scientific Advisory 
Q.ommittec had made an evaluation. 


76. The Agency could perform valuable services by developing, in consultation 
with experts from Member States, regulations governing the safe handling, use 
and carriage of radioactive substances. That was a subject on which, it was 
obviously better for regulations to be- worked out on a world-wide, rather 
than on a national or regional, basis. The Secretariat had therefore 
5/ 


drafted and published manuals governing the safe handling of radioisotopes^, 


the safe transport of radioactive materials—'and radioactive waste disposal 
7/ 


into the sea-K. The Agency had also worked out a draft Convention on the 
Liability of Operators of Nuclear' Ships. A diplomatic conference, which 
would be meeting again in 1962, had made a preliminary examination of the 
draft Convention, which would later be submitted to Member States. 

77• Early in 1961, the Secretariat had completed its work on a draft 


International Convention on Minimum International Standards regarding Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage. Ho hoped that the Board would shortly 
authorize the convening of a diplomatic conference to consider and adopt 


the Convention. 


4/ GC(IV)/EES/76. 
5/ STl/PIIB/l, STI/HTO/IO and STl/PUB/ll. 

6/ STl/PUB/40 and STl/PUB/32. 
2/ STl/PUB/14. 


GC(V)/OR.48.-. 
page 16 


78.' Other major programs had .been steadily carried out on the general lines 
contemplated-in 1957- The Agency had become a recognized clearing-house ' 
for nuclear'science developments. Its publications - and in particular it's 


journal "Nuclear Fusion".^- had been very favorably commented upon. The ' 
Library was becoming increasingly well stocked and the documentation service 
was compiling lists of useful references. Growing interest was being taken' 


in the Agency's scientific meetings, of which 12 had been held in 1960 with 
about 2 000 participants. An equal number of participants Had already 
attended the eight meetings held up to the end of September 1961. 


79. The Agency's scientific staff had made a series of studies on nuclear 
power costs and costing methods. There wore positive signs of a reawakening 
of. interest in nuclear power, and the atomically advanced countries should 
maintain, or even increase, their current efforts in that field. - The 
Secretariat had been.studying possible arrangements for the construction and 
operation* under the Agency's auspices, of a small demonstration power reactor. 
The costs of such an undertaking might be borne partly by the State housing 
the reactor and partly by an atomically advanced country, which'would meet . 
the expenditure on research and fuel? the balance of'from one-fourth to onethird 
.of the cost would be financed by a loan repayable over a period of 
years out of operating revenues from the reactor. Since several developing 
countries might be interested in such a project, the Agency could conduct the 
necessary studies with regard to the type, size and location of the proposed 
reactor, and could set up a panel of technical experts to evaluate the 
various proposals received, . . 
80. The Agency had evaluated, upon request, the safety- problems involved in 
the construction of various reactors. It had organized a Symposium on '.• 
Nuclear Ship Propulsion with Special Reference to Nuclear Safety, and had 
held a Seminar on the Physics of Fast and Intermediate Reactors. Studies• 
had continued on the management and disposal of radioactive wastes into the 
atmosphere, the soa and fresh water. A program of research on the effects 
of radioactivity into the sea would be initiated in the very near.future in 
collaboration with the Government and Oceano'graphic Institute of Monaco. 

GC(V)/OR.48 
page 17 


81. With the approval of the Agency's safeguards system by the Board and 
the conclusion of safeguards agreements with various Governments, the safeguards 
activities of the Agency were evolving from the preparatory phase to 
one of practical application. The Secretariat was also studying the steps 
necessary to place under Agency administration the safeguards arrangements 
contained, in bilateral agreements between Japan and the United States and 
between Japan and Canada, and also to implement the United States proposal to 
place four of its reactors under Agency sa.feguards-% 
82. Working relationships with the United Tfeticns and the specialized agencies 
wore continuing to develop in tin atmosphere of mutual confidence and co-operation. 
83. With regard to the Agency's staff recruitment policy, he continued to 
attach the greatest importance to the need for proper geographical distribution, 
which was second only bo the requirement of recruiting staff of the 
highest quality. During the preceding four years, the Secretariat had 
endeavored to recruit staff which would meet both criteria, and that objective 
had been largely achieved. There wore now 45 nationalities represented in 
the Professional category, a relatively satisfactory result. Nevertheless, 
the problem of geographical d.istribution was liable to cause difficulties in 
the future, as the number of vacant posts diminished. Furthermore, as 
Member States became increasingly interested in all aspects of the Agency's 
activities, they would, probably wish to have increased, representation on its 
staff. In the long run, the implementation of the geographical distribution 
principle was a question of confidence. Member States had to bo assured 
that the Director General's approach was honest and impartial, but they 
should realize the serious obstacles which had to be surmounted. 
84. He was convinced that the proper conduct of any international organization 
was impossible without a nucleus of permanent staff to ensure continuity. 
At the present time, not more than 21$ of the Professional posts subject to 
geographical distribution were filled by permanent staff members. That 
percentage was still too small and would no doubt.have to be increased. 
85. In making his last formal appearance before the Conference, he would 
like to put forward five concrete suggestions which, if adopted, would 
strengthen the Agency and allow it to develop vigorously during the next 
four years. 
8/ GC(IV)/ORo8, paragraph 41. 



GC(V)/ORo48 
pago l8 


86. First, a long-term program should be developed reflecting the changes in 
emphasis that had taken place in the Agency's work and representing a proper 
balance between vision and reality. Ho had already begun,-in consultation 
with the senior members of his staff, to sketch out a flexible long-term 
program, which ho would hand on to his successor, 
87. His second suggestion was concorned with the funds required for the 
Agency's operational programs. During the first four years of the organization's 
work, dependence on voluntary contributions had made long-term planning 
impossible and oven short-term programming extremely difficult, An 
improved method of financing had to be found whereby more of the Agency's 
activities could be paid for under the Regular Budget, i.e. from the assessed 
contributions of Member States, A statutory amendment was needed t'o 
consolidate the Operational and Regular Budgets or to permit more research x.and 
technical assistance activities to bo financed from the latter. The 
Agency would then no longer be solely dependent on voluntary contributions 
in order to carry out its basic responsibilities under the Statute. 
88. His third suggestion related to the need for reorganization of the 
Secretariat. The present structure hampered its efficiency to a considerable 
degree. For example, responsibility for technical assistance activities 
was dispersed between three departments and four divisions and offices. 
The grouping of most functions pertaining to technical assistance into a 
single administrative unit would result in a much simpler and more efficient 
operation. In addition, the Department of Administration, Liaison and 
Secretariat was entrusted with such a variety of functions, and its staff 
was so large, that its head was unable to give his undivided attention to • 
administrative problems. The Director General, on the other hand, had for 
long boon deprived of direct contact with those services which pertained"to 
"policy-making" and affected the Agency's relationship with the outside 
world. Under the new procedure adopted earlier in the current year, four, 
divisions (External Liaison, Legal, Public Information and Secretariat of 
the Board and Conference) reported directly to him.: ' That arrangement-had ' 
'' 
worked well and was probably the best solution of the problem. The machinery 
for production and distribution of documents and scientific publications 
also needed to bo closely examined and responsibilities clearly defined. 
Furthermore, it was necessary to reorganize the scientific divisions and at 
the same time to define their functions more clearly. 

GC(V)/OR.48 
page 19 


89. During'the last few months a survey, had teen raado of all Professional 
posts, The resulting report indicated that if reorganization along certain 
lines, such as those mentioned earlier, could be effected, there would be 
better utilization of Professional staff. He warned the Conference against 
delaying for too long the reorganization of the Secretariat on account of 
the political questions involved, particularly where senior pests were 
concerned. He believed that the number of such posts should be kept to 
the minimum compatible with a rational and efficient organization of the 
Secretariat and the legitimate national or regional claims to such posts. 
90. His fourth suggestion concerned the relationship between the Board 
and the Director General, On the whole, the Board and the Director General 
had played the respective roles assigned to then by the Statute. In the 
sphere of administration and the implementation of broad policy decisions, 
however, it seemed that the Statute intended the Director General to play 
a leading role, subject to the authority and the control of the Board* The 
question of the frequency of Board meetings had a certain bearing on that 
problem. Their preparation imposed a very heavy burden on the Secretariat, 
and if the activities of the Agency wore to increase, the Board and its 
committees might have to mcot more frequently unless greater discretion in 
administrative matters and in the implementation of policy were allowed the 
Director Genera,!. The solution might lie in a careful planning of the 
Board's agenda so that there need be but two meetings each year to deal with 
the important questions of broad policy, including the annual program and 
budget. Less important items could always bo considered, as necessary, by 
special meetings which could be attended by the alternates to Governors, 
91. The fifth rcoommonda-tion dealt with the vital question of support for 
the Agency by Member States. The continuing success of the organization 
v/as not primarily a question of finance but depended on the extent to which 
the Groat Powers used the Agency as an instrument of scientific co-operation. 
It depended equally on the extent to which the Agency served - in preference 
to bilateral and regional channels ~ as a means of aid between the advanced 
countries and the others. The major nuclear Powers should show their 
willingness tc furnish fissionable materials, preferably at a discount, 
and to make available scientific personnel to serve on the Agency's staff 
and as experts it could send into the field. 

GC(V)/0K.4<3 
page 20 


92, Through those types of support, all States, large or small, could 
contribute to the success of the common cause. As one saw the enormous 
efforts going into utilizing the atom for destructive purposes and the 
huge resources devoted to scientific and' technological advances which hardly 
contributed directly to the peace, health'and prosperity of man, one could 
not look without a certain sense of sadness at the scanty support given to 
the efforts to accelerate the peaceful utilization of the atom for the 
benefit o.f all. 

95• He admitted to some feelings of regret at leaving his office, and 
particularly at parting with friends within the Secretariat, the Board, 
the Conference and atomic energy commissions throughout the world. It was 
also with deep regret and profound disappointment that during his four years of 
service he had noted a diminution in the spirit of unanimity, accommodation, 
compromise and co-operation evident among the major Powers at the beginning. 
Ee hoped for a revival of that spirit which had been prevalent four years 
ago and which had inspired the creators of the Agency. It would be wrong to 
look upon the Agency only as a barometer of the climate in the outside world. 
The Agency was meant to create a climate of its own and thus to contribute 
to a general climatic improvement. That was the Agency's greatest challenge 
and its noblest aim. He hoped that the Conference would do all in its 
power to revive the spirit of the period when unanimity had been the rule, 
and the high purpose Member States had agreed to pursue had been still 
unblemished. 


94. In spite of those sentiments of regret, he felt a certain satisfaction 
that, through the combined efforts made since 1957? the work had been started. 
A competent and devoted staff had been recruited, and they represented the 
most valuable heritage which he loft behind to his successor. 
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(V)/OR.50 
27 November 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference ENGLISH 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 27 September 1961, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
11 General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1960-61 
(continued from the 49th meeting) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Finland 
United States of America 
Switzerland 
France 
Israel 
Netherlands 
Italy 
Korea 

Paragraphs 


1 
7 
9 
16 
34 
46 


59 
71 


* GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GG(v)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5877 


77 


6 


8 
15 
33 
45 
58 
70 
77 



GC(V)/0B,50 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERIORS FOR 1960-1961 
(GC(¥)/154, 168) (continued from the 49th meeting) 


1, Mr. LAURILA (Finland), after congratulating the President on his 
election, paid a tribute to the memory of Mr. Dag HammarskjSld,with whose 
country Finland was closely linked and whose death had been deeply felt by all 
his countrymen, 


2. In his opinion., the present session of the Conference might be considered 
as one of the most important of the five so far held, since it had to decide 
whether a general review of the Statute of the Agency was to be undertaken 
during the following year and to confirm the appointment of the Director * 
General whom the Board of Governors had elected in June by a large majority, 
5. It would no doubt be useful to review certain provisions of the Statute, 
but something could be done to remedy most of the existing defects by practical 
administrative measures. For that reason, the Finnish delegation would 
support a proposal to defer the review. The only urgent measure at the 
present juncture was the adoption of the amendment to the Statute submitted 
by the Board pursuant to the resolution adopted unanimously by the Conference 
at its fourth session with a view to ensuring the equitable representation 
of the "Africa and the Middle East11 area on the Board-' , The Finnish 
Government was prepared to approve that amendment and ratify it as soon as 
possible. In its opinion, the amendment met the well-founded claims of the 
new Member States from that area, without affecting the distribution of seats 
among the other areas, 
4* With regard to the Agency's activities, he stressed that the really 


significant large-scale application of nuclear physics was to be sought in 


the production of electrical and thermal energy by fission or, in the not 


too near future, by fusion processes. Technology seemed to be leaving 


behind the initial period of fumbling, and nuclear energy was entering a 


phase where it really began to be economically and technically profitable 


at least in certain areas of the world, of which Finland was one. For that 


reason, it was conceivable that the Agency would concentrate its attention 


1/ GC(IV)/RES/85, 



GC(V)/OR,50 
page 3 


on activities the aim of which was to solve problems connected with the more 


extensive use of nuclear energy in power economy, Studies such as the 


analyses of power systems of the kind made jointly by the Agency and Finnish 


2/ 3/ 
experts in Finland—' and by the Agency mission in the Philippines—' were of 
exceptional value. The panels of experts.dealing with such problems as 
third party liability and the pollution of air and water, and the conferences 
dealing with safety measures and protection against radiation, were also 
extremely important. On the other hand, the well-known and much'discussed 
problem of safeguards had only a secondary importance from the technical point 
of view. In view of the increasing importance of nuclear power plants, he 
hoped that the Agency would establish closer relations with the World Power 
Conference^ which had a very wide experience in handling the world-wide 
problems of energy production in general, 


5. The furnishing of nuclear aid to areas where the conventional forms of 
engineering had not yet been fully developed was a difficult and even a 
delicate task. If the less-developed areas did not receive evenly balanced 
aid throughout the whole sector of engineering, a one-sided emphasis on 
nuclear engineering might lead to a certain distortion of the technological 
development of the area concerned. The Agency should not lose sight of that 
aspect of the problem. 
6. It was customary for the delegates to the Conference to give a personal 
opinion on the activities of the Agency, Those opinions were often made in 
the form of criticisms which were not entirely unjustified., However, it might 
be that the successful activities of the Agency were not sufficiently stressed. 
For that reason, he was happy to state, in conclusion, that the relations 
between the Agency and his country had always been excellent, and had produced 
concrete results. He thanked the Director General and his collaborators, 
whose skill and goodwill had made a large contribution to the solution of 
important problems. 
7. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) first paid a tribute to the 
memory of Mr. HammarskjSld, whose death was a grievous loss to humanity. 
2/ STl/DOC/10/2. 
3/ STI/DOC/IO/3. 



GC(V)/0H,50 
page 4 


8. He then made the following statements* 
(1) MI am honored to appear before the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, Your election as President of 
the Conference is a tribute to the impressive role you have played in 
advancing the Agency's objectives, and I congratulate you, I should 
like to pay tribute to the outgoing Director General, Sterling Cols? 
for his notable work in loading this organization so successfully 
through its formative years. 
(2) "I am privileged to read the following message to the delegates 
from the President of the United States? 
•The General Conference of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency is a welcome ovont to all peoples who value peace. Your 
meeting accentuates the enormous potential of the atom for 
improving man's well-being. We already know the atom can help 
place more food on our tables, provide more light in our homes, 
fight disease and better our health, and give us now technical 
and scientific tools. The exploration of this force for human 
welfare is just beginning. The International Atomic Energy 
Agency can assume a position of leadership in bringing the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy to the people of the world, 
'Moreover, the intangible benefits of your work are no 
less than the material rewards. When people from different 
countries work together, in a common cause, they help to maintain 
a bridge of understanding between nations during times of tension 
and build firmer foundations for a more stable and peaceful world 
of the future, I applaud your efforts and assure you that they 
have the full support of the United States. 


'John K, Kennedy 
'President, United States of 
America' 


(3) "I am here in the spirit of President Kennedy's message, to 
advance on behalf of my Government the high principles of the Agency, 
which in the words of the Statute are 'to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace;, health, and prosperity throughout 
the world.' My remarks will be confined'to that purpose.. I' shall 
not protend that wo can ignore world tensions. It Is, of course, 
difficult to bo optimistic that these tensions will vanish at an early 
date. We can hope, as I earnestly do, that this condition will be 
limited to the tension phase, however difficult this may be. We can 
do much morei wo can resolve, here, to dedicate ourselves to the 
pursuit of the objective of the Agency and - through mutual goodwill 
and the positive accomplishment that is within our power - to strive 
to build solid international foundations that will diminish tensions 
in the longer future,. 
* 
This statement is reproduced verbatim, at the speaker's request, under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, 

GC(Y)/OR,50 
page 5 


(4) "There are good reasons why this organization is especiallysuited 
for such accomplishment, Man has many arts which can be 
applied to the building of a hotter world order, including diplomacy, 
law, economics, and others, I believe science stands high among these 
activities. 
(5) "I should like to discuss briefly how I believe this Agency, if 
Members apply themselves to the expansion of science and technology, 
can use the potential and the characteristics of these arts to influence 
constructively the course of events, 
(6) "The world of the future will be increasingly affected by science. 
Already in some nations, science has become the dominant force in 
shaping the material course of affairs. This trend will continue in 
countries that have highly developed technologies. Moreover, we hope 
that science and technology will develop and grow in other countries? 
indeed, this is one of the major objectives of this organization, I 
should hope that the development of science will be a matter of high 
policy in all countries, especially those that are newly independent, 
and that all Member States use the resources of this Agency for this 
purpose, 
(7) "There are many qualities of science that can be cultivated by 
bodies such as this with great profit for the world. Science is 
involved with the pursuit of truth, with the expansion of knowledge. 
It is not concerned with national differences, 
(8) "The characteristics of science encourage in the individual 
scientist and technologist values that are especially favorable to 
an international viewpoint, 'In their search for knowledge, scientists 
seek to achieve the free, unfettered, unprejudiced mind. The scientist's 
greatest admiration is for individuals with curiosity, ability and a 
willingness to exchange ideas. Moreover, a scientist's empathy with 
mankind in the broad sense is reinforced by his consciousness that the 
knowledge he gains ultimately becomes a part of the common heritage of 
men everywhere forever, 
(9) "Science gives us the means for the treatment and prevention of 
disease. The knowledge it creates helps us to increase our produc~ 
tivity in agriculture and in industry. It gives us energy with which 
we can do more work. Above all, perhaps, it is the means by which man 
put's behind him superstition and fear, and thoreby finds greater personal 
security through understanding the forces of an environment that has 
been overwhelming and fearsome to previous generations of people, 
(10) "It is painfully clear, of course, that science, misused by man, 
can create fear and destruction. As more sophisticated world 
political devices evolve in the years ahead - perhaps with the help 
of science itself - I believe there will be a progressive lessoning 
of such fears. 
(11) "With all those good qualities and more, science and technology 
are among the most powerful of the arts of peace. To my Government 
it is clear that the Agency,' being charged in its Statute with worldwide 
peaceful expansion of one of the greatest scientific-technological 
developments of our time, is in a position to be a powerful catalyst 
of peace and international co-operation, 

GC(V)/OR,50 
page 6 


(12) "I am a newcomer to these Conferences, and perhaps I bring to 
this meeting a perspective that is possibly different from that of 
delegates who have observed the evolution of this body from its 
beginnings. While it may seern that the program is modest, my view 
is that the Member States have built soundly and woll, and4thatj 
considering the youth of the Agency, the achievements and the promise 
are highly significant. 
(ij) "The challenge to the Agency and to its'Members is very great. 
As President Kennedy has said in his message? the Agency can help to 
maintain strong bridges of friendship between nations during times of 
tension^ and in the longer future, can offer a model of operation 
which can help men to enlarge the foundations for a more secure and 
peaceful world. 


(14) "How can we sot about to develop the maximum potential of the 
Agency as a force for peace? I believe, first of all, we must establish 
a pattern of conduct hero that will permit representatives of Member 
States to exchange ideas in reasonably froe and unencumbered fashion. 
Second, the larger contributions of the Agency will be achieved through 
dedication to specific programs, 
(15) "We are, I am sure, realistic enough to know that wo will work 
under difficulty for some time. If wo can dedicate our efforts to the 
goals of the Agency, with faith in their power for good, I- believe the 
ultimate impact on world society will be very large. 
(16) "Lot mo describe, briefly, some of the views of my Government 
relative to the program of the Conference and future work of the Agency. 
(l7)- "With reference to the question of the next Director General of 
the Agency, it is my ploasure to give the vigorous support of my 
Government to Mr. Eklund. He is highly qualified for the important 
office of Director General, Mr Eklund" is, as you know, an eminent 
scientist. Wo hope that ho will receive that wide and generous support 
which will enable him to render the effective leadership of which he 
is capable. 


(18) "In supporting strongly the candidacy of Mr. Eklund, I wish at 
the same time to make wholly clear that it is our firm view that, as a 
matter of principle, the top posts of this organization, including the 
post of Director General, cannot be considered to be reserved to any 
group, geographical or otherwise, of the Members of this Agency. 
(19) "It is pertinent to point out that the Governor from the United 
States stated this same principle with regard to the Secretariat when, 
at the June meeting of the Board, he made it clear that we do not 
consider that the top posts in the Secretariat should be held' exclusively 
by particular Member'States or groups of States. This has boon our 
policy, and wo will continue to bo guided by it in supporting qualified 
candidates in the years ahead, 
(20) "Wo believe every effort should be made to minimize the burdens 
and increase the strength of the new Director General and his staff. 
We have been particularly impressed with the calibor, strength and 
dedication of the Secretariat, and arc convinced that this organization 
can fruitfully expand its work in nuclear science. 

GC(V)/OR.50 
page 7 


(21) ,(Wc• are pleased that the membership of the Agency continues 
to grow, During the past year, six now Members have joined, all 
from the developing areas of 'Africa and the Middle East ' and 
'Latin America'. ¥0 hope that this trend will continue, 
(22) "We are gratified that the Agency has recognized the implication 
of expanding membership by timely resort to the process of amendment 
of its Statute, This has resulted in a draft amendment. The amendment 
would double the representation of the 'Africa and Middle Bast' 
area on the Board, and-in addition? vrould insure the present representation 
of Latin America, without altering the existing pattern of 
representation from other areas, We strongly support this amendment. 
My Government intends to press for early ratification so that a 
generally recognized inequity in representation of an important area 
can be quickly oorrectod. ' In our view, however, since four years of 
Agency experience is too little to warrant a general Statute review, 
we believe consideration of this question should bo postponed for a 
reasonable period. This need not preclude a decision in the meantime 
to undertake a review of individual statutory provisions in the event 
ciroumstances make such action desirable, and, of course, any Member 
Government is free at any timo to propose an amendment to any 
particular provision of the Statute pursuant to the regular amendment 
processes provided for in the Statute, 
(23) "The United States supports the recommended Program and Budget 
for 1962, We urge Members to contribute generously to the operational 
budget, and to increase thoir contributions wherever possible. 
(24) "I should like, also, to make certain suggestions relative to the 
Agency's programs 
"-*-• Technical assistance 


(25) "We believe the program to provide exports, equipment, training 
opportunities and research grants can and should be expanded, within 
the fiscal ability of the Agency, to stimulate technical progress in 
developing countries, 
(26) "My Government will continue to supplement, to the extent 
practicable, the Agency's resources for equipment, exports and 
research contracts, 
"II, aosearch and research co-ordination 


(27) "In line .with the thoughts I expressed earlier and with the support 
of my Government, I should like to urge upon the Agency the study of 
undertakings in basic and applied research that arc within its power, 
In particular, I believe the Agency is well qualified to organize joint 
projects. The Agency need not bo limited to its own budget, but can 
organize projects financed by participating Members, Wo welcome the 
recommendations of the Scientific Advisory Committee regarding possible 
joint projects. 
(28) "My own experience leads me to suggest, as an example, th'at 
important advances could bo made in science and technology by the 
development and construction of reactors with fluxes as high as 

GC(V)/OR.50 
page 8 


10 n/cm /sec. The Agency could make an important contribution 
by identifying the requirements for such facilities and encouraging 
scientists from Member States to undertake joint conceptual studies 
of such reactors, 


"III, Nuclear power technology 


("29) "We have, gone through successive stages of over-optimism and 
pessimism about the prospects of nuclear power. We have emerged 
now, I believe, into a time of realistic optimism. It is my own 
belief that nuclear power will provide an important and expanding 
supplement to conventional sources of power in many areas of the 
world by the 1970's and 1980's, In my own country, private and 
public utilities are already undertaking large developmental reactor 
power projocts, and within this decade nuclear power may be competitive 
with conventional sources in some circumstances. 


(jo) "Important studies also have been sponsored by this Agency, 
notably in Finland and the Philippines, and my Government hopes that 
an increasing number of Member States will avail themselves of this 
type of Agency assistance, 


(31) "As for our own program of assistance in this area, we are 
prepared to consider Agency nominees from developing countries for 
on-the-job training in the construction and operation aspects of 
our small and medium power reactors. 
"IV, Radioisotopes and radioisotope technology 


(32) "I propose that the Secretariat expand further its activities 
in the field of isotopes* There are almost unlimited possibilities 
in this area, A satellite using isotopic power, for example, is 
no?/ sending navigational signals for the use of ships at sea. 
Similarly, important weather data from unmanned stations can now 
be transmitted from remote areas, My Government would like especially 
to commend to the Agency the study of low-dose radiation as a means 
of preserving food. The development of this technique could significantly 
improve the distribution of wholesome and nourishing food 
to many areas of the world. My own country recently initiated a 
five-year research program in this area, The Agency, In co-operation 
with, international organizations such as the Food, and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), might profitably undertake 
such research^ convene meetings, arrange for expert advice and furnish 
radiation sources. The Agency may be especially effective in 
establishing research centers in this field, with special consideration 
for those countries having limited scientific and financial resources 
and which are most likely to benefit. My own Government is prepared 
to support the Agency in developing such a program, I note that FAO, 
the World Health Organization and the Agency are sponsoring a Technical 
Meeting in Brussels on the Evaluation of the Wholesomeness of Irradiated 
Foods, 

GC(V)/OR.50 
page 9 -. 


"V* Health, safoty and advice on regulatory activities 


(33) "It is now widely recognized that the Agency has made important 
contributions in this field. The adoption of international conventions 
governing liability for possible nuclear damage from both 
land-based reactors and nuclear-powered ships is very important, and 
we hope that conventions acceptable to Member States can soon be 
opened for signature. 
(34) "We support the Agency's co-ordination of technical and legal 
studies on radioactive waste disposal in the ocean, and we are 
prepared to consider Agency proposals for jointly financing waste 
disposal studies. 
v


"""1 • Exchange of information 


(35) "The very nature of progress in scionce and technology, to which 
I referred earlier, requires the continual exchange of information 
through meetings and publications. By continuation and further 
improvement of its generally good program of conferences and publications 
the Agency can be of maximum influence in the expansion of science and 
technology, My Government believes that a third International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy might usefully bo held in 
1963 under the auspices of this Agency, Although the scope should be 
more limited than at the previous meetings, we recommend that the 
Director General study and report on the desirable scope, timing and 
financial implications of convening such a meeting, 
"VII, Materials 


(36) "My Government was pleased to have been a party to the project 
and supply agreements signed during the past year furnishing reactors 
and fuel to Finland and Norway, We hope an increasing number of 
States, including those with whom yre have bilateral agreements, will 
avail themselves of the sizable quantities of special materials the 
Agency has for distribution, 
(37) "We are pleased to have boon able to reduce our prices for U , 
and we are now able to make available to the Agency plutonium and Ij233 
for use in research projects, I am also pleased to renew for the 
third year our offer to donate up to $50 000 worth of U<^35 to the 
Agency for use in research projects. Lastly, I am gratified to 
announce to this Conference that President Kennedy has just approved 
the allocation of an additional sizable quantity of enriched uranium 
for peaceful uses within the United States and abroad. Under this 
new allocation, a total of 65 000 kilograms of contained U235 has been 
made available for distribution to other countries. In making this 
announcement, the President has noted that, as peaceful programs 
develop in the future, it will undoubtedly be necessary for the 
United States to make further allocations of this nature. His 
statement underscores the point that the capacity of the United States 
for producing enriched uranium is sufficient to meet all foreseeable 
needs for peaceful uses. As in the•past, this material will be 
distributed over a period of years and it will be subject to prudent 
safeguards against unauthorized use. 

GC(V)/OR.50 
pago 10 


(38) "In this connection, we arc gratified that important progress is 
being made in developing and applying Agency safeguards to such materials 
to assure their peaceful use. As the atomic energy industry grows 
throughout the world, experience with this system will help insure that 
nuclear materials for poaceful applicatic n will not ho diverted to 
military use, 
(39) "When we consider the progress and the potential of this young 
organization, we cannot fail to bo encouraged. Much has already been 
accomplished, oven though the emphasis of the program has not been 
identical with some of the original conceptions. The important thing 
is that we have a basically sound organization, with good purposes and 
dedicated to the international promotion of a great technological 
discovery. Each nation which lends the Agency its full support will 
be rewarded many times over in the years ahead. We can already 
experience or foresee many of the material benefits? the augmentation 
of our energy resources, the additions to our agricultural and industrial 
production, the benefits to our health, But we have barely entered the 
atomic age, No one can now foresee, as scientists and technologists 
expand our knowledge, the extent of our ability to control the environment 
, 


(40) "This body has a much larger potential as an instrument of peace 
than its present program suggests. Each of us knows that, despite the 
difference between nations, there is in the hearts and minds of thinking 
men - as individuals - a universal ideali sm. Each of us, I am sure, 
yearns for peace, for freedom of the mind and spirit, for liberation 
from fear, for an understanding of the natural forces of his environment, 
and for the friendship of his follows. The world of today and tomorrow 
provides the International Atomic Energy Agency with an unusual opportunity 
to help translate this universal idealism of man into reality, 
(41) Finally, I should like to oxtond my personal good wishes to overy 
delegate, I look forward to becoming acquainted with you and exchanging 
ideas with you in the days ahead." 
9. Mr. HOCHSTRASSER (Switzerland) congratulated the President on his 
election, which the Swiss delegation regarded as an earnest of the success of 


the Conference's work. He associated himself with those delegations which 


had thanked the Director General for the great services ho had rendered the 


Agency during the first inevitably difficult years of its activities, The 


Swiss delegation had appreciated the kind remarks made by the Director General 


and the representative of the United Nations regarding Mr. Jolles, the former 


Deputy Director General for Administration, Liaison and Secretariat, It had 


noted with satisfaction the new presentation of the budget, now divided by 


activities and no longer by departments. That change, which was not just one 


of form, would make itself felt in a saving of staff, on the lines advocated 


by the Director General, 



GC(V)/OR.5.0 
page 11 


10, As far as the Operational Budget was concerned., • it was desirable that the 
real e-fforts which had been made to cut administrative expenses so as to 
devote more to scientific activities should he continued. In order to avoid 
duplication and waste of effort, the Agency should concentrate particularly on 
those activities which it was host ahle to undertake. Among the essential 
tasks of the Agency were the efforts to standardize, on a world-wide'plane, the 


collection and exchange of scientific information on atomic energy and research 
which could not - for lack of funds - ho undertaken on a regional or national 
level. In the legal and economic fields, useful work could also he done by 


the Agency, particularly in the preparation of international regulations and 


in carrying out economic studies on applications of atomic energy, especially 


on the cost of nuclear energy. The use of panels had provod the most suitable 
way of achieving that purpose. 


11, Switzerland was aware of the importance and usefulness of the scientific_ 
meetings organized by the Agency, It was necessary, however, to co-ordinate 
activities in that field with those of international scientific institutions, 


in order both to avoid duplication and to help those institutions to achieve 


their objectives, 


12, The Director General had stated that the fellowships program was about 
to level, off at a certain ceiling,-" The Agency should therefore now study 
what were the employment openings for the scientists it had trained so' that its 
fellowships program could be based on the real needs of applicants, 


13, The Swiss delegation was convinced that the Agency's laboratory could 


render important services, It would, however, be necessary to clarify its 


tasks in order to avoid duplication with national laboratories. He proposod 


that a report on the laboratory's activities in 1$62 should be submitted to 

the sixth regular session of the Conference, 


14, The Operational Budget showed that Member States were increasingly availing 
themselves of the Agency's technical services. The Swiss delegation suggested 
that a charge should bo .made for those services! technical assistance would thus 
bo able to develop without being a burden on that budget. The Swiss Government 
had decided to allocate again the sum of 50 000 Swiss francs to the General 
Fund for 1962. 


4/ GC(V)/OR,48, paragraph 70, 



GC(V)/OR,50 
page 12 


15. HG expressed the hope that no considerations unconnected with the 
scientific and technical activities of the Agency would be allowed to intervene 
in the deliberations of the Conference and that every Member State would 
contribute to the development of the Agency as far as its means allowed, 
16. Mr. GOLSSCHMIDT (Prance) congratulated the President on his election, 
and expressed- the French delegation's gratitude to the Director General, who, 
in spite of serious difficulties, had carried out his task with groat dedication 
for four year.s. 
17. Up to the present time, the Agency had had a complex and delicate existonce 
by virtue of the dual political and technical character of atomic energy 
and the slowness with which its use for non-military purposes had developed, 
as compared with earlier anticipations, 
18, It had meanwhile been possible to arrive at a more judicious assessment 
of the Agency's role. Far from being a clearing-house for nuclear materials 
and techniques as its founders had hoped, it had become essentially an 
organization for technical assistance at the disposal of the more advanced 
countries, to assist less-dcvolopod countries in their atomic endeavors. In 
that field, however, the Agency had to contend with the competition of bilateral 
assistance, which channeled the groat majority of international atomic 
exchanges, and for that reason its means wore limited, A better definition 
of the trend of its activities was therefore essential, 


19, He regretted that in the past the Agency'had dispersed its resources over 
a multitude of projects, and thought that it should concentrate its efforts on 
a limited number of items likely to be of interest to the greatest possible 
number of Member States, such as the co-ordination of programs on the use of 
research reactors, the use of radioisotopes in medicine and agriculture, 
research connected with the problem of radioactive wastes and international 
legislation, particularly in regard to radiation protection, Efforts in 
those fields should be integrated and should simultaneously embrace technical 
assistance, fellowships, -scientific meetings, research contracts and even 
laboratory work, 

20, The main function of the Agency was to help its economically least 
advanced Members to prepare for the day when nuclear power would become 
competitive in their respective territories, The Agency should, however, warn 
some of them of the dangers of drawing up programs which were too ambitious, 



GC(V)/0E,50 
page 13. 


21, In one group of States, for which a reactor would represent too great 
a financial outlay, the Agency should direct its efforts towards activities 
of more immediate interest, such as the various applications of isotopes, or 
towards prospecting for uranium and thorium, as it was desirable to know, oven 
in a time.of abundance, the utilizable resources. In those countries, the 
most that could bo justified was, in exceptional circumstances, the construction 
of nuclear stations of low and'medium power| in that case the Agency should 
provide for-the training of the necessary staff, 


22, In a second group could bo placed more advanced States, which had been 
obliged to confine their efforts to the purchase of one or two rosoaroh 
reactors with the aim of training technicians able to operate nuclear stations 
in the relatively near future. As forecasts had proved to bo rather optimistic, 
it was often difficult for those countries, whose resources in money and staff 
wore limited, to use their installations for original work in the field of 
nuclear research, Mb effort should bo spared to keep the capable research 
workers of those countries and their laboratories in toubh with leading 
research workj the Agency could organise links between research centers in . 
those countri'os and the corresponding centers in more experienced countries, 


23, In the third place, the Agency could play a significant part in relation 
to the large nations,, by virtue of the fact that in the atomic field it was 
the only organization to which all the Great Powers belonged, 


24, The Agency's symposia provided the atomic Powers with the opportunity 
of comparing their views on the future, and the meetings organized by it in 
the past had been fruitful. France also recognized the usefulness of 
comparing views on general problems, and hoped that the Agency would take over 
the principal responsibility for the third International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of- Atomic Energy, which might bo held in 1963. 


25. In technical matters, there was a much disputed question in which the 
Agency could play its part - the treatment of radioactive waste (for 'any 
considerable development in nuclear energy inevitably caused the creation of 
large amounts of radioactive waste). It was completely untrue to say that 
that problem concerned only the military atomic Powers, and the French delegation 
therefore fully endorsed the suggestion by the delegate of the Soviet Union for 
a meeting of experts from the four or five Powers most concerned with the 
subject, which was unfortunately too often exploited purely for the purposos 
of political propaganda, 

GC(V)/OR„50 
page 14 


26, The leading countries had also much to gain if swift decisions were 
reached on the problems of health and safety standards, for public fear about 
radioactivity was increasing. The Agency, which had already done excellent 
work in the matter, should play its part by laying down the operating 


conditions and the security regulations appropriate to research reactors and 
power reactors, 


27, The French Government approved the Agency's Program and Budget for 1962, 
which involved only a slight increase in staff and an increase of less than 
1,5$ in ^ho regular budget. Technical assistance would be the Agency's 
principal fiold of activity in 1962e In that connection, France would 
continue to put at the Director General's disposal some of its most able 
experts, and hoped that the benefit from the results obtained by the technical 
assistance missions vrould not be limited to the Member States which they had 
visited, France, which would have received more than 30 Agency fellows in 
1961, would continue to participate in that training program and hoped that 
it would develop further. 


28, The French Government approved the program of conferonces and symposia 


drawn up for 1962, but warned the Agency against the dangers of increasing 


the number of those meetings, 


29, The program of work of the Seibersdorf Laboratory was also praiseworthy, 
but it was to be hoped that the research work performed there as well as work 
performed on external contract would bo related as closely as possible to the 
major activities of the Agency, 


30, One of the main statutory functions of the Agency' concerned the supply of 
source and fissionable materials. It seemed that in 1962, as in 1961, the 
Agency would have no occasion to supply fuel for power reactors, in spite of 
the revival of optimism observed in some advanced countries, whore it was 
anticipated that nuclear power would become competitive before the end of the 
next decade. For that reason France would continue to advocate moderation in 
the application of safeguards, in order not to drive towards bilateral 
negotiations the few countries which might bo tempted to obtain the nuclear 
materials they needed from the Agency. 



GC(V)/OR,50 
page 15 


31. Because of the complexity of the Agency's activities, his country had 
always considered that the Director General should be chosen from among those 
leading men who had for years been closely involved in the development of 
atomic energy in their own country. Last June, therefore, when voting in the 
Board, France had not hesitated between a specialist in atomic energy and a 
man who, however meritorious, had never been concerned with the development 
of atomic energy. The question of the country of origin could not be 
completely ignored, but it should bo secondary to specialist knowledge and in 
no case ought it to be the guiding factor in choosing the head of an international 
organization whose function was essentially technical, His 
delegation accordingly saw no reason why the Agency should not choose for its 
second Director General, on the ground that ho was fitted for the task, a 
national of one of the countries - but from another part of the world - which 
provided most of its credits,its training fellowships, its correspondents and 
its experts, 
32. Unlike those countries that had systematically opposed the candidature 
of a national of an advanced country, regardless of his worth, Prance by no 
means refused to consider the idea of a future head of the Agency being a 
national of a country receiving technical assistance, provided he was familiar 
with its complex problems. Only such a person could command the respect of 
staff members who were of real worth to the Agency, especially in the 
technical field, 
33. The French delegation was thus glad that the Board's choice for Director 
General had fallen on'Mr. Eklund, He was not only one of the pioneers of 
atomic energy in Sweden but also a person who, it was unanimously agreed, had 
succeeded on the international plane as Secretary General of the Second 
United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, 
held in Geneva in 1958. His presence at the head of the Agency would assist 
it to play the important role it should in the third conference. As the 
technical director of an organization which numbered more than a thousand 
people and which had tackled all the problems of a uranium chain, Mr* Eklund 
was completely qualified for such a task. The French delegation wholeheartedly 
supported his candidature and hoped that the political considerations 
raised in opposition to his appointment' would grow dim in the light of his 

GC(V)/OR',5P 
page 16 


merits and that he would not• be'hampered in his direction of the Agency during' • 
•• 
the four-year period which would bring hearer the' 'time when nuclear power 
became competitive and the Agency could-assume it's full functions, 


34•> Mr. BERGMAM (Israel) congratulated the President on his election, 
and offered him his best wishes for success in his high office. ' 


35. He asked permission to dwell briefly on the research carried out in • 
Israel in the field of atomic energy<, The main objective had been to 
utilize as fully as possible the swimming-pool research reactor, which had 
been operating satisfactorily for over a year, .Israel was producing a number 
of radioactive elements, limiting its activities to short-lived radioisotopes 
among whic,h'.fluorine-l8 had proved to bo of some practical value in the 
location o-f brain tumors-. , .
.. • 
36. Like the other developing countries, Israel'was particularly interested 
in the agricultural applications of atomic energy. Apart from the production 
of useful, 'mutations of .practical value, the most urgent problem in that field 
was the fight against insects.-including agricultural posts as well as 
disease-transmitting insects... The human race was losing ground in its fight 
against insects, and atomic energy.in the form, of sterilizing radiation could 
be an extremely valuable instrument* _s _. • _ ,. ,. . 
37<! The Israel Atomic Energy Establishment was also taking"an interest in ' 


chemical protection against radiation. In studying that method of protection,' 
which seemed' to have a promising future, the Agency would supplement usefully 


its important activities concerning water pollution by radioactive wastes, 
radiation-dosimetry and general aspects of safety, 


38, Among the routine activities of the Establishment was, of course, the'' 


measurement of radioactive fall-out* There wore some areas in the world 
where, for various reasons, no measurements of that kind had been carried but. 

His delegation Would like to see a survey of those areas included in the 

Agency's work on radioactive fall-out, both as a matter of scientific interest 


and because' those areas might in future have to serve as sources of food for 


the ever-increasing population of the world. He felt sure that the Agency's-• 


laboratory and the atomic energy establishments of many countries would be • 
willing to carry out the analytical work connected with the study of those 


areas. His Government, for one, would accede to any request of that kind 


addressed to it by the Agency, 



GC(V)/OR,50 
page 17 


39. Another important problem of technical interest was the utilization of 
research reactors for analytical purposes? activation analysis was being 
increasingly used because of the great advantages it offered, Israel had 
recently developed a method which consisted in the irradiation of uraniferous 
ores and measurement of the secondary neutrons emitted by the contained 
uranium-235. That method had put surveying of the radioactivity of geological 
structures en a new basis. A technician could now carry out more than one 
hundred analyses of very high accuracy in a single working day, 
40. The Government of Israel was fully aware that the nuclear future of the 
country depended as much on the training of scientists and technicians as on 
actual research carried out by them. The Israel Radioisotope Training Center 
was now taking advantage of the possibilities offered by the research reaotor. 
Moreover, efforts wore being made" to show visitors from developing countries 
that the possibilities of atomic energy were by no means limited to power 
supplys in fact the medical, agricultural and other applications of atomic 
energy seemed very promising, 
41. The international course on radiobiology that was soon to begin in 
Israel had aroused great interest in many countries, including some that were 
far more advanced from the nuclear point of view. It was through the good 
offices of the Agency that Israel had been ablo to arrange the course, and 
the Israeli Government wished to express its gratitude for the moral support 
and practical help it had received from the Agency, 
42. It was important to encourage the developing countries to avail themselves 
without delay of the benefits of atomic energy. The Israeli delegation 
was therefore happy to sec new States becoming Members of the Agency at every 
session of the Conferences it extended a warm welcome to the Ropublic of the 
Congo (Leopoldvillc) whoso application for membership of the Agency had just 
boon approved— , For the same reason the Israeli Government welcomed the 
proposal to increase the number of Members of the Board.-' It firmly believed 
that that stop? apart from its political advantages, would go a long way towards 
establishing a reasonable policy on the question of regional centers. The 
timo had not yet come for the Agency to devoto a considerable part of its 
budget to the establishment of costly centers, Each country should first 
5/ GC(v)/OR-48, paragraph 51, 
6/ GC(V)/151 and Add.1, 



GC(V)/OR,50 
page 18 


have its atomic energy establishment and train its own nationals, gradually 
attracting students from abroad and calling on experts from more advanced 
countries through the good offices of the Agency, 


43. Referring to the project for an international center for theoretical 
physics-" , he said that the Israeli Government - while recognizing that the 
project was admirable in itself - would prefer the Agency to begin by 
arranging a series of symposia on thoorotical physics, to be held in 
interested Member States, with the participation of scientists from all the 
advanced countries. That interim measure would have the advantage, among 
others, of showing many countries how important true international collaboration 
was in that field? it would also enable them to realize that founding 
a regional center was not a question of prestige, but a matter of necessity 
for the host country as well as the other participants, 
44. Ho had deliberately abstained from mentioning political questions because 
they should not enter into- the deliberations and decisions of the Agency, 
Nevertheless he was bound to say that the Israeli Government had been grieved 
at the Agency's decision not to allow it to be host, in 1961, to a seminar 
on the applications of short-livod radioisotopes, although there had boen 
no scientific objection and no othor country had offered to act as host to 
such a seminar, 
45. The Israeli delegation sincerely hoped that the Agency would be able 
to fulfill the hope expressed by the out-going Director General at the 48th 
plenary meeting, In spite of temporary difficulties, collaboration between 
scientists was possibles it was, indeed, essential for the survival of 
humanity, 
46, Mr. ESCBAUZIER (Netherlands) warmly congratulated the President on 
his election, 


47- The Agency had rJW been operating for four years. That period, which 
was mentioned twico in the Statute - explicitly with regard to the term of 
office of the Director General and implicitly in the provision for a general 
review of the Statute -, was not without significance. 


48, The Director General's term of office was coming to .an end. Delegates 
had listened with particular interest to the detailed statement in which he 


7/ GC(IV)/RES/76. 



GC(V)/OR<50 
page 19 


had expressed his views on the achievements and shortcomings of the Agency 
and had noted his suggestions for the future, He (Mr. Eschauzicr) commended 
Mr. Colo for his wholehearted devotion to the Agency. 


49. In the introduction to its report (GC(v)/154> paragraph l), the Board 
recalled that the Agoncy had begun normal operations two years previously, 
and that 1961 has been generally expected to he a year of consolidation. 
Useful experience had been gained, not only of the Agency's activities, but 
also of the implications of certain constitutional provisions of the Statute, 
50. In accordance with Article XVIII, the question of the general review of 
the Statute had been placed on the agenda, To undertake that review, the 
Conference would have to draw up a balance-sheet of the past years and hazard 
a forecast of the future, 
51. The peculiarities of the Agency's structure were explained by the unique 
character of atomic energy and the need for delicately balanced compromises. 
That being the case, considerable foresight had been necessary to provide the 
opportunity for revision. Dissatisfactions undoubtedly existed in certain 
quarters, but did that make it necessary to undertake a general review? Even 
if an imperfection was generally recognized it was inevitable that the 
remedies proposed would differ, and it might therefore be best simply to 
adapt the existing structure as need arose and avoid changing the very 
foundations of the edifice. Article XVIII moreover afforded the possibility 
of pragmatic and partial solutions: in that connection the Netherlands 
delegation wholeheartedly supported the amendment to Article VI recommended 
by the Board with a view to increasing the size-of the latter and meeting the 
legitimate wishes of Member States of the "Africa and the Middle East" area, 
who sought more equitable representation for that region, 
52. Once that point had been settled, it seemod to the Netherlands delegation 
that' the most urgent task was to give consideration to the reorientation 
of the Agency's activities reflected in the program for 1962, A certain 
balance between the different parts of the program would have to be struck 
and an order of priority established in the light of now trends and likely 
developments. 

C-0(V)/0B,50 
page 20 ' 


53. He M been.h.ppy to ,ote fro, the Director General's adaressS/ that the 
Secretariat had started formulation of a long-term program on the basis of 
the changes which had occurred. In its observations on the program for 1962 
the Board informed the General Conference that it intended to continue its 
study of the problems connected with programming of that kind and the 
Netherlands delegation was looking forward with interest to the specific 
proposals which the Board would submit to the sixth 'regular session of the 
Conference," ' . 
54. The Agency's functions had been defined on the basis of assumptions which 
either had not been confirmed or had materialized more slowly than expected^ 
He considered that the adaptation of the Agency's program had perhaps been 
too slow, and for that reason it would be necessary to pay great attention to 
a forward appraisal at the sixth regular session, 
55• Turning to some issues of interest more specifically to his own country, 
he recalled;, in the'first place, that the Netherlands had benefited from 
Agency assistance. An advisory'panel of experts had studied the safety 
aspects of a high-flux reactor project, and in the light of their findings it 
could be said that the Agency was fully capable of giving important assistance 
to countries requiring expert opinion on the hazards involved in reactor 
operation, The Institute' for the Application of Nuclear-Energy to Agriculture, 
at Wageningen, had received valuable advice on material accounting for radioisotopes, 


56, At that Institute the Agency and FAO had organized two international 


courses on radioisotope techniques in agricultural and forestry research, for 

which the Netherlands had provided the necessary facilities, If the Agency 


wished, his country would be prepared to act as host for symposia on subjects 


of mutual interest. In view of its present state of development in the field 


of peaceful uses of atomic energy, the Motherlands had not been able, except 


in exceptional casos, to comply with requests for experts or fellowships. 


Nevertheless, a start had been made in the form of three Type II fellowships 


offered to the Agency. 


8/ GC(V)/0H.48, paragraph 86. 



GC(V)/OR,50 
pago 21 


57• The Netherlands was very much concerned with the effects of environmental 
radioactivity, particularly those accruing from the release of radioactive 
wastes into the sea and fresh water. It had noted with interest the paragraphs 
in the Annual Report devoted to the subject (GC(v)/154? paragraphs 147-150) 
and the attention which the Agency was paying to co-ordinating the activities 
of interested organizations? the Netherlands also welcomed the work of the 
panel of legal experts (GC(Y)/154, paragraph 170) which had considered the measures 
to be taken at the international level to implement the conclusions of the 
Panel on Radioactive Waste Disposal into the Sea, 


58. The atom would probably become a viable source of power? the Netherlands 
and the whole world were preparing for that event and the Agency could make 
a substantial contribution in that field, During its first four years the 
Agency had become a useful and respected member of the United Nations family. 
In spite of some disappointments, it had very great potentialities. It was 
certain that, with growing experience, it would become increasingly effective 
in carrying out its objectives, 
59• Mr. IPPOLITO (Italy) congratulated the President on his election. 
He then associated himself with the expressions of condolence voiced by 
earlier speakers at the untimely death of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, 


60, He paid tribute to the outgoing Director General, who had given the Agency 
a vitality and efficiency which unfortunately did not always exist in other 
international organizations, too often paralyzed by the opposing interests of 
their members, 


61. The Agency itself might on various occasions have become an instrument 
of political propaganda. The Director General had ensured that the Agency 
remained faithful to its objectives and had at the same time encouraged its 
work for the peaceful* uses of atomic energy, The Italian delegation fully 
agreed with the proposals put forward by the Director General in his address 
with regard to better organization and more efficient working of the 
Secretariat^. 
9/ GC(V)/OR,48, paragraphs 88-89. 



GC(Y)/OR?50 
pago '22 


62. The Agency had dono a remarkable job with regard to technical assistance 
in the nuclear field. However, the task was enormous and much remained to 
he done, particularly when it was considered that atomic energy was of supreme 
importance as key to the industrial progress of the developing countries, 
Italian participation in the Agency's technical assistance program had so far 
been less than was desirables the reason was not ignorance or blindness on 
the part of the Italian authorities but a long-standing legislative deficiency 
which hadj however, recently been remedied. The Act of 11 August 1960 and 
the establishment of the National Committee for Nuclear Energy (CNEM) ~ which 
had replaced the National Committee for JSFuolear Research - justified hopes for 
a substantial improvement in the situation. 
63. Two of the chief responsibilities of the new Committee, whose activity 
extended, however, to all spheres of nuclear research, were to supervise 
the construction and operation of power reactors and to promote the technical 
training of nuclear experts. It had an appropriation of 75 000 million lire 
($120 million) for a period of four years. That sum had made it possible to 
prepare a much more comprehensive program of work than in the past. 
64. Among other activities, the Italian program included the building of 
two nuclear power stations with a power capacity of over 350 MW. Furthermore, 
CNEN had studied two extremely interesting projects. The first covered the 
study, erection and operation of a 30—MW(t) reactor, organic liquid-cooled 
and -moderated, which would provide technical information and data on the 
operating costs and final unit cost of nuclear power.; That reactor was to 
go into service at the beginning of 1964? the estimated cost being some 
$12 million, . The aim of the second project was to show the feasibility of 
233 


setting up a Th-U fuel cycle for thermal power reactors at: comparatively 
low cost. The plant, which was at present in the planning stage, would begin 
to operate at the beginning of 1964, the initial cost being about $5.5 million. 
To those two programs must be added a design study for a 70 000-ton nuclearpropelled 
tanker, 


65. He hoped that those few very general items and projects to which he had 
referred would load many foreign countries to ask for more detailed information 
on Italian nuclear programs. The exchanges of information on activities 
in the nuclear field undoubtedly provided the best means of extending to all 
the benefits arising from the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

GC(V)/OR,50 
page 23 

66, Being well aware of the difficulties in implementing technical assistance 
programs, and in response to the Agency's appeals for stronger support from 
its Members, the Italian delegation was happy to announce that the CNEN had 
decided to work more closely with the Agency in assisting it to achieve the 
objectives laid down in its Statute, As from the start of the Agency's next 


fellowship program and up to the end of 1964? appropriations for fellowships 
for training foreign scientists in Italy would be doubled, i,e, would be 
increased from 10 to 20 million lire, or more than $32 000. At the request 
of the Agency, and within the limits of the funds appropriated, changes could 
be made in the amount and duration of individual fellowships, which at present 
were to the value of $1 500 and were tenable for eight months. The CNEH, on 
its part, thanked the Agency for the opportunities for further training which 

the latter had obtained for Italian technicians, and was, in that connection, 


studying ways and means of making a partial reimbursement of costs with a 
view to lightening the financial burden on the Agency. 


67. The CWEN intended to expand substantially the number of schemes for the 
dispatch of Italian scientific and technical missions to the developing 
countries. Agreements as to the financing of the travel and maintenance 
expenses of the experts concerned might be concluded with the Agency, It 
should be understood, however, that for a country like Italy, which had 
important projects of its own on hand, there wore certain difficulties in 
the way of long-term secondment of highly qualified personnel to assignments 
abroad. 
68. As regards the program of research contracts, he was glad to announce 
that the Agency could now request the CNEN to carry out research in which it 
was interested, free of charge to itself. The CHEN was prepared to carry 
out such research at its own expense, while placing the results at the Agency's 
entire disposal°} it merely reserved the right to make a choice among the 
subjects for research proposed by the Agency, On the conclusion of the 
current contracts, the favorable terms to which he had referred would be 
applied to them, should the Agency v/ish the work to continue, 
69, As in recent years, the CUEN had decided to make a voluntary contribution 
of $25 000 to the Agency for 1961. In view of the unanimous agreement on 
the need to strengthen co-operation among theoretical physicists, particularly 


GC (v)/OR.5 0 
page 24 


those from the developing countries, Italy also intended to assist in the 
establishment of an international center for theoretical physics. Provided 
the Agency agreed to the city of Trieste as the location of the center, Italy 
would he prepared to furnish the site and itself undertake the construction of 
the center at a cost of about 300 million lire, or $500 000, Italy would, 
moreover, bear the whole cost of erecting accommodation for the staff and 


fellows at a cost of a further 300 million lire. It had been decided to 
make an annual contribution of 20 million lire, or $32 000, for a period of 
five years, towards the cost of running the center. Italy was, therefore, 
prepared to offer more than $1 million in all for the international center 
for theoretical physics, 

70. In conclusion, he hoped that Italy's efforts to meet the Agency's needs . 
would be appreciated not only for their monetary value, but also, and above 
all, for the spirit of collaboration and co-operation which they showed. 
Jit Mr. SHIM (Korea) associated himself with-previous speakers in 
congratulating Mr. Quihillalt on his election to the presidency of the 

Conference, On behalf of the Korean Government he paid a tribute to the 
Director General, who had carried out his duties with ability and devotion. 
He also congratulated the Agency's staff on their untiring efforts to implement 
the programs drawn up by the Board, particularly in the fields of 


technical assistance and the exchange of information to.promote scientific 
progress in developing countries, 


72, He was happy to point out that over 1 000 scientists and technicians 
specialising in atomic energy had been trained in the advanced countries under 
the Agency's fellowship programs. The arrangements made by the Agency for 
the exchange of information had contributed much to the development of atomic 
energy in Korea, which had benefited, in particular, by the presence for 
several weeks of a mobile radioisotope laboratory, 


73. With the assistance of the Agency and of the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission, Korea had made rapid progress. Mention should be made, in the 
first place, of the establishment of the Atomic Energy Research Institute, 
where a Triga Mark II reactor, made in the United States, was being installed, 
A new five-year plan for the period 1962-66 had been drawn up by the Office 
of Atomic Energy^ .among other things, it provided for extension of the uses 
of atomic energy and expansion of the laboratories and other facilities of 
the Atomic Energy Research Institute, 

GC(V)/OR,50 
pago 25 


74, Korea attached groat importance to a plan for the use of radioisotopes in 
agriculture and medicine, That plan included the installation of a J-MeV 
Tan de Graaff accelerator, and full utilization of the reactor for research 
work and applications in the various branches of nuclear science, 


75. A follow-up mission had visited Korea from 16 to 23 August 1961 and 
supplied the competent authorities with valuable information for putting the 
atomic energy program into effect. Two experts were now on mission in Korea 
and were actively engaged in advising Korean scientists and technicians. 
Their advice was greatly appreciated, 
76, Fourteen fellowships had been awarded to Korean students under the 
Agency's fellowship program for 1961, but that number fell far short of the 
Korean Government's request. It appeared that one of the Agency's most 
urgent tasks was to train qualified scientists and technicians in the 
developing countries, Korea hoped it would be possible to meet its request 
for fellowships under the 1962 program, 


77• The importance of establishing regional training centers and of certain 
resoarch contracts with less-developed countries could not bo overestimated. 
Having promoted the establishment of a training contor in Latin Amorica and 
planned a radioisotope center for the Arab countries, the Agency should now 
take similar measures in respect of the "Par Bast" and "South-East Asia and 


the Pacific" areas. The Agency would also do well to award as many research 
contracts as possible to loss-developed countries, thereby encouraging 
research. 


The meeting rose at 5.20 P.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(V)/OR.51 


28 November 1961 


General Conference 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 23 September 1961, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


II 
General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1960-1961 
(continued from the 50th meeting) 1-29 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1 
Poland 2-20 
Lebanon 21 - 29 


* GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(v)/INF/42/Rev. 3. 


61-5881 



GC(V)/0E.51 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 196O-6I 
(GC(V)/154, 168)(continued from the 50th meeting) 


1. Mr. EMSLYAHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) made the 
following statement*; 


(1) 
"The present session of the General Conference of the Agency is taking 
place against the background of a deteriorating international situation. 
Countries are now witnessing the increasing aggressiveness of reactionary 
forces, which are speeding up the race for arms to an unprecedented rate, 
and leading to tension in the international situation. 
(2) 
"The Soviet people, like all other peoples, needs peace. 
(3) 
"The new draft program of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union proclaims 
that 'to abolish war, to consolidate lasting peace on earth is the 
historic mission of Communism1. That aim, dear to all peace-loving men, 
is given concrete expression daily in the policy of the Soviet Government. 
This policy - a policy of peace and fellowship with all States - aims at 
developing relations with them on the basis of peaceful co-existence. 
Por the Soviet Union, as for all the socialist countries, there are no 
problems in their relations with other States which they want to settle by 
force of arms. 


(4) 
"The Soviet Government has done and is doing much to relieve tension and 
clear the way for normal relations and co-existence between all States, 
A dependable, lasting peace, a peace without arms and without war, has 
always been the dream of humanity. The most reliable way of ensuring a 
lasting peace on'earth is by universal and total disarmament. The Soviet 
Union has proposed negotiations for full and final abolition of all 
material means of conducting war, for the disbandment of armies, for the 
abolition of nuclear and rocket weapons and all other types of armaments, 
as well as for the abolition of war ministries and general staffs and for 
stopping military training and military appropriations. At the same time 
the Soviet Government has repeatedly said that it was willing to accept 
any proposals on control if our program of general and complete disarmament 
was accepted. The Soviet Union was not content with merely 
putting forward a program of general and total disarmament, it is also 
endeavoring to implement this program. Inside and outside the United 
Nations, the Soviet Government is trying to translate disarmament from 
planning to reality, and had it not been for the negative attitude of 
the Western Powers, general and complete disarmament would already have 
become a reality, 
(5) 
"While indefatigably pursuing the interests of peace and security for all 
peoples, the Soviet Government cannot ignore the fact that in reply to 
its proposal to conclude a peace treaty with Germany and on this basis 
normalize the situation in Berlin, aggressive circles in the West have 
answered by intensifying their military preparations. 
This statement is reproduced verbatim at the'speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Rul es of Procedure of the Conference, 



GC(V)/0E.51 
page 3 


"It cannot be indifferent to the fact that in West Berlin the spirit of 
revenge and aggression has again come to the fore. 


"The West German army, equipped with modern weapons, is already the 
nucleus of the armed forces of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
aggressive bloc. A remilitarized West Germany is being converted into 
the spearhead for unleashing a new world war. 


"Faced with the threat of a new war, the Soviet Government decided to take 
the necessary measures to strengthen its defences and those of the whole 
mighty socialist camp. The Soviet Union has also been forced to carry out 
experimental, nuclear weapons explosions. The measures which the Soviet 
Union has undertaken to strengthen its defense potential also serve the 
security.of all peace-loving States and nations, the general cause of 
safeguarding and consolidating peace. Those who are preparing war must 
clearly realize that aggression on their side will meet with a crushing 
retaliation. 


"At this Conference some delegates have said that nuclear tests have a 
harmful effect on living organisms. But, gentlemen, the truth must be 
faced; the question at issue is not the harmful effects of atomic 
radiation on living organisms, which no one would deny. But we are 
talking about saving humanity from the dangers of a thermonuclear war and 
saving the lives of millions of people by not allowing atomic 'weapons to 
be used? this can be done only by introducing universal and complete 
disarmament. It is not surprising that back in 1958 scientists attending 
the international Pugwash Oonforcnce here in Austria had stateds 'Obviously 
biological damage caused by a war in which nuclear weapons were used 
would be incomparably greater than that caused by tests. Thus the main 
problem now facing humanity is to create conditions that would 'remove the 
possibility of war.' That is now the principal goal and the main problem. 
Universal and complete disarmament will not only preserve health and 
remove the danger of the consequences of atomic radiation, but will save 
life itself and will liberate humanity from the deadly menace of a 
nuclear war. 


"In our opinion, with the Wos crn Powers continuing their senseless armaments 
race, the conclusion of a separate agreement on the discontinuance 
of nuclear tests is only likely to breed dangerous illusions in the public 
mind that something is being done to avert a nuclear war. It is clear to 
everybody that such an agreement in itself would not for a moment arrest 
the process of stockpiling nuclear weapons of mass destruction, not to 
speak of the fact that the existing stocks would remain untouched. With 
a nuclear arms race no one can prevent other countries which do not yet 
possess nuclear weapons from mobilizing their scientific and technological 
resources for their manufacture. The Soviet Government is firmly 
convinced that in the present state of affairs, agreement on the problem 
of the discontinuance of nuclear tests is only possible on the basis of 
universal and complete disarmament. This is the only correct and realistic 
solution. If, in fact, States were to carry out universal and complete 
disarmament under effective international control and if all types of 
weapons, including nuclear ones, were abolished and armies disbanded, 
the spur to perfect nuclear weapons and consequently to tost them would 
disappear. 



GC(V)/QE.51 


page 4 


(11) "Gentlemen, as you arc aware, on the eve of the sixteenth regular session 
of the General Assembly of the United Nations and shortly before the 
Agency's own General Conference started work, the Governments of the 
Soviet Union and of the United States reached agreement on principles 
for disarmament talks!/, which is a definite step forward. 
(12) "I have already spoken about how important universal and complete disarmament 
would be for the Agency's work. It would create endless 
possibilities for obtaining nuclear fuel and would open the doors of 
nuclear laboratories at present closed and would enable scientists to 
devote all their gifts and energy to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
(13) "Gentlemen, our Agency cannot be indifferent to the problems of disarmament 
and must actively work towards the realization of that great dream 
of humanity, I propose that the Conference adopt a draft resolution on 
the subject, the text of which will be circulated by my delegation for 
consideration by the Conference,ZJ 
(14) "Represented at the present Conference are the heads of atomic energy 
commissions and nuclear scientists from all over the world. This 
representative assembly probably realizes more clearly than any other 
the implications which a nuclear war would have at the present time. 
The scientists who devote their efforts to the harnessing of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes are naturally alarmed at the present world 
international situation. Among other things, it will complicate the 
work of the Agency, which is pledged to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. 
(15) "Our present generation is witnessing the beginning of a now era in the 
history of civilization - the atomic age. The unravelling of the secret 
of the atomic nucleus and the harnessing of the energy of the atom for 
the benefit of mankind constitute one of the supreme triumphs of the 
human intellect. Thanks to the indefatigable efforts of scientists, 
engineers and many thousands of ordinary workers, mankind is now beginning 
to enjoy the practical benefits of nuclear energy in the form of 
electricity from nuclear power plants, engines for nuclear propulsion, 
radioisotopes and radiations for use in industry, agriculture and 
medicine. 
(16) "All these achievements are only the first chapter in the story of man's 
efforts to harness the inexhaustible resources inherent in the nucleus 
of the atom. The time is not far off when it will be possible to turn 
t,o practical account the energy from a number of nuclear processes and 
then we shall be in a position not only to meet the power requirements 
and satisfy other vital needs of nations everywhere but also to implement 
plans for transforming our own world and conquering the universe so 
bold as to bo no more than dreams at the present time. 
l/ United Nations document A/4879. 


2/ Subsequently issued as do oument GC(V)/175. 


GC(V)/0B.51 
page 5 


(17) "It was our desire to lose no tine in placing atomic energy at the 
service of mankind that impelled us in the Soviet Union to support the 
idea of the International Atomic Energy Agency, in spite of our 
realization of the fact that the idea had only boon meeted as a 
propaganda move in order to distract world attention from the arms-race 
policy of the United States. The Soviet Union was the first State to 
ratify the Agency's Statute. 
(18) "The ratification of the Agency's Statute met with opposition in the 
United States Senate on the part of the Republican right-wing senators. 
The'Christian Science Monitor' wrote that, while there had boon almost 
unanimous approval in the Senate of the idea of setting up the Agency 
in 1953? there was nevertheless at the tine a number of senators who 
considered the Agency to bo a matter of secondary importance. 
(19) "Certain pressure groups in the United States were insistent that before 
the Statute was ratified, there should be bargaining to obtain a number 
of favorable conditions. 
(20) "One of those conditions was scon in the efforts made to obtain guarantees 
that the Chinese People's Republic would not be admitted to the Agency 
and that a more stringent system of control would be exercised with 
respect to countries receiving aid, giving the Agency the right to 
aPPly even stricter sanctions than are provided for now in the Statute. 
(21) "Speaking before a Senate Foreign Relations Committee devoted to a 
discussion of the Agency's Statute on 10 May 19573 the former United 
States Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, made a special point of 
the fact that in accepting the Statute of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, the United States would be assuming only a few responsibilities, 
and those not heavy ones. He added, howovor, that the ratification 
of the Statute would enable the United States to go on asserting 
its position of leadership. 
(22) "At the.time, the United States Senate made the ratification of the 
Agency's Statute in fact contingent on the post of Director General 
being allocated to a United States citizen and only ratified the 
Statute onco it had become clc-ar that this would be the case. 
(23) "Wo would not have brought up all these details if it were not for 
the fact that the present General Conference is called upon to approve 
the appointment of a now Director General and that it is therefore important 
to recall the way in which the first Director General was appointed, 
(24) "Various prominent personalities in the United States have sometimes 
levelled the criticism that the speeches made by Soviet representatives 
at the .Agency are subordinated to political considerations.. 
(25) "Well, Gont-lomcn, it is perfectly true that the Soviet representatives 
do at times have to touch on political questions, but why? The answer 
is very simples it is because the United States subordinates, its 
activities in this organization to political considerations. 

GC(V)/OR.51 
page 6 


(26) "What Is the explanation 
for example, of the fact that five socialist 
countries cannot joint the Agency? This is not ruled out by the Statute? 
as is made clear in Article IV of the Statute, 
(27) "Svery year the question of China is brought up at the General Conference 
of the Agency. Obviously certain United States personalities would be 
only too happy if the Soviet representatives silently resigned themselves 
to a situation where the place of the Chinese People's Republic in the 
Agency is taken by the Chiang Kai-shek clique. It is not we who arc 
responsible for originating these problems but the United States State 
Department, which is intent on creating a cold war atmosphere even where 
this could bo avoided. Ho, Gentlemen, we cannot reconcile ourselves to 
this situation even, I am sorry to say, if this moans giving our 
activities what can be considered as political overtones, 
(28) "We did not oppose the granting of consultative status to the International 
Confederation of Free Trade Unions nor to the International 
Federation of Christian Trade Unions. 
(29) "One might have expected that the United States would have been tolerant 
and co-operative when the question arose of granting similar status to 
the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). Nothing of the kind, 
however, took place. The United States decided to turn this issue too 
into an opportunity for intensifying the cold war atmosphere in the 
Agency. At last year's session of the General Conference, the United 
States representative made a slanderous speech against the WFTU. The 
United Kingdom representative made a similar statement. The voting 
machinery was set in motion with the' result, as you know, that the 
World Federation of Trade Unions was denied the consultative status 
which is enjoyed by the two pro-Anerican trade union movements I 
mentioned earlier^/. This is another matter, Gentlemen, to which we 
cannot reconcile ourselves. 
(30) "If we examine the work of the Agency over the past year, we shall find 
many instances confirming the point that the United States representatives 
are doing everything to subordinate the Agency's activities to their 
political interests, which often have nothing at all to do with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. In many cases, obvious attempts have 
been made to give the Agency's work a military slant and to make the 
Agency the handmaid of the military side of the nuclear industry. 
(31) "There are quite a number of examples to substantiate this. Earlier 
in the year, the Agency Secretariat submitted for urgent consideration 
a 'request ' for the examination of the harbor of Copenhagen with a view 
to tlie admission of nuclear shipping. The question arises as to why 
a request of this sort should be considered as a matter of urgency. It 
is a well-known fact that the only nuclear-propelled merchant ship 
at present in operation is the Soviet ice-breaker 'Lenin'. There are 
no plans, however, for this vessel to put in at Copenhagen, but in any 
case, • we can be sure that it was not for the admission of the 'Lenin' 
2/ GC(IV)/OR.47, paragraph 61. 



GC(V)/OE.51 
page 7 


that preparations were necessary in the port of Copenhagen. A further 


question arises quite naturally out of this. Is this port not being got 


ready to admit other vessels of a non-peaceful character? This seems 


all the more likely in view of the reports which, have appeared in the 


Western press .that the United States is prepared to hand over to the 


SATO countries five nuclear submarines fitted out with Polaris missiles 
equipped with nuclear warheads. 


(32) "In May of this year, the Italian newspaper, 'Paese Sera', published an 
article referring to discussions in Paris among members of the British 
delegation at NATO headquarters of a United States proposal to make 
available to NATO five submarines equipped with Polaris missiles? four 
of them to bo based at Holy Loch in Scotland, 
(33) "In order to be able to carry- out possible military assignments, according 
to the newspaper, those submarines were scheduled to cruise about for 
long periods in the North Atlantic and the Baltic in order to bo in a 
position to approach their objectives quickly. 
(34) "At the be ginning of May, Norway and Denmark agreed to allow those four 
submarines to take shelter if necessary in Norwegian and Danish bases. 
(35) "What is behind all this? 
(36) "An answer is supplied by a British M.P., Mr. Emrys Hughes, in a pamphlet 
published in February 1961 and entitled 'Polaris and the armaments race'. 
In this pamphlet, Mr. Hughes writes that Mr. Macmillan had agreed to 
place the Scottish bases at the disposal of the United States in order 
to enable Polaris-equipped American submarines to sail in the Arctic with 
a full load of missiles and nuclear warheads, which would be powerful 
enough, to quote the boastful statements made by American admirals, to 
destroy all Kussian cities and industrial areas situated in the northern 
latitudes between Moscow and Omsk. 
(37) "On 4 March 1961, the military correspondent of the British 'Daily Express 
wrote that the crows of all the submarines sent to Holy Loch would be 
trained to carry out a special maneuver designed to enable the submarines 
to direct broadside salvoes of hydrogen bombs at .Russia while 
lying at anchor in their base in Scotland. Ho added that these missiles 
would be aimed at definite targets situated between Leningrad and Kiev 
by means of electronic devices. 
(38) "Attempts h avc been made before to arrange for American submarines to 
'visit' the harbor of Copenhagen. The United States submarine 'Skate', 
for example, attempted to put in at this port as early as 1958 but was 
prevented from doing so as the result of an outburst of indignation 
among the Danish public. 



GC(V)/OR.51 
page 8 


(59) "This is the reason - in order to provide nuclear submarines with 
access to the port of Copenhagen - why a 'request' for the dispatch of 
Agency experts to examine Copenhagen harbor has come up for discussion 
at the Agency. Will the examination of questions of this sort by the 
Agency promote co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy? Of 
course not,' In spite of the criticism made by the Soviet representatives 
on the Board the outcome of the discussion was loft vague. Two points 
should be made. Firstly, this is not the only example of our organization 
engaging in unworthy activities of this kind. Secondly, enormous 
importance attaches to the trend, the lines along which the activities 
of the Agency develops is it to bo employed for peaceful purposes or 
are we to have a peaceful organization used to solve military questions 
of interest to a major nuclear Powe*1? 
(40) "Another example can be quoted, also in connection with the Agency's work 
over the past year. As is well known, three of the four nuclear Powers the 
United States of America, Great Britain and Prance - dispose of the 
waste accumulating in their military plutonium plants by discharging it 
into the sea. World opinion - particularly people living in coastal 
areas - is thoroughly alarmed by this discharge of radioactivity into 
the soas and oceans, which is a danger to everyone who relics on the 
sea as a source of food. 
(41) "In May of this year, the 'Now Tork Herald Tribune' published an article 
by James Warner eloquently ontitlods 'Is it dangerous to cat fish?1. 
The question raised by the author is whether the oysters, lobsters and 
other types of frosh-watcr or marine organisms which we oat at the 
present time or will be oating over the next five years must not bo 
considered as being dangerously radioactive, 
(42) "The author writes that alarm has been caused by the steel drums and 
concrete containers filled with radioactive wastes which havo been 
discharged into the Pacific near San Francisco and Los Angeles. He 
adds that the containers have been dumped in trawling areas. 
(43) "This method of getting rid of radioactive waste is causing apprehension. 
In Franco, the plan-to 'dump'radioactive wastes into the Mediterranean 
off the C3to d'Azur was met with outbursts of indignation. 
(44) "And the Atomic Agency, instead of condemning this method of discharge 
and' tackling the job of working out the best way of storing radioactive 
wastes, declared its intention of carrying out research on the disposal 
of radioactive wastes into the sea. To do this, it is proposed to 
• enlist the services of an authoritative ocoanographical institute in 
Monaco. 
(45) "Again the Soviet Union took energetic steps to prevent the Agency from 
giving pseudo-legal sanction to the disgraceful method of dumping 
radioactive waste into the sea which has boon adopted by military plants 
in the United States, Great Britain and Franco and which threatens to 
contaminate the seas and oceans. 

GC(V)/OR.51 
page 9 


(46) "Under pressure from the Soviet Union, this question was examined by the 
Scientific Advisory Committee, which is made up of loading scientists 
from several countries. The Committee did. not recommend that the Agency 
project bo carried through;, and proposed another research program. And 
yet repeated attempts are made by the Agency Secretariat to find some 
backdoor way to giving legal sanction to the disposal of radioactive 
waste into the sea. This is further evidence of the tendency to divert 
the Agency's activities away from the provisions of the Statute end to pervert 
it into an organization which to a certain extent aids and abets the 
military efforts of the nuclear Powers. 


(47) "Can wo reconcile ourselves to this? 
Ho, wc cannot.' Those are not the 
purposes. Gentlemen, for which wo sot up the International Atomic Energy 
Agency. 
(48) "Of the scientific research work which the Agency carries out through 
contracts with various scientific organizations in Member States, most is 
of little scientific interest, or concerns mainly the advanced countries? 
the majority of contracts are connected with the preparation of a safeguards 
system. Many of the contracts are of minor importance, although 
a fow are undoubtedly useful. Some arc of such limited interest that it 
is -surely unnecessary to conduct them under the aegis of an international 
organization. 
(49) "I remember the first session o f the General Conference, four years ago, 
at which so many optimistic statements wore made. Much was said of the 
prospects for the peaceful uses of atomic energy offered by this newly 
established organization. 
(50) "Three countries - the United States of America, the Soviet Union and the 
United Kingdom - offered the Agency fissionable materials. At the prosent 
time the Agency possesses 5140 kilograms of uranium-2;55. One is entitled 
to ask why this uranium is not being distributed. Four years have gone 
by, during which many countries have concluded bilateral agreements, and 
only the Agency has not usod the resources placed at its disposal. 
(51) "The quantity of uranium available to our organization is more than 
sufficient for 20 atomic vessels'similar to the ice-breaker 'Lenin'. 
Why. is this uranium not being distributed? Why has no one asked the 
Agency for uranium? During the past year only one such request, from 
the Finnish Government, has reached the Agency. 
(52) "From this platform the Director General has appealed to Member States 
to offer the Agency low-cost fissionable matorials4/. But is the problem 
really that the price of uranium is too high? Is this why the Agency 
has received no requests for uranium? No, the cost of fetters is not 
high, but even if they were free, no one would willingly agree to accept 
them. In fact, it is the unjustifiably strict safeguards and the complicated 
inspection system that have deterred Member States from requesting 
the Agency's assistance. How else can one explain the fact that at the 
fourth regular session of the General Conference so large a group of 
countries voted against the safeguards system? One of the chief arguments 
against the system was that it was not univursal in character,. as -it would 
be unilaterally applied by certain countries to others. And now wo 
4/ GC(V)/OR.48, paragraph 91, 



GC(V)/QR-.51 
page 10 


oorao to a very interesting points it would seem that the problem of 


the Agency's development is directly hound up with the problem of 


general and complete disarmament. If agreement could be reached on 


general and complete disarmament, including a strict system of inter


national controls^ the separate problem of Agency safeguards would 


cease to exist., 


(53) '.'At the present time it seems unnecessary to dwell in detail on the 
subject of safeguards. However, I think we should for a moment consider 
the question of inspection. It should be stated quite bluntly that the 
inspection system has been unceremoniously thrust cnto the Agency's 
Member States. In order to prevent discussion in detail, the document 
on inspectors^/ has not been submitted for approval by the General 
Conference, although in accordance with the provisions of the Statute, 
and the procedure followed for the safeguards document, this should 
definitely have been done. The result is that the document on Agency 
inspectors, adopted in the Board of Governors by the votes of 18 Western 
Powers and their allies, will serve as a guide for J6 Member States. 
Is this fair? In my opinion, it is not. 
(54) "However, let us return to the question of fissionable materials. 
Not 
only does the Agency not use the materials at its disposal, it docs not 
even assist in producing such materials in countries where there are 
suitable deposits. In particular, this can bo seen in the case of the 
mission sent to Mexico. 
(55) i:Permit me to remind you that the Statute entrusts the Agency with the 
task of co-operating in the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. At 
the present time the only source of atomic energy is uranium. And here 
we have an Agency mission, sent to Mexico, which recommends the Mexican 
Government to abandon all work on the exploitation of its uranium deposits 
and on the construction of a uranium ore processing plant, 
(56) "One wonders why this odd recommendation was made by the representatives 
of an organization whose duty it is to co-operate in the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy. Perhaps Mexico was planning to make an 
atomic bomb with this uranium? Of course not. Mexico is planning to 
begin work on an atomic power program, and in particular on the construction 
of a power reactor, V/hy then did representatives of the Agency make 
this recommendation which, incidentally, was not accepted by the Mexican 
Government? 
(57) "Once again one cannot help wondering whether the actions of this mission 
were dictated by certain circles which would like to keep all uranium 
in their own hands, to control the entire uranium production and to fix 
whatever prices suit them, 
(58) "The examples I have quoted are an eloquent testimony to the fact that 
control of the Agency by a limited group of countries must cease. The 
structure of its executive - including the Director General, the Board 
of Governors and the Secretariat - must be brought into line with the 
5/. GC(v)/-I.F/39. 



GC(V)/OR.51 
page 11 


interests of the present membership, and reorganized accordingly. It 
is clear that not everyone has yet understood the justification and need 
for such a reorganization. We shall tirelessly expound and fight for the 
realization of this idea. What we can do here and now is to appoint to 
the post of Director General a representative of the neutral group of 
Afro-Asian countries; whose present needs demand the Agency's special 
attention - a candidate of those countries which desire to make wide 
use of the achievements of modern atomic science and technology to raise 
their economic standards. 


(59) "A quite different candidature has boon proposed, or to be more prociso, 
has been imposed by the Western countries. Once again, this nomination 
servos the interests of the Western Powers. The person in question has 
little understanding of the needs of the neutral group of Afro-Asian 
countries, 
(60) "Even his appointment has taken place in mysterious circumstances. 
You 
must be aware, Gentlemen, that the candidate for the post of Director 
General was elected in his absence, and despite the fact that, since the 
time of his election by the members of the Western bloc only, lie has still 
not appeared at a meeting of the Board of Governors. Many members of the 
Board have never seen him nor spoken with him - for some reason or other 
he declines to put in an appearance in Vienna. 
(61) "You must agree, Gentlemen, that these are unusual and odd circumstances. 
(62) "The Soviet Union has always supported international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. This is the natural outcome of its 
policy of peaceful coexistence between Governments with different 
political systems. 
(63) "Over the last five years, the Soviet Union has concluded a series of 
bilateral agreements for-co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy with countries belonging to all throe groups of countries 
existing in the world today. 
(64) "The Soviet Union is carrying out a broad program of scientific and 
technical co-operation with the socialist countries. Under co-operation 
agreements with Poland, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, 
Czechoslovakia, Romania, Bulgaria, the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea .and. the Chinese People's Republic, assistance has been given to 
these countries in sotting up scientific centers for nuclear physics 
and the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
(65) "The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist camp are 
collaborating in the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna, 
where research on high-energy particles is jointly carried out. To 
further the development of co-operation between these countries, an 
atomic commission for the co-ordination of activities in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy was set up in 1960, by the Council for Mutual 
Economic Aid (COMECON). During the past year, this commission has 

GC(V)/OR,51 
page 12 


investigated numerous problems of general interest. In accordance with 


the principles of the socialist division of labor, it has developed a 


program of work and methods for specialization and co-operation in. the 


production of nucle.ar engineering instruments and equipment for use in 


the national economy, radioactive and static isotopes, and safety


measures for workers handling radioactive substances, 


(66) 
"The Soviet Union has also concluded bilateral agreements with Indonesia, 
the United Arab Republic, Iraq, Yugoslavia, and Ghana. A co-operation 
agreement for the peaceful uses of atomic energy has been drawn up with 
India. 
(67) "Over a comparatively short period of scientific and technical co-operation, 
joint efforts in nine countries have led to the construction of 
nino research reactors, seven accelerators and ton laboratories, equipped 
with the very best physics instruments and apparatus. To operate . 
reactors and carry out research work, the Soviet Union has supplied these 
countries with close on 16 000 kilograms of u235-enriched uranium arid 
uranium compounds. 
(68) 
"The physics research centers that were set ,up have now become firstclass 
scientific organizations, actively working on the latest problems 
of science and technology, playing their part in international science 
and satisfying the economic requirements of their countries. 
(69) "In accordance with our agreements, preparatory work on the construction 
of reactors and various other scientific research facilities is now 
going on in connection with physics centers in Indonesia, Iraq, Ghana 
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
(70) "It is common knowledge that the Soviet Union is co-operating in 
scientific and technical matters with the United States, under the terms 
of the joint memorandum. Oo-operation agreements have been concluded 
with France and the United Kingdom, including exchange visits between 
scientists, the exchange of scientific, and technical information and the 
discussion of questions of mutual interest. 
(71) "Prom the very inception of the Agency, the Soviet Union has supported, 
and is continuing to support, the essential work of developing co-operation 
between all countries^ regardless of their social structure.,- -within 
the framework of the Agency, Wo aro in favor of co-operation.' 
(72) "The Soviet Union is firmly, convinced that the Agency can and must play 
an important part in the peaceful development of atonic energy, 
particularly in the less-developed countries which have recently thrown 
off the colonial yoke. 
(73) "In tlae view of the Soviet delegation, the central feature of the Agency's 
work in the coming year should be such activities as the training of 
experts for the developing countries in various aspects of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, the use of radioactive isotopes in medicine and 
agriculture, the study of problems connected with radioactive waste 
disposal, the dissemination of information and the organization of 
scientific meetings. 

GC(V)/OR.51 
page 13 


"!• The training of .experts in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 


(74) "As always, the Soviet delegation considers this work to he one of the 
Agency's basic tasks, since the further development of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy in the less-developed countries depends on the presence 
of a sufficient number of fully qualified national experts. 
(75) "I am authorized to state in this connection that, in addition, to previous 
offers of fellowships, the Soviet Union will provide the Agency with 
40 000 rubles to be spent on fellowships. This offer will allow the Agency 
to send twenty fellowship holders for training in the Soviet Union for 
periods of four to six months. Instruction will be given in the higher 
educational establishments and scientific research institutes of the 
Soviet Union in the following subjectss nuclear physics, radiochomistry, 
methods of conducting scientific research work with reactors and accelerators 
'••'and the use qf radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture, biology and 
industrial processes. 


"II, The use of radioisotopes in medicine for diagnosis and therapy 


(76) "The efforts of medical science are directed towards discovering effective 
ways of combating disease and new methods of treatment, and also towards 
finding means of making an early diagnosis so that the underlying causes 
of the disease can be eliminated in time. The basic uses of radioisotopes 
and radiations in medical practice, as well as in scientific research, 
have already boon determined. The use of isotopes and radiations for 
diagnosing and curing diseases is offering ever-increasing possibilities, 
• and is widely practised in many countries. 
(77) "The Agency must find a place for itself in this deeply humanitarian 
struggle for the health of mankind, for the creation of bettor living 
conditions and for increasing man's longevity. The Agency's work is to 
draw general conclusions from the experience accumulated in this sphere, 
and make them available to all States. The Agency should take measures 
to introduce into the public health work of the less-developed countries 
the use of isotopes and radiations for purposes of diagnosis and therapy, 
and also for scientific research on no?/ and effective methods of combating 
the most dangerous and widespread diseases in these countries, 
(78) "For these purposes the Agency must assist Member States? 
1, To obtain preparations of cobalt-60, cosium-137 and other 
long-life isotopes and radiation sources§ 


2, To construct laboratories for the preparation of short-life 
isotopes for medical purposes? 


3, To construct radiology departments in hospitals and clinics 
for radiation therapy of patients| 


4, To work out uniform methods for the use of radioisotopes and 
nuclear radiations in diagnosis and radiotherapy and for the determination 
of radiation dosesf 


5, To train exports in radiotherapy and radio-diagnosis. 



GC(V)/0E._51 
page 14 


"III. The use of radioisotopes in agriculture 


(79) "One of the most acute problems facing mankind is to provide all men with 
an adequate amount of essential foodstuffs. The main responsibility for 
solving this problem falls to agriculture. 
(80) "The. experience of the Soviet Union and other countries shows that 
radioisotopes and ionizing radiation arc capable of speeding up the 
solution.of such problems as increasing the agricultural yield and 
combating agricultural and animal pests. These methods can also be 
widely used in reclamation work and irrigation. 
(81) "The Soviet delegation considers that the Agency must make a great effort 
.to solve the problems of agricultural science and practice as rapidly as 
possible. 
(82) "Until now the Agency's work in this sphere has been limited to discussing 
the efforts which have been made in various countries and to exchanging 
information and consultations. Nowadays this is not enough. On the 
basis of the experience which has been acquired, the Agency must draw up 
recommendations and co-ordinated programs of work on certain of the most 
important agricultural probloms, bearing in mind above all the interests 
of the less-developed countries, 
"IV* Radioactive waste disposal 


(83) "Until this vital problem has been solved, it will be impossible to 
develop widely the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to make full use 
of the achievements of atomic science and technology to increase the 
welfare of the peoples of all countries. In this connection the Soviet 
delegation considers that the Agency should concentrate on working out 
the most rational methods for the disposal of low- and medium-activity 
wastes, icC. the wastes caused by the use of radioisotopes in various 
branches of science and technology. 
(84) "The following problems may arises 
1. The solidification of high-activity wastes, obtained by the 
processing of low- and medium-activity wastes, through the development 
of methods for concentrating radioisotopes in crystals, which will not 
break over a long period, and medium-activity wastes in tight ceramic 
blocks, made from simple and inexpensive materials! 
2. A study of the conditions under which wastes may be stored in 
deep geological formations, which offer possibilities for the indefinite 
storage of largo volumes of medium- and low-level wastes3 
3. The elaboration of cheap methods for processing largo volumes 
of radioactive solutions, using local natural absorbants and coagulants. 
With this in view, efforts must be made to study more, closely the 
absorption of radioisotopes both by natural and synthetic materials% 
4. The study of the migration of radioisotopes in earth and soil 5 
5. The elaboration of methods for the radiochemical and physical 
determination of low and very low levels. 

GC(V)/0E.51 
page 15 


(85) "In addition, the Agency must devote attention to producing flowsheets 
and recommendations for the processing and disposal of radioactive wastes, 
and must assist Member States which "are embarking on programs for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in putting those flowsheets and recommendations 
into effect. 
(86) "The Agency must, immediately .begin work in these directions;, and find 
ways and means for assisting countries which especially need its help. 
(87) "The noble aim which the Agency sot itself at the time of its establishment 
- to assist international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy - retains its full moaning oven today. 
(88) "In all its work on these lines, the Agency can count on the support of 
the Soviet Union in carrying out its tasks. 
(89) "Gentlemen, you arc well aware of the achievements of the Soviet people 
in modern science and technology, Many of you have expressed your 
sincere admiration for thorn, seeing that the results of many scientific 
discoveries are made to servo the whole of mankind, and are used for 
peace and progress. 
(90) "Even more ambitious goals arc set' in the now draft program of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. -'Theoretical research', it is 
stated 'will undergo very broad development, in the first place in such 
decisive fields of technical progress as the electrification of the 
whole country, the intcr-rclated .mechanization and automation of industry, 
the chemicalization of the most important branches of the economy, the 
productive use of atomic energy,- and transport and communications. ' 
(91) "A large part in carrying out these tasks will bo played by the discovery 
of new sources of energy and methods for the direct conversion of thermal, 
nuclear, solar and chemical energy into electricity. 
(92) "To carry out these tasks we are building many largo nuclear power 
stations, including the Beloyarsk and the Voronezh stations. Construction 
of the Beloyarsk nuclear power station (lOO 000 kW) with a uraniumgraphite 
reactor, and"the new Voronezh power station with reactors each 
of 210 000 kW, and the use of these and other nuclear power stations 
with reactors of various typos and power, levels, will allow us to 
accumulate wide experience, showing the way towards the creation of. 
improved designs. 
(95) "Study of the processes of controlled thermonuclear fusion is proceeding 
on a broad front in the USSR. To carry out the- basic physics research, 
a series of largo installations of various typos have been constructed 
and-various installations aro still in the building stage. 
(94) "To carry out our plans we desire peace, and wo aro ready to co-operate 
widely with all countries, regardless of their political structure. 
?fe aro in favor of peace and co-operation. Thank you," 

GC(V)/OR.51 
page 16 


2. Mr. BILLIG (Poland) stated that, at previous sessions of the 
Conference, his delegation had invariably commented on the progress made by 
the Agency. During the past year, however, negative factors had predominated, 
and the Agency had not justified the hopes placed in it by the founder-States 
and by those which had subsequently joined. 
3. While acknowledging the successful work done in connection with training 
and fellowships? he must nevertheless emphasize the recent fall-off in those 
activities, which he greatly regretted in view of the importance Poland 
attached to them. Not only must the previous level be maintained but - since 
many less-dcvolopod countries had joined the Agency and personnel training was 
of vital importance to them - steps must bo taken towards systematically 
extending such activities, even at the price of sacrificing others. Fellowships 
offered by Poland had been taken up to a negligible extent only. The 
scientific conferences, seminars and symposia were definitely appreciated by 
his delegation, but ho doubted whether all the seventeen panel meetings that 
had been held were in fact necessary. In the main, only such scientific 
meetings should be arranged as would rapidly help the less-dovclopod countries 
to develop their own nuclear research. 
4. Agency publications were also appreciated, in particular those dealing 
with the application of radioisotopes in medicine, with health protection, 
the directories of nuclear reactors, and so on. 
5. His delegation also favored the development of research which the Agency 
furthered by encouraging contacts between scientists in different countries, 
including Poland. There was, however, a certain crbitrariness in the selection 
of the subject matter for research contracts, 
6. He wished to draw attention to the tendency of the Western Powers to use 
their majority on the Board in order to force through a safeguards and control 
system, their main purpose being, through the Agency, to bring under their 
own control the development and utilization of nuclear energy throughout the 
world. It had been shown in practice that such safeguards compelled countries 
in need of assistance to refuse the Agency's services. The occasions when 
countries turned to the Agency with a request for supplies were limited to 
those involving:equipment which was subject to nominal safeguards only 

GC(V)/.0R,51 
page 17 


(small experimental reactors). Even that was done only because the United 
States had made it a condition of supplying such equipment that Agency safeguards 
should he accepted. The result of imposing safeguards was a situation 
in which the overwhelming majority of countries were compelled to have recourse 
to bilateral agreements. 


7, Poland, like many other countries? was receiving extensive assistance 


from the Soviot Union on the basis of bilateral agreements, without conditions 


or obligations of any kind other than those coming within the scope of normal 


trade agreements^ it received from the Soviet Union all it needed and was 


developing its own nuclear science and technology. 


8, His delegation was against safeguards pro domo sua not because they 


were an obstacle to Poland but because many countries which would gladly have 


taken advantage of the Agency's assistance in order to acquire nuclear 


materials and equipment considered that the acceptance of unilateral safe


guards of such a type would constitute an infringement of their sovereignty. 


An international organization such as the Agency, set up to further inter


national co-operation in.connection with nuclear energy, could continue to 


exist and develop only on the basis of mutual understanding and mutual 


assistance. There could be no question of one country - even the strongest 


nuclear Power - imposing its will on the others. 


9, As another example of neglect to take into account the opinion of a 
considerable number of countries, he quoted the appointment of the second 
Director General, Effective arguments had been put forward by the socialist 
and less-developed countries in support of their proposal that a representative 
of one of the less-dcvclopcd Afro-Asian countries should be elected to the 
post.of Director General since a representative of the Western Powers had held 
the post for a period of four years, and that there should be discussions with 
a view to reaching agreement on a candidate who would be acceptable to all. 
Neither proposal had boon considered and no attempt had even boon made to 
discuss the matter. Instead, taking advantage of the fact that they had a 

majority of votes, the Western States had imposed their candidate, completely 
ignoring the point of viow, the arguments and the interests of the socialist 
countries and of a considerable number of countries in Asia and Africa, 



GC(V)/OR.51 
page 18 


10. Another example of the persistent unwillingness of the Western countries 
to co-operate in the general interest was the still unsettled, question of 
granting consultative status to theT.7FTU. 
11. Under the Statute the Conference had, at its fifth regular session, to 
discuss the question of a general review of the provisions of the Statute. 
His delegation considered that the provisions of the Statute relating, for 
instance, to membership, safeguards, the manner of appointing the administrative 
bodies and their composition and to a certain extent also their competence, 
were based upon principles which wore no longer applicable and had become 
obsolete. 
12. The absence from the Agency of representatives of certain countries such 
as the Chinese People's Republic and the German Democratic Republic could 
not bo .considered right, nor the absence of co-operation between the Agency 
and the scientific institutes, scientists and technicians of the countries 
concerned. Again all countries in some parts of the world were represented 
on the Secretariat, while other parts of the world were either not represented 
at all or were represented to a negligible extent. That applied in particular 
to countries in Asia and Africa. The Agency could provide a groat deal of 
assistance to such countries, especially in connection with laboratories and 
nuclear installations, and in training of personnel. Agency co-operation 
would enable such countries to ostablish a basis for developing nuclear power 
in the future. 
13. If the work of the Agency wore to bo fruitful, a long-term plan was 
necessary and, above all, a plan to assist the loss-dovclopod countries. 
His delegation had raised that question at the fourth session of the 
Conference and had put forward a draft resolution-'which, however, had not 
obtained the necessary degree of support. A long-term operational program 
for the Agency's activities, and in particular a plan for assistance to 
developing countries, must be elaborated without delay. 
14. The representatives of certain countries had declared that since the 
Agency did not have the funds for extensive activities, thero was no point 
in working out a program5 but that surely could be done even with the modest 
resources available. Should the program be approved, his delegation was 
convinced that it would become an important means of raising the funds 
6/ GC(lv)/COM.1/44. 



GC(V)/0H.51 
page 19 


necessary for its fulfillment. If even a small proportion of the resources 
at present being spent on atomic armaments were allocated for the development 
of atomic energy and its utilization for peaceful purposes, that would make 
it possible to carry out a broad program for the utilization of atomic energy 
throughout the world and to give real assistance to the developing countries. 


15. Clearly, there was a close connection between disarmament on the ono hand 
and on the other the development of atomic energy, the solution of the Agency's 
problems and the achievement of its aims. 
16. The atmosphere prevailing in the Agency reflected the international 
situation, and the Agency's success depended on whether the Powers would per.
sist in an armaments race or would turn to competing in their efforts to 
advance science and technology, promote economic progress and raise the living 
standards of their peoples. 


7/ 


17. In 1960, his delegation had submitted a draft resolution-L/ proposing that 
an appeal be made to the Groat Powers to reach agreement as soon as possible 
on the discontinuance of nuclear tests. Unfortunately, the draft resolution 
had failed to obtain a majority. Of course the adoption by the Agency of any 
resolution, however perfect, did not dispose of a problem, but its attitude 
was often reflected in the position which it adopted. It was common knowledge 
that the Western delegations had taken a negative stand on the problem and 
events had proved that that attitude was directed not only towards the resolution 
but to the problem of disarmament itsolf. Certain gentlemen, prominent 
in diplomatic chancelleries and General Staffs, had perhaps forgotten about 
the twenty-five million dead from the Soviet Union, the six million from 
Poland and the many other millions from other countries. But they had not 
been forgotten by the citizens of Stalingrad or by the inhabitants of a 
beseiged Leningrad. For had they been forgotten by the Polish people who 
still could not pronounce the words "Warsaw", "Oswiocim"'(Auschwitz) and 
"Maidanek" without a pang. In many Buropean countries the sacrificial torch 
in honor of tortured fellow human beings would burn brightly for many years 
to come. Saber-rattling from beyond the Elbe could only have one meaning 
for Poles. 


2/ GC(IV)/131. 



GC(V)/OR.51 
page 20 


18. In those circumstancGs the defensive power of the Soviet Union was 
immensely important to the Polish people, since it was the only force in the 
world capable of cooling the inflamed German militarists who had condemned 
the Polish people during the past war to biological extermination. Although 
at that time they had not possessed nuclear weapons, they had succeeded in 
destroying one sixth of the Polish population. It was easy to imagine what 
would happen if they were to he in possession of atomic armaments. Thus his 
Government had every reason wholeheartedly to support the Soviet Government's 
decision to take defensive measures, sinco they guaranteed world peace and in 
particular the interests of the Polish people. 
19. First and foremost his people and those of other countries needed peace. 
They all understood that agreement and co-operation in the first place between 
the Soviet Union and the United States was a primary condition for the 
preservation of peace and the removal of the present dangerous tensions. 
Accordingly, his delegation welcomed the recently published joint declaration 
by the Soviet Foreign Minister and the United States Secretary of State about 
the resumption of disarmament talks. Peace could be preserved and maintained 
only with, universal and complete disarmament accompanied by strict controls. 
20. His delegation reiterated its firm belief that events would take 
precisely that turn, and that good sense and devotion to peace would prevail. 
It was also the only possible course for the Agency and would open up prospects 
for its progress in every sphere. 
21. Mr. AMMOUH (Lebanon), confessing to the diffidence of a layman in 
speaking before such a distinguished company of atonic scientists, remarked 
that his country would take the greatest pleasure in oxtending hospitality to 
any international gathering and would be proud to welcome to its shores the 
diplomats and men of learning gathered together in the Conference and to make 
its modest contribution to the task they wore called upon to discharge. 
22. Atomically at least, Lebanon figured among the underdeveloped countries and 
felt itself there in good company. It was a country that cherished no 
illusions of becoming an atomic Power in the military sense, its one ambition 
being to add its mite towards hastening the day when atomic energy would be 
used entirely for promoting peace, health and prosperity in the world as a 
whole. It was also ono of the requesting countries. 

GC(V)/0E.51 
page 21 


23. It was strange to reflect that, but for the unparalleled work of 
Western scientists, the underdeveloped countrios would not today be in a 
position to benefit through the Agency from the many peaceful applications 
of atomic energy in medicine, agriculture and industry. Those scientists 
might rightly be proud of the magnificent prospects opened up for the future 
of mankind. 
24. Yet there was another side to the coin. Atomic energy could bring 
destruction in place of prosperity and, so far, the weapons it had forged for 
destruction were more powerful than the tools it had fashioned for good. The 
balance was still negative, and it was to be hoped that the Agency would 
succeed in righting it at a not too distant date. When nuclear science had 
overcome cancer, eliminated the remaining epidemics and conquered famine, 
some complacency might be possible. 
25. There were times, however, when he wondered whether everything that 
should be done was being done, whether there was not some more lofty aim 
than the somewhat negative objectives laid "down in Article II of the Statute. 
Instead of concentrating on matter and technique, why not go back to man, the 
true fons ot origo? Atomic scientists were men and, in other circumstances, 
the Agency might conceivably have led those men - like the women in the 
"Lysistrata" - to go on strike until all atomic weapons had been destroyed^ 
then the atom would bo used for peaceful purposes only. That fantasy might who 
know? - one day become a reality, or, worse still, a necessity. 
.26. His main object, however, was more immediately practical. The speed 
with which nuclear science developed was phenomenal. But could not advances 
be to some extent anticipated, and taken into account in planning for economic 
and social development? For instance, why build large and costly hydroelectric 
dams if, in the near"future, there was. likely'to be an atomic 
reactor capable of economically providing all the power that was needed? 
The examples were endless. The consequences of foresight could be tremendous, 
particularly for countries which had still to build up an oconomio 
infrastructure out of nothing. 



GC(V)/0S.51 
page 22 


27. Nuclear science would certainly continue to make great strides. Was 
not now the time to sot up a group within the Agency which, working in close 
collaboration with Governments and with other international organizations, 
would advise on all large-scale projects and very possibly succeed in helping 
to release for other constructive purposes the enormous sums that might 
otherwise be spent on the more conventional sources of energys coal, 
petroleum, hydroelectric stations and so on? A draft agreement between the 
Agency and the United Nations Special Fund—'was a step in the right direction, 
but it would be concerned with the execution of projects, not their planning, 
and it was precisely in the planning stage that the Agency could make its 
most useful contribution. 
28. No doubt the advances he had in mind would not be the work of a day, 
but chance might conceivably bring rapid answers to many of the problems of 
nuclear science that still remained unsolved. And if the first atomic 
reactor to light the towns, run the factories, increase the earth's yield and 
cure cancer could bo built through the common efforts of scientists and 
technicians of all ideologies from every corner of the earth, united in the 
desire to promote peaco and human well-being, the whole world would rejoice, 
29. Nuclear science had created a hew human brotherhoods the brotherhood of 
.fear of the atom bomb. 
If the peaceful uses of the atom could but link men 
in the same way, the world would be changed. And the Agency could have no 
more lofty ideal than to seek to change the human despair of today into hope 
for the future. 


The meeting rose at 12.50 P.ro. 


8/ GC(V)/167. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(V)/OR.52 
29 November 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference ENGLISH 


FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 28 September 1961, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: M. QUlHILLALT (Argentina) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs, 


11 General debate and report of the Board of 1 - 101 
Governors for 1960-61 
(continued from the 51st meeting) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Pakistan 1-11 
Czechoslovakia 12 - 31 
Viet-Nam 32 - 41 
Romania 42 -51 
Mexico 52 - 68 
China 69 - 80 
Albania 81 - 91 
Philippines 92 - 101 

GC(V)/171. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(v)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5885 



GC(V)/OH.52 
oar;e 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AMD REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR'* 1960-61 (Q0(-V)/154s-.'il68) 
..(continued from the 51st .me.eiing) ....... . . . 


1. Mr. USMAHT (Pakistan) congratulated the President on Ms election. 
2, The Pakistan delegation was glad to see that the Agency had overcome its 
initial difficulties, thanks to the untiring efforts of the Director General 
and of his colleagues in the Secretariat* Doubtless, as the Director General 
had remarked—', there was still considerable room for improvement if the Agency 
was to play a more effective and dynamic part in promoting the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy throughout the world„ However, it was not to the advanced 
countries that the Agency should direct its efforts hut rather to the less 
developed parts of the world- The developing countries had realized that the 
way to progress was through the increasingly extensive use of science and 
technology,. Since atomic energy had many practical uses, those countries 
were all looking to the Agency for assistance, guidance and information in the 
fulfillment of their national programs<, 

3' !?h.e„]?a._kistan delegation would have liked the Agency to take an active part 
in such joint enterprises as the establishment of an international institute 
of theoretical physics, proposed by it in the.previous year, and in the nuclear 
power demonstration projects„ It had noted with great satisfaction that its 
proposal had met with the enthusiastic support of the world's leading 


2/ 


physicists and of the great majority of Member States-7. It would welcome 
concrete suggestions on the subject, and hoped that the Director General would 
circulate the opinion of the Panel on the Problem of an International Center 


'of Theoretical Physics to all Governments, so that they might appreciate the 
importance which the Panel attached to the project. His delegation wondered 
whether the problem of finance was really an obstacle to the establishment of 
an institution of that type. In 1960 an enormous proportion of the Agency's 
resources had been absorbed by the Secretariat, the meetings of the Board and 
the Conference, while only twenty per cent of the total budget had been 
allotted to functional activities. In 1961, expenditure entailed by the 
meetings of the Board alone would be in the neighborhood of $570 000—{ That 

1/ GC(V)/OR.48, paragraphs 85-92. 
2/ GC(IV)/RES/T6. 
3/ GG(lV)/RES/72, paragraph-!. 



GC(v)/ORo52 
page 3 


was an anomaly which the Conference should remedy. The Agenpy could undoubtedly 
find the money to be spent on the promotion of international scientific 
progress by reducing administrative expenditure, curbing the expansion of the 
Secretariat and limiting the number of Board and Conference meetings, A 
committee should be appointed to go into the working of the Agency's various 
organs and with full power to suggest measures of economy wherever possible,. 
An increase in the Agency's resources could also be considered, but he was 
convinced that the careful husbanding of existing income would be sufficient 
to finance the establishment of an international institute of theoretical 
physics and other similar projects-, The Pakistan delegation wished in that 
connection to thank the Italian Government for its generous offer—, and hoped 
that other Member States would wish to contribute to the carrying out of that 
important project. 

4- As regards the question of the financing and award of research contracts 
(GC(v)/154j paragraphs 221-223), he noted that 48 new contracts had been 
awarded and 35 renewed in the financial year 1$60-61, That represented an 
expenditure of more than 1652 000, but of that sum $446 000 or nearly 70$ 
related to contracts awarded in advanced countries. Those countries, however, 

were already well-eq.uipped and certainly did not need the Agency's assistance., 
Their laboratories could carry out research for the Agency as a contribution to 
the common cause, so that the Agency could use its funds for other activities 
such as the training program and international projects„ If research contracts 
had to be awarded, they should be placed with the new centers and laboratories 
emerging in the developing countries. The Pakistan delegation hoped that the 
policy followed hitherto in that field would be thoroughly reviewed both as 
regards the nature of problems selected for research and the choice of the 
laboratories with which those contracts were placed* 


5. Investigations wiich had so far been carried out showed that it was not 
in the application of isotopes but in the generation of power that atomic 
energy could have the most' revolutionary effect on the economy of underdeveloped 
countries„ 
4/ GC(V)/0H.50, paragraph 69. 



GC(v)/OfL52 
page 4 


6, It was ironical that, in.the countries where' nuclear technology was most 
advanced, conventional fuels were cheap and abundant, so that nuclear power 
was not yet competitive. But, thanks to the remarkable development of nuclear 
technology in recent years, it was now perfectly clear that in the high-cost 
fuel 'areas 'nuclear power could not only compete with conventional power 
sources but could even be cheaper. It was not generally realized that the 
immediate future of nuclear power lay in some of the fuel-starved countries 
and not in those which were technologically developed. 


7. In certain areas of Pakistan there was no coal, no gas, no oil and 
practically ho hydro power potential, but population density was high and raw 
materials for industry were abundant. A study report on the feasibility of 
nuclear power in Pakistan had been prepared and would shortly be submitted to 
the Agency> He hoped that the Agency would give all possible support to the 
establishment of a nuclear power station in Pakistan and that Pakistan's 
friends in the developed countries would take an enlightened view of the 
project, realizing that in helping to prove the economic feasibility of 
nuclear power under conditions actually prevailing in an underdeveloped 
country they were also helping their own nuclear" power industry. He wished to 
state categorically that Pakistan had no intention of using the plutonium 
produced in a power reactor for military purposes, and was convinced that the 
same applied to the other less-developed countries. As a member of the Agency, 
Pakistan had pledged itself to work 'its research and power reactors under the 
Agency's safeguards and under open sky. 
8„ It was time for the Agency to take up the cause of nuclear power development 
more actively and not to confine itself to reviews and studies, however 
useful they might be. It should help the developing Member States to obtain 
international financial support for the implementation of their nuclear power 
projects when it coul-d be shown that those projects were economically feasible, 


9. In the matter of technical assistance, the Agency had spent very meager 
sums on the supply of equipment, the award, of fellowships and the dispatch of 
experts, the dilatory procedures followed by the Secretariat often being 
responsible for inadmissible delays. For instance, it took the Agency from 
one year to eighteen months to select candidates for training and to place 
them in suitable institutions. The Pakistan delegation had already made 

GC(V)/0E.52 


page 5 


specific suggestions-7 in the previous year for improving that situation, but 
so far nothing had been done to speed up the training program. Again it was 
a matter of deep regret that the revised program envisaged a reduction in the 
number of fellowships from 428 in 1960 to 360 in 1962, even though the Agency's 
membership had increased. Even more than equipment, the developing countries 
needed trained manpower for the execution of their research programsv A 
complete overhaul of the training program was therefore desirable. He also 
drew particular attention to the training and research laboratory requirements 
in electronic equipment as well as in conventional equipment, 


10„ As regards the recruitment of the Secretariat, he considered that the 
population and needs of the various Member States should be taken into 
consideration in the distribution of posts, and not only the amount of their 
financial contribution to the Agency. In his opinion the distribution of the 
Agency's staff by nationality was extremely unsatisfactory as far as the 
representation of the underdeveloped countries was concerned. Steps should 
be taken to provide due representation of the countries of Latin A-'erica. 
Africa and Asia in the technical and administrative set-up of the Secretariat. 


11„ In conclusion he gave some data on the progress of the atomic energy 
program in Pakistan. The most important project was the establishment of the 
Institute of Science and Nuclear Technology near Islamabad, the new capitali 
which would have a $-M'l reactor of the swimming-pool type and several research 
laboratories. The reactor was on order and should come into use within the 
next two years. The Institute would cost between 8 and 10 million dollars 
and would be one of the finest institutions of its kind in Asia. In 
addition two big training centers were being established - one at Lahore 

(West Pakistan) and the other at Da^ca (iCast Pakistan). The Lahore center 
was finished' and was due to be 'inaugurated in October 1961. The .Dacca center 
would be ready within the next eighteen months. Training would be given 
at those centers in the uses of radioisotopes;, and Pakistan would welcome 
Agency fellows. An agricultural research center had been established at 
Dacca and there would shortly be another in West Pakistan. In addition, 
medical research centers had been established in four hospitals, two of them 
equipped with cobalt therapy units. An aerial survey of an area containing 


5/ GC(V)/OR,39, paragraph 62. 



GV(V)/OR,52 
pa-;o 6 


deposits of radioactive minerals had been completed and prospecting would 
follow, • One hundred and fifty Pakistan scientists and engineers had been 
trained or were under training in different fields abroad. That number would 
rise to nearly 400 by 1965 when Pakistan's expanded program was fully taken 
care of. In that connection, the Pakistan Government was hoping to receive 
more liberal help from the Agency than hitherto, 

12 Mr OUZKY (Czechoslovakia) congratulated the President on his election, 


13 It was the A, .ency's task "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace5 health and prosperity throughout the world". The 
basic condition for the fulfillment of that task was genuine co-operation 
between States with different social systems, aimed at the preservation and 
consolidation of world peace. It was impossible to discuss the contribution 
of atomic energy to health and prosperity without being aware of the grave 
dangers threatening mankind. It must be realized that the Conference was 
meeting in a tense international situation created by the fact that certain 
circles in the West had not yet given up hope of stopping the development of 
history by force. The principal States Members of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) wore increasing their expenditure on armaments every year. 
Plans existed to supply the SATO countries with nuclear weapons? if those 
plans were carried out, the West German army would be equipped with nuclear 
weapons, and that constituted a serious threat to the peace and security of 
European nations and of the whole world.. The Czechoslovak Government, which 
had had bitter experience of German militarism, was anxious to warn all 
countries against the dangerous militarist, revengeful and neo-Fascist developments 
in the Federal Republic of Germany. It was strongly in favor of the 
immediate conclusion of a peace treaty with Germany to clear away the remnants 
of the Second World War. In that way one of the main causes of the present 
international tension would bo removed and the Agency would be able to devote 
itself fully to the accomplishment of its task. 


14. Such were the reasons for which the Czechoslovak delegation supported the 
Soviet delegate's proposal that the Conference should call upon the States 
Members of the Agency to co-oporate in the conclusion of an agreement on 
general and complete disarmament-^. 
6/ GC(V)/OR.51, pragraphs l(l3). 



GC(V)/OR652 
, page 7 


15. Mankind was faced with a choice between the threat of a devastating nuclear 
war and the possibility of peaceful co-operation with prospects of a happyfuture., 
There was no doubt which the nations would choose, but much still 
remained to be done to avoid a catastrophe and to ensure a lasting peace 
through general and complete disarmament, The Agency had a statutory 
obligation to contribute its share to that objective, The Conference should 
associate itself with all those who had approved the first Soviet proposal for 
general and total disarmament, and support the unanimous decision of the 
United Nations General Assembly in favor of that proposal? it should express 
its support of the attitude taken by the representatives of the non-aligned 
States at Belgrade and its adherence to the spirit of the agreement between 
the Soviet Union and the United States on the basic principles of general 
and complete disarmament, • 
16. The attainment of that aim would make it possible to make enormous 
financial and material resources and an army of scientific workers available 
for the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and unprecedented progress could be 
made in the Agency's activities. 
17. It was well known that Czechoslovakia had had many successes in nuclear 
science and technology. It had built laboratories for pure and applied 
research in nuclear energy, nuclear chemistry, etc, and had also solved 
various problems connected with the disposal of radioactive waste, on which 
the development of nuclear power largely depended. The direct utilization 
of the effects of radiation on various materials was also being studied. The 
use of radioisotopes in science and in various aspects of the country's 
economy was becoming general, and by 19&5 i^ would be possible, as a result, 
to save some 650 million Czechoslovak crowns a year, to say nothing of the 
medical advantages. Experimental studies relating to the construction of 
the first Czech nuclear power station, the largest in central Europe, were 
well under way. 
l8. It was necessary to emphasize that effective international co-operation, 
and technical and scientific assistance given by other socialist countries, 
particularly by the Soviet Union, had played a part in the development of 
atomic energy in Czechoslovakia. In that connection, mention should be made 
of the work of the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna, in which a 
number of Czechoslovak scientists were participating, of the scientific 



GC(V)/OR,52 
page 8 ' * 


commission responsible for co-ordinating studies on experimental reactors, 
and of the commission which was formulating recommendations on what branches 
of nuclear technology should be developed in order to avoid waste of effort 
and money, International Co-operation in the socialist countries was 'based 
solely on the scientific and technical interests of those countries?; it 
could serve as an example in many respects to the International Atomic Energy 
Agency.. 


19-. Some of the Agency's activities were of use to all Member States or to 
those Member States which were carrying out atomic energy programs? for 
example, certain publications, efforts directed at promoting the mutual 
exchange of information, the organization, of scientific conferences, technical 
assistance and, above all, training. The latter activity was developing, but 
it was surprising that the fellowships offered by Member States had not all 
been made use of, although they constituted the most effective form of 
assistance, Czechoslovakia, for example, had offered 21 short-term fellowships, 
but only six had been taken up, and 24 long-term fellowships, of which 
only two had been taken up. It was therefore doubtful whether there was any 
point in certain institutions setting aside in their budget sums intended for 
fellowships which the Agency failed to use. The conditions offered .by the 
Czechoslovak Government were such that several hundred students from developing 
countries could study in Czechoslovakia without difficulty. The same was 
true of equipment put at the Agency's disposal and not used under the pretext 
of administrative difficulties, A credit of 200 000 Czechoslovak crowns had 
been made available for the purchase of equipment but the Agency had used only 
a negligible part of it. Many delegations could put forward similar complaints. 
Such examples showed that the Agency had not given its Member States every 
possible assistance. 


20 The main reason for that regrettable situation was to be found in the 
lack of flexibility on the part of the Agency's staff which consisted of 
nearly 700 persons, many of whom were experts and from whom one could expect 
much more effective work. In any case the Agency's staff would not be able 
to work to the best advantage until a long-term plan had been drawn up for the 
development of atomic energy answering to the needs of the countries which the 
Agency existed to serve. 



GC(V)/OR.52 
page 9 


21, The Agency, being composed of countries with different social systems, 
ought to encourage co-operation among them on the basis of the principle of 
equitable representation, However, if one studied the composition of the 
Secretariat, one found that 61,3$ of the posts were held by nationals of 
States linked with the Western military and political bloc, and the figure 
reached 70$ for directorial posts. The thre.e Western Great Powers alone held 
more than a third of all posts, while the United States, Canada and the West 
European countries hold about half the senior posts. The unaligned countries 
were insufficiently represented^ they held 21$ of all posts, but only 10$ of 
directorial posts. In the case of the countries of Africa and Asia, those 
percentages fell to 8$ of all posts and 5$ of directorial posts, 


22. That situation was the result of the composition of the Board, which did 
not correspond to the present balance of forces in the world and as a result 
of which States belonging to the Western bloc were able to impose their 
decisions. The Czechoslovak delegation would return to the question of the' 
composition of the Board later. If the organs of the Agency kept in mind the 
interests of all Member States and if the Agency fulfilled the tasks laid down 
by its Statute, there could be no doubt that the activity of many Member States 
in the nuclear field would increase considerably, 
23, Many activities were included in the Agency's program which had nothing 


to do with the needs of the majority of countries but served the interests of 


the Western States alone, particularly the United States of America, That 
was due to the fact that cold war methods continued to be applied in defiance 
of international co-operation, 


24. Reverting to the question of safeguards and inspection, he recalled that 
there had been much criticism of safeguards at the fourth session of the 
Conference, and the Board had been invited to take account of the comments made 
7/ 


by Member States—. Nevertheless the Board had adopted an almost unchanged 
3/ 
system of safeguards—', imposing on the receiving countries conditions incompatible 
with their sovereignty, detrimental to their interests and impeding 
co-operation. 


7/ GC(v")/RES/71? operative paragraphs 2 and 3. 
8/ INFCIRC/26, 



GC(V)/ORo52 
page 10 


25o An example of discrimination was the constant refusal to give consultative 
status to the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), which defended the 
interests of more than 100 million workers throughout the world* It was the 
opposition of the United States which had prevented a satisfactory solution 
of that question. The Czechoslovak delegation hoped that the Board would 
reconsider its unjustified decision at the earliest opportunity. 


26. It might also be recalled that the Western Powers had recently refused to 
take part in a real negotiation on the question of the appointment of a new 
Director General of the Agency, and that they had imposed a candidate who 
suited their interests. Such an attitude made fruitful co-operation impossible 
and risked having serious consequences for the Agency's activities. 
27. Furthermore, Czechoslovakia could never agree to a certain number of 
countries, particularly China with a population of 600 million inhabitants, 
being debarred from participation in the Agency, which was thus robbed of its 
universal character. There was ample'proof that the United States of America, 
which controlled the votes of a number of countries, opposed the development 
of the Agency's activitjr and, under the mask of scientific and technical cooperation, 
introduced methods of cold war and political discrimination* 
28. The Agency's activities were seriously impeded by the attitude of the 
United States, However, it must not be believed that that situation would 
halt technical and economic development. All countries knew that nuclear 
science could contribute to economic progress and prosperity as a whole, and 
that was why a number of them were trying to obtain assistance elsewhere than 
through the Agency. In that connection it would be interesting to compare the 
volume of technical and scientific assistance provided on a bilaterial basis 
with that given by the Agency. If the Agency persisted in its policy, it 
would only lose in importance and prestige. In the Czechoslovak delegation's 
opinion the following steps should be taken to improve the situations an end 
should be put once and for all to the pressure brought to bear by the United 
States and to discriminatory measures? all countries should be allowed to join 
the Agency; and a long-term program should be established in response to the . 
needs of all Member States} and particularly the underdeveloped countries, 
29. The Czechoslovak Government was following with interest the Agency's 
activities and was trying to support those aspects of its work which we're in 

GC(V)/OR,52 
page 11 


keeping with, its original mission. It had offered financial assistance to 


the technical assistance program, fellowships and experts5 it had provided 
facilities for a scientific symposium and had sent experts to scientific and 
technical conferences? it had made it possible for scientific institutions 


to do scientific work on the basis of contracts with, the Agency in fields 
which were of great interest to all Member States, etc The Czechoslovak 
Government had decided to continue to assist the Agency. It was ready to 
av/ard fellowships to young GXpcrts from developing countries as it had done 
in preceding years, to put experts at the disposal of the Agency for the 
technical assistance program, particularly in regard to the use of radioisotopes, 
and to organise another scientific conference in Czechoslovakia. 


300 Czechoslovakia's voluntary contributions to the Agency's General Fund 
had not been sufficiently drawn upon and the Czechoslovak Government had 
therefore reconsidered its position. The Atomic Energy Commission had carefully 
studied the problem and the Government had decided that instead of 
making a financial contribution to the Agency's General Fund it would offer 
to a developing country a complete set of equipment for cobalt-60 treatment, 


to the value of $30 000, as well as give the local staff of the recipient 
country an opportunity of becoming familiar with, the operation of the unit. 


31. The Czechoslovak Government supported the positive aspects of the Agency's 
activities in the conviction that, even in the circumstances in which, the 
Agency found itself as a result of the policy of discrimination practised by 
certain Powers, it was possible to provide effective assistance to Member 
States. It hoped' that'all Member States would renew their efforts to enable 
the Agency to discharge its functions better in the future. 
32. Mr. PHUOHG (Viet-lTam) associated himself with the congratulations 
and good wishes which, had been addressed to the President by other delegations. 
33. He was happy to welcome the representatives of Senegal and the Congo 
(Leopoldville), who wore present for the first time at the Conference. Vietnam 
shared with Senegal a common language and means of expressions that was 
of real benefit to the respective cultures of the two countries and, together 
with other affinities, would for a long time to come form the lasting basis 
of a fraternal understanding. The Congo's recent admission to the Agency was 
renewed proof of the complete sovereignty of that country, which had the entire 
solidarity and support of Viet-Nanu 

GC(V)/OR.52 


34* Viet-Nam was glad that the Conference would soon be called upon to decide 
the question of enlarging the Board in order to provide equitable representation 
of the countries of the "Africa and the Middle East" area, not only because 
"Viet-Nam had a strong natural feeling of solidarity with them but also because 
it always stood for justice and against all forms of inequality. The role 
those countries played on the international scene was becoming ever more important 
and it seemed right that after adopting the amendment transmitted by 
the Board-^- while awaiting its acceptance by two thirds of the Member States 
in accordance with the Statute - the Conference should apply the spirit of the 
amendment at the present sossion, by appointing two observers from the Africa 
and Middle Bast region to the Board, which could thus be helped in the performance 
of its duties, purely as an interim measure, by having a valuable 
additional source of wisdom and perceptiveness, 


35. The delegation of Viet-ifem had noted the idea put forward by the delegate 
of Prance—' that the post of Director General should rotate between nationals 
of countries advanced in the use of atomic energy and countries receiving 
technical assistance But he found it difficult to agree with the French 
delegation when it coupled that principle with a proviso of a technical nature 
relating to the Director General himself„ 
36. Other delegations had already paid a just tribute to the present Director 
General for the work he had accomplished during the past four years. The 
delegation of Viet-Wam wholeheartedly associated itself with that tribute, 
and in that connection noted that the achievement the Director General would 
be leaving behind him would certainly serve as a valuable standard in the future 
choice of a Director General. 
37. He found it all the easier to discuss the technical-assistance provided 
by the Agency because up to the present Viet-Nam had obtained only two study 
fellowships for 1959 'md did not appear anywhere in the Agency's operational 
budget. The previous year it had asked for an analog computer, but had not 
yet received a reply. The equipment and supplies allocated to Viet-Nam were 
worth the infinitesimal sum of $15. Hence nobody could accuse Viet-Wam of 
wanting everything all at once and of not considering either the Agency's 
2/ GC(7)/151 and Add.1. 
10/ GC(V)/0S 50, paragraph 32, 



GC(V)/0H.52 
page 13 


resourcos or its own limitations, Yet such admonitions and counsels of 
patience and moderation had been customary in the past„ The result of 
constantly trying to discourage legitimate requests and extending the time 
limits imposed by the great changes taking place in the world had very often 
been a rude awakening and a profound bitterness at seeing excellent chances 
of co-operation being spoiled. Such mistakes in the planning and execution 
of the Agency's technical assistance program should be avoided„ 


38. It was not enough to state that, since technical assistance was provided 
only at the request of governments, it was for them to prepare national plans 
which would serve as the basis for the Agency's program. That system would 
inevitably make it impossible for the Agency to meet all requests at the same 
time. Experience showed that assistance could prove very valuable where it 
was judiciously integrated with the national programs. The Agency undoubtedly 
had a primary role in technical assistance, not a secondary responsibility 
compared with that of the requesting countries. It was therefore essential 
to draw up a long-term program which would ensure better co-ordination of the 
efforts devoted to each region and take the priority requirements of the 
developing countries into account. If such a program was submitted to all 
Member States within a reasonable time, before its execution was begun, with 
a statement of priorities and of what the Agency could undertake to do, it 
would provide the requesting countries with useful information enabling them 
to present requests in terms of their national plans and also consistent with 
the Agency's resources. The Agency could then distribute its assistance on 
a more balanced, and consequently a more equitable, basis, particularly where 
the developing countries were concerned. In other words, since the Agency's 
assistance could only supplement the efforts of a requesting country, that 
country should be in a position to know how much assistance it could count 
on in order to set reasonable objectives for its plan* 
39. With regard to the activities of the Viot-Nam Office of Atomic Energy, 
the years 1958 and 1959 had been a period of planning, whereas 1960 had seen 
the foundation of the Institute of Nuclear Research at Dalat, the building of 
which would be completed at the beginning of 1962„ The Institute-had a 
Triga Mark II reactor of 25O kW, which it was hoped would come into use during 
1962, A laboratory had already been opened at Dalat, whose work was to 
measure radioactivity;, make radio-ecological studies of the territory round 

GC(V)/OR 52 
page 14 


the Institute and assemble and check electronic and radiological measuring 
instruments* In addition, a scientific library devoted to various aspects 
of nuclear energy had been opened at Dalat, A program of training for experts 
had also been begun, to provide research workers for the various laboratories 
of the Institute of Nuclear Research, 


40. Like other developing countries, Viet-Wam attached particular importance 
to the training of technically qualified staff and it therefore hoped that in 
the future it would not he overlooked when study and research fellowships were 
awarded. As a result of bilateral agreements, a certain number of "\ftet-
STameoe research workors wore at present undergoing training at the French 
atomic energy centers and. Vict-Nam had just signed an agreement with France 
for technical and scientific co-operation for the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy., 
41^ In conclusion, Viet-Nam wished to associate itself with the moving appeal 


11/ 
made the previous day by the delegate of Japan—, regarding the danger to mankind 
caused by the resumption of nuclear explosions at an increased rate„ 
That appeal, coming from a country which spoke from experience, should be a 
warning at a time when radioactivity was increasing from day to day and 
spreading fear; though the incalculable possibilities of nuclear energy could 
serve man and help to increase his well-being if only they were used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes. 


42, Mr. HOVACO (Romania), having congratulated the President on his 
election, hoped that, in spite of the increase in international tension, reason 
would finally prevail, and general and complete disarmament under strict international 
control would create the necessary conditions for atomic energy to be 
used in accordance with the Agency's Statute for exclusively peaceful purposes, 


43° He noted with s tion that the number of States Members of the Agency 
was continually increasing and welcomed the presence of delegates from countries 
which had recently cast off the colonial yoke and gained independence, in 
particular, the delegate of the Republic of the Congo (Loopoldville). He 
regretted that' that great Power, the People's Republic of China, had not yet 
taken its rightful place and that States such as the German Democratic Republic, 


11/ GC(V)/OR,49. paragraphs 72-74. 



GC(V)/OR,52 
page 15 


the Mongolian People's Republic, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and 


the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam were still not yet Members of the Agency 
because of political discrimination. That situation prevented the Agency from 
being truly universal and hindered it in its work. 


44. After the difficult initial period, the Agency had achieved remarkable 
results in the exchange of information, the granting of fellowships, the 
provision of scientific documentation, the organization of symposia.and 
conferences, etc. 
45. With regard to technical assistance, the annual report of the Board showed 
that in 1961 the number of experts had doubled as compared with 1960, and that 
that was prejudicial to other activities. Expenditure on the services of 
experts had also doubled, whereas the appropriations for fellowships were 
smaller than the previous year. It was obviously in a country's interest 
to train its own experts and use them to the best possible advantage, rather 
than obtain the services of foreign experts -for a relatively short period. 
Moreover, a local expert knowing the language and the problems, of his country 
could be of greater service than a foreign expert, even if the latter were 
highly qualified. Hence the increase of over $350 000 in the estimates for 
the services of experts in 1962 as compared with the previous year was not 
justified. 


46. The inadequacy of the Agency's material resources was often deplored. 
He considered that those resources were sufficient, but were not always well 
managed. For example, some requests for fellowships had not been grantedj 
while offers of fellowships had not been taken up, 
47. There was also an obvious disproportion between the volume of technical 
assistance given by the Agency and the size of the Secretariat. In the 1961 
budget $1.1 million had been allocated for technical assistance and $400 000 
for the corresponding administrative expenses. Those figures showed the need 
to rationalize functions within the Secretariat in order to reduce non-• 
productive expenditure. The 1962 budget, however, provided for a further 
increase in the staff of the Secretariat. That procedure, which seemed to 
be becoming the rule, was not acceptable to the Romanian delegation. 
48. With regard to the appointment of the new Director General, he could not 
approve the methods used by the Western Powers to impose on the Agency once 

GC(V)/OR,52 
page 16 


again a Director General from their own bloc The candidature put forward 
did not reflect the unanimous -view of the Board and violated the principle of 
collaboration between all Member States., The Austrian press seemed to have 
complete faith in that sort of procedure; for it had announced the appointment 
as if it was an accomplished fact. The Romanian delegation, for once, 
considered that the post of Director General should be held by a national of 
an uncommitted Afro-Asian country, since one of the principal duties of the 
Agency was to help developing countriesa 


49<• In the Romanian People's Republic, research had been carried out during 
the past year in nuclear physics and in reactor physics and technology, including 
studies of very high energy nuclear interactions (in collaboration with 
the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna and other cosmic ray 
research centers), studies on nuclear reactions, nuclear spectroscopy work, 
research on the interaction between radiation and matter, study and construction 
of certain new apparatus (oscillating system, thermal loop and electronic 
reactor simulator, neutron selectors, neutron polarograph, double crystal 
spectrometer, multi-channel analyzers etc), studies on the quantity production 
of new types of apparatus and devices (transistorized electronic equipment, 
high-temperature Geiger-Muller counters, etc)„ The results of those various 
researches had been published in specialized journals and described at international 
conferenceso The reactor team had also developed a process for 
locally increasing by a factor of four the thermal neutron flux, in order to 
obtain a greater specific activity for certain radioelements. The cyclotron 
team had investigated and developed a method for extending the range of 
energies obtained, with a view to increasing the research possibilities of 
that instrument. 


50= Finally, the applications of radioisotopes in industry, medicine and 
agriculture had been extended to the iron and steel industry, heavy engineering, 
the coal and petroleum industries, forestry, light industry and hydrology. 
Flaw detection by gamma rays had also been developed by using as radiation 
sources not only radioisotopes, but also the 30 MeV betatron, which had been 
brought into service the previous year. 


51o The Romanian People's Republic, as a Member of the Agency, wished to 
collaborate closely in the common task, provided, however, that the collaboration 
of others was sinoere and respected the interests of both the 



GC(V)/OR.52 
page 17 


socialist and the uncommitted countries. If that condition was fulfilled, 
the Agency could attain the nohle aims it had set itself, in order to improve 
the' welfare of nations and ensure world peace. 


5,2. Mr. ORTIZ TIRADQ (Mexico) congratulated the President most warmly 
on behalf of his delegation. He welcomed the election to the presidency of 
a representative of a Latin American country. That choice would undoubtedly 
he a stimulus for the countries of Latin America, which believed that the 
development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes held o^t great promise for 
humanity. 


53" It had been said that 1961 would be o- year of consolidation after the 
period of gradual development of all the activities of the Agency, which had 
given tangible proof of the beneficial results which could be obtained. 
Indeed, each year of the Agency's existence marked a step forward and clearly 
proved that international co-operation, although it had not leC to all the 
results expected at first, htid nevertheless allowed remarkable and encouraging 
progress to be made, 

54° It was customary for the Conference each year to draw up a balance-sheet 
of the work done, hut opinions often differed because Member States,- having 
different political systems, applied their own particular criteria? hence 
it was sometimes very diffioult to -recognise the positive features of the work 
accomplished through the haze of contradictory judgements. It was too ofton 
forgotten that a body such as the Agency, which was essentially scientific and 
technical, was not an appropriate place for settling ideological conflicts. 
The Mexican delegation considered that efforts should be concentrated on a 
common ideal, adopted in good faith, with the aim of developing and accelerating 
the peaceful use of atomic, energy. His delegation WP,S convinced, as it had 
already stated in the past, that it was essential to ensure that the Agency 
pursued the noble aims that had inspired its founders, that it did so with all 
the vigor the world expected of it and that, in its own sphere, it fulfilled 
the obligations it had assumed, helping to promote peace and international cooperation, 
Humanity was building groat hopes on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy for a constant improvement in its living conditions. In that campaign, 
undertaken with great enthusiasm, the presence of new Member States was. 
particularly significant. 



GC(V)/0H„52 
page 18 


55• In considering the results obtained in so complex and difficult a task as 
that of the Agency, no aspect of the matter should be overlooked if criticism 
was to be constructive., The efforts made in the three main fields of nuclear 
technology with which the Agency was concerned had certainly had far-reaching 
effects on the economic and social development of Member States- The 
production of nuclear power, the applications of radioisotopes and radiation 
protection were, indeed, the subject of constant attention and intensive work. 

56. Although the prospects for nuclear power had not changed appreciably, it 
was encouraging to note that the cost of such power was decreasing faster than 
that of conventional electric power, that nuclear power would become competitive 
before 1970 and that 28 nuclear power stations with a capacity of 4 300 MW were 
now under construction., The principal role of the Agency had been to study 
the economic aspects of nuclear power production, in particular methods of 
evaluating and comparing costs, so as to promote contacts between experts and 
exchanges of information on current research work. 
57* Great progress had been achieved in the use of radioisotopes and 
radiations. Research workers were continually discovering new applications 
and perfecting the old ones, The Conference on the Use of Radioisotopes in 
the Physical Sciences and Industry—'had provided an opportunity for a thorough 
study of the present situation in that field. The papers presented and the 


13/ 
discussions which had taken place— had brought out the fact that the applications 
of radioisotopes were continually increasing and quickly passing 
beyond the stage of research and experiment. The Chairman of the Danish 
Atomic Energy Commission had stressed, on that occasion, that progress in 
experimental physics had made it possible to produce an ever-increasing number 
of radioisotopes, while methods of measurement were becoming more accurate, 
thus widening the scope of research. 


580 Mexico was pleased that another important international meeting, the 


Conference on the Use of Radioisotopes in Animal Biology and the Medical 


Sciences, was to be held at Mexico City in November 1961° That conference 


12/ Held at Copenhagen, 6-17 September 1960, 
13/ STl/PUB/20„ 



GC(v)/OR.52 
page 19 


would no doubt bring to light new knowledge in fields where atomic energy was 
raising high hopes, and Mexico would he happy to take an active part in studying 
those problems for the greater benefit of mankind. 


59• Mexico had already manifested its interest in atomic energy questions by 
asking the Agency to send a preliminary assistance mission to investigate 
whether the program and work of the Mexican National Nuclear Energy Commission 
were, from the technical and economic points of view, such as to promote the 
best development of the peaceful applications of atomic energy. That mission, 
which had gone to Mexico in October 1960, had reported—^that Mexico had made, 
and was still making, great efforts to train its technical staff in the use 
of radioisotopes, and that the- courses organized for that purpose were 
satisfactory in all respects. 


60, As a matter of fact, the use of radioisotopes was becoming general in 
Mexico, whether in the field of radioteletherapy, clinical diagnosis,' unsealed 
sources or research using tracers. Many Mexican doctors had undertaken 
extensive research on the subject abroad? others had attended training courses 
organized by the National Nuclear Energy Commission, The mission, after 
visiting various hospitals, clinics and laboratories, had reported that they 
were well equipped and staffed by qualified technicians who took a great 
interest in the progress achieved. At La Eaaa Hospital a complementary 
course on fundamental techniques in radioisotopes, intended exclusively for 
doctors, aimed at providing training in the use of radioisotopes in applied 
medicine. - The School of Medicine of the National University, where courses 


in nuclear medicine for post-graduate students had been organized during the 
past two years, was training the technicians whom the country would soon need. 
The public medical center, where the conference organized by the Agency was 
to be held, and particularly the oncology hospital, possessed magnificent 
facilities for radiotherapy and physics, and was well equipped for various 
forms of radiotherapeutical treatment, since technicians had at their disposal 
four cobalt bombs and a betatron capable of producing energy up to 1.5 MeV, 
making it possible to use electrons as well as very penetrating X-rays. 

61. On the whole, Mexico was satisfied with the way in which the mission had 
accomplished its task. The only point on which the mission and the Mexican 
14/ STI/D0C/31. 



GC(V)/OR„52 
page 20 


Government had disagreed was the exploitation of uraniferous deposits. The 
Government had always held the view that the country ought to he able'to 
supply its present and future energy needs from its own resources. 


62. The interesting annual report of the Board of Governors to the present 
session stressed the progress already accomplished in one year in the spheres 
he had indicated, such as those of radioisotopes and radiation, the use of 
which in safe conditions was increasing in the developing regions. That 
explained why more than a third of the fellowships, expert services and 
research contracts granted by the Agency were in that field, which was of 
considerable importance to Member States. 
63. It was to be hoped that the studies on the disposal of radioactive waste 
into the sea and fresh water and its radiological control would continue with 
increasing speed so that the necessary information would quickly be made 
available to the countries concerned. 
64. The report, after stressing the importance of technical assistance 
activities, referred to the work undertaken in the field of radiation protection 
in order to improve safety standards and reduce the dangers of radioactivity 
to persons and property. He was pleased to note that the Agency had 
undertaken research in radiobiology, the contamination of the sea by radioactive 
waste and radiodosimetry, and had renewed different research contracts 
on radiobiology and radiation protection. 
65. He was also glad for all countries, and particularly the developing 
countries, that the Agency had renewed research contracts on radioactive waste 
disposal. The Mezioan delegation had for a long time past manifested its 
interest in the study of the effects of radioactivity in the sea. 
66. It had also on previous occasions expressed its approval of technical cooperation 
between the Agency and other organizations of the United Nations 
familys which had great advantages for the Agency, as well as of contacts and 
agreements with inter-governmental or non-governmental organizations. 
67 His delegation was unreservedly in favor of setting up an international 
institute of theoretical physics, since it had received the assurance that 
the institute, if set up, would be provided with the minimum of qualified 
staff required. 



GC(V)/OR.52 
page 21 


680 Mexico, honored by the confidence placed in it, had been happy to release 
one of its experts to sit on the Board of Governors. On behalf of the outgoing 
Governor from Mexico, he expressed the former's appreciation of the 
privilege he had enjoyed of following closely the Agency's activities. 


69 • Mr. LEE (China) congratulated the President on his election and was 
convinced that he would fulfill his high office with success. 


70. The Republic of China had no resident representative to the Agency and 
was not a Member of the Board. Its delegation was therefore unable to give 
an accurate and detailed analysis of the report before the Conference, It 
was clear, however, that the Agency's programs and activities deserved praise 
as well as criticism. 
71. In the past two years the Agency had awarded two research contracts to 
the Republic of China, one on mutation experiments on rice improvement and 
the other on the utilization of P - and C -labeled fertilizers and growth 
regulators to investigate the foliar application of fertilizers to ricegrowing 
in reclaimed tidal lands, 
72. One of the two mobile laboratories had been sent to the Republic of China, 
and had been used for the training of 120 young scientists over a period-of. 
five months. Three scientists sent to the Institute of Nuclear Science of 
the Tsing-Hua National University had made some important contributions 
towards the atomic energy program. In August, a second survey mission, 
consisting of three Agency scientists, had visited Taiwan. 
73. While the Agency's award of fellowships to Chinese every year was 
appreciated, he considered that there was room for improvement in the procedure 
followed for the awards. Each year the Government was requested to 
send the Agency a list of candidates, but was not informed of the number of 
fellowships available and in what fields. Information on those points would 
make matters much easier for the Government. 
74.r As regards the recruitment of Agency staff, the Chinese Government had 
on many occasions requested the appointment of Chinese nationals to posts on 
the Secretariat, but no member of the Secretariat had as yet been recruited 
in the Republic of China with the Government's approval. That being so, his 
Government had the right to ask why the contribution of the Republic of China 
to the ordinary budget was assessed at more than $200 000, and was the sixth 

GC(V)/OR,52 
page 22 


largest in size. Failure by the Agency's high officials to remedy that injustice 
would mean that they were not faithful to the international civil 
servant's moral code and their conduct should be investigated. 


75. Turning to his country's atomic energy program, he was glad to state 
that his Government was able to offer the Agency four study fellowships for 
1962. The allowances offered were not very high but, having regard to the 
cost of living in the Republic of China, they were adequate, particularly 
as free accommodation was provided. 
76. The Institute of Nuclear Science of the National University comprised 
four departmentss nuclear physics, nuclear chemistry, nuclear technology, 
and reactors and isotopes. The Physics Department had a 3 MeV Van de Graaff 
accelerator, and the Institute also possessed a 1 MW research reactor of the 
swimming-pool type, which had been brought to criticality on 13 April 1961. 
It was expected that high-power operation would begin towards the end of the 
year, and that the production of short-life radioisotopes would commence in 
the following year. Although the Republic of China was one of the lessdeveloped 
countries industrially, that reactor had, with the exception of some 
reactor parts and fuel elements supplied from the United States, been built 
by' Chinese engineers and technicians. 
77 Some nuclear activities were also taking place at other institutions, such 
as the National University at Taipei. The College of Agriculture was parti-,. 
cularly active5 it had a radioisotope laboratory at which agricultural and 
biochemical research was to be undertaken with a view to improving methods of 
cultivation and animal husbandry. The Physics Department was contemplating 
the construction of a 15 MeV cyclotron. In the field of medicine, there was 
some cobalt apparatus for teletherapy, and use was being made of radioisotopes 
in research, diagnosis and treatment. 


78. He also wished to make some comments on the General Conference. He 
greatly regretted that it had become a forum for the propagation of hatred and 
discord among Member States. It always made problems instead of solving them. 
He regretted to see eminent scientists taking part in political discussions 
instead of working for the progress of science and technology. He associated 
himself fully with the views expressed by the delegate of Israel on that 
15/ 

subject—. 

]Jj/ GC(V);OR050, paragraph 44. 


GC(V)/0E.5page 
23 


79• The Chinese delegation would vote for the proposed amendment to the 


Statute—, aimed at allocating two extra seats on the Board to the "Africa 


and the Middle East" area. It also supported Mr. Eklund's candidature for 


the post of Director General of the Agency, though it regretted the departure 


of the present Director General. 


80. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director General, whose term of office 
was coming to close, and the members of the Secretariat on all that they had 
done during the four years of the Agency's existence, often under very difficult 
conditions. 
81. Mr. PAZE (Albania) congratulated the President on his election. 
82. The Agency's creation had raised great hopes throughout the world, but 
those hopes had not been justified since it had become dependent on the 
United States^ which was using it to cover its military preparations. 
83; Under its Statute, the Agency was supposed to be a universal organization. 
But what was the reality? With the support of its allies, the United States 
was using the voting machinery to exclude the People's Republic of China, while 
its place was unjustly taken by the Chiang Kai-shek clique. That countryhad 
nevertheless made great progress in the nuclear field. At the Joint 
Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna, Chinese scientists had taken part 
in research work which had resulted in the solving of important problems in 
nuclear physics. Why ignore so valuable an experience? He also quoted the 
case of the German Democratic Republic, and protested against the discrimination 
exercised by the Western Powers against the World Federation of Trade Unions 


(WFTU), which had been refused consultative status with the Agency. 


84• The aggressive policy pursued by the imperialist countries was a threat 


to world peace. Those countries had consistently opposed the concrete 
measures proposed by the Soviet Union and other socialist countries, and had 


systematically wrecked all efforts for agreement on the banning of nuclear 


tests and general and complete disarmament and for the conclusion of a peace 


treaty with Germany. Not content with blocking those efforts, they were 


stimulating the arms race, creating dangerous centers of tension, reinforcing 


their bases abroad and maintaining a war psychosis. 


16/ GC(V)/151 and Acld.l. 



qc(v)/OR 52 
page 24 


85. The provisional cessation of nuclear tests had been due to the efforts 
of the Soviet Union, but the NATO countries had used the respite to strengthen 
their armaments, increase their stocks of atomic bombs and complete the 
encirclement of the socialist countries. Furthermore, Prance, supported by 
the United States and the United Kingdom, had carried on with its tests, of 
which those two countries had shared the benefit. Under those conditions the 
Soviet Union's decision to resume experimental explosions was both legitimate 
and necessary to muzzle the imperialist adventurers and defend world peace., 
86, Under the terms of its Statute the Agency should "encourage ... practical 
application of atomic energy for peaceful uses" and "establish or adopt .,. 
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to 
life and property". In other words, it should ensure the protection of the 
population, and particularly of the younger generation, against radiation, 
promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy and make every effort to enlist the 
atom in the service of peace. Under pressure from the Western Powers it had 
always evaded those duties, It had never met the aspirations of the peoples 
and had refused to support the proposals of the socialist countries for 
general and complete disarmament and the prohibition of nuclear tests. 


87. Since the establishment of the Agency there had been a steadily increasing 
desire throughout the world to co-operate in using atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes, but the Western Powers, particularly the United States, were opposed 
to such co-operation. The United States had even tried to use the Agency 
to achieve objectives which had no connection with international co-operation.. 
There was a constantly growing need for power in the world, which could be 
satisfied to a great extent by atomic energy. Sources of power were lacking 
in a number of less-developed countries and their requirements could be met 
only by atomic energy. What had the Agency done to solve that problem? 
88. In violation of the provisions of its Statute, which laid down that it 
should promote the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, the Agency's 
activities, at the instigation of the Pentagon and NATO, had been directed to 
an entirely different end. That had been reflected in the attitude adopted 
by the United States regarding the method of controlling assistance provided 
by the Agency, namely that control should be extended to all research centers 
and all the peaceful uses of atomic energy, but that it should not hamper, 
and should even promote, the production of nuclear weapons. Furthermore, 

GC(V)/OR,52 
page 25 


some of the research carried out by the Agency was intended to establish a 
control system the sole purpose of which was to enable American atom magnates 


to take advantage of the discoveries made in other countries. In other cases, 


the purpose of the research carried out was to help countries producing 
nuclear weapons to conceal from the population the potential dangers resulting 
from the operation of nuclear weapon plants. Those were only some of the 


serious shortcomings in the Agency's activities, but the examples given were 
sufficient to show that the Agency had placed itself at the service of the 
military cliques in the Y/estcrn countries. 


89. His delegation protested against the dangerous way in which the Agency 
was being used and asked the Conference to take radical and immediate 
measures to ensure that the Agency should resume its proper activites and 
genuinely serve as an instrument of co-operation between nations. 
90 Albania, which until recently had been a backward country, was now, 


thanks to the selfless labor of its people and the help it had received from 
other socialist countries, a mixed agricultural-industrial country. The 
foundation of a university had made it possible to train the highly qualified 
key personnel required to organize scientific research, and consequently the 
training of experts in atomic energy could begin. 


91. The Government and people of Albania were anxious that atomic energy 
should serve the interests of peace and humanity and were therefore proud of 
the progress they nad made in that respect. His Government had always 
protested against the production and testing of nuclear weapons. It had 
protested against the establishment of rocket bases in Italy and the Greek 
Government's decision to convert Greece into a NATO atomic base. In 1958 his 
Government had joined the Soviet Union in requesting that the Balkans should 
become an atom-free zone. Albania would support any proposal which would 
encourage the practical use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 
92. Mr. RSGALA (Philippines) congratulated the President on his election 
and wished him every success in the performance of his duties. He would like 
to avail himself of the opportunity to thank the Conference for the honor it 
had conferred on him by electing him Chairman of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee. 

GC(V)/OR.52 
page 26 


93* His Government attached great importance to the sessions of the Conference, 


since they permitted all Member States to review the Agency's activities and 
make constructive suggestions regarding its future work. He expressed his 


Government's general satisfaction with the work carried out so far and the 
way in which the Agency had served the interests of Member States. 


94* His Government followed with great interest the Agency's activities and 
achievements, and particularly the execution of the technical assistance 
program., It was gratifying that, despite some- financial difficulties, the 
Agency had met the numerous requests for technical assistance from Member 


17/ 


States. At an earlier meeting—', the Director General had made a very 
interesting suggestion regarding the financing of the Agency's activities? 
namely, that more of those activities should be financed from the regular 
budget, i,e, the assessed contributions of Member States, as was the practice 
in most organizations in the United Nations family. He thought that, when 


the Statute was revised^ the provision of technical assistance should be 


expressly mentioned among the statutory functions of the Agency, 


95° In connection with the suggested preparation of a long-term program—-^, 
his delegation wished to draw the Conference's attention to the growing need 
and importance of scientific library and documentation services in the 
developing countries„ There could be no doubt that an adequate library was 
one of the essential requirements of a scientific organization. His delegation' 
therefore suggested that any long-term program should include technical 
assistance for promoting the establishment and development of library and 
documentation services in the Member States, 


96, In his address, the Director General had said that the principle of 


geographical distribution had always been taken into account in recruiting 


Agency staff.—^ It seemed, however, that that principle had not been given 


,20 


the importance it deserved. The list of Agency staff issued in July 1961 


showed that out of 56 posts at P-5 level and above only six were held by 


17/ GC(V)/OR„48, paragraph 87. 


18/ Ibid., paragraph 86„ 


19/ Ibid,- paragraph 83


20/ IlTFCIRC/22/Rev.l, and Corr.1. 


GC(V)/0E.52 
page 27 


nationals of the developing countries, including three from the Asian countries. 
Of the fourteen Directors listed, only two were nationals of underdeveloped 
countries. 


97. It might be argued that the less-developed countries could not spare any 
experts to fill technical posts, but that argument did not apply to the 
administrative posts. At one of the Board's meetings in June 1961 the 
Governor from the United States had said that his Government was in favor of 
allocating one post of Deputy Director General to a national of a developing 
country. That was not only desirable but essential and should be done as soon 
as possible, 
98, In 1960 the Agency had sent a nuclear power survey mission to the 


21/ 
Philippines and the mission's report had since been published,—' His delegation 
was extremely satisfied with the work done by the Agency's experts. 
As a result of that work, nuclear energy might have an important part to play 
in the Philippines before the end of the current decade, Recently a follow-up 
mission from the Agency had also visited the Philippines and had done very use- ful 
work. Such follow-up missions should be encouraged, since they kept the 
Secretariat in close touch with, the requirements of the developing countries. 


99> His delegation associated itself with the tributes paid to the Director 
General for the work he had done in laying down strong foundations for the 
Agency, 

100, The death of the Secretary-General of the United Nations had been a great 
loss to peace-loving peoples throughout the world. His sudden loss had brought 
the United Nations to the brink of possible disaster at a critical time. The 
world-wide tribute paid to him was the most eloquent testimony to the work he 
had done in making the United Nations an effective instrument in preserving peace. 


101. He thought he was voicing the sentiments of most delegates in expressing 
the hope that the efforts that were being made by many leaders in many nations 
would result in a relaxation of international tension. The Agency should make 
a dynamic and effective contribution to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
as laid down in the Statute. The Philippines would continue to offer its 
full support and active co-operation towards the achievement of that aim. 
The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 


21/ STl/DOC'lO/3, 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(V)/OR.53 

1 December1961 


GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 


FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Friday, 29 September 1961, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 

CONTESTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


11 
General debate and report of the Board of 1-99 
Governors for196O-61 
(continued from the 52nd meeting) 


Statements 
by the delegates of: 


Portugal 1-8 
Turkey 9-17 
Hungary 18 - 22 
Indonesia 23 - 34 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 35 - 50 
Australia 51 -69 
United Kingdom 70 - 89 
Burma 90 -99 

* GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(V)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5892 



GC(V)/OR,53 
page 2 


GENERAL,DEBATE. .AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1960-61 (GC(v)/154, 168) 
(continued from the 52nd meeting") ' 


1. Mr. de LEMOS (Portugal) said the President represented a country with 
which Portugal had long maintained the warmest relations, and congratulated him 
on his appointment. 
2. The work done during the early years of the Agency was now beginning to 
bear fruit and the Board's annual report (GC(V)/154)? "the Program and Budget 
l/ 2/ 
for 1962—' and the Director General1s statement—' held out promising prospects 
for the Agency's future5 its technical work had really promoted the peaceful 
uses of atonic energy, and, most Member States had been considerably helped. 


3. He was especially glad to see the attention the program devoted to assisting 
laboratories in Member States through research contracts and providing 
more experts and equipment than hitherto. 
4. The Agency's recommendations and reports on various technical aspects of 
nuclear energy very usefully complemented or extended the scope of the valuable 
work done by national atomic energy commissions and other international 
organizations. 
5. Portugal needed an ever-increasing number of scientists and technicians 
and hoped that its new nuclear research center and the universities would supply 
that need. To do so, however, the center would need more, and more elaborate, 
equipment and installations, together with the co-operaticn and assistance of 
scientists and technicians from other countries. A request in that sense had 
been submitted to the Agency and it was hoped that two highly qualified scientists 
and equipment for nuclear chemistry research would be forthcoming as a result. 
As-the'-center developed? requests of that sort and applications for Agency 
fellowships would no doubt increase. 
6. Assistance was not one-way, however. Portuguese radioactive ore prospecting 
experts had taken part in technical assistance missions, thus passing 
on to other countries the benefit of their experience, and other technical 
personnel had been made available to the Agency. The scope of the Portuguese 
contribution would increase as the center developed; technicians from other 
countries'would be welcome to use its research facilities - no doubt to their 
benefit and to that of the center itself. 
1/ GC(v)/i55. 
2/ GC(V)/OR.48, paragraphs 68-94. 



GC(V)/OR.53 
page 3 


7, He would like to pay tribute to the work of the Director General during 


the difficult formative years of the Agency. 


8, There had been times in the past Y/hen civilization had been in dire peril, 
but the human intellect had always triumphed in the end. The Agency had 
brought many nations together for the pxxrpose of developing the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. It could now encourage all countries, in the interest of 
peace and international co-operation, to contribute to its technical work 
without the intrusion of politics, and thereby inspire mankind with more confidence 
and hope. 


9* Mr.JCARATAY (Turkey) paid tribute to the memory of Mr. Hammarskjol'd, 
whose work for pes.ee would always be remembered with gratitude in Turkey. 


10. He congratulated the President on his election. He also wished to pay 
tribute to the work done by the Director General. • 
11. His delegation approved the Board's annual report and was confident, now 
that the purely organizational Tork was complete, th'at the Agency could in 
future concentrate more closely on the development of nuclear technology. 
12. He hoped that, through close co-operation and with the help of the advanced 
countries, nuclear power would become competitive sooner than the Secretariat 
•3/ ' ' 
now anticipated-J . A praiseworthy example had been set by the United States 

Government in inviting the Agency to co-operate in the design, construction and 

start-up of seven small power reactors.--' He welcomed the studies made in 
the Philippine s-^and l?z.".?1"r.C. ~J , The scope of such investigations should be 
broadened and similar studios m?do in other countries. 

13. Ho was glad to learn that the Agency conrsidered preparing a long-term 
program which would take account of pest experience, the anticipated progress 
in nuclear technology and the pr'enont and future needs of Member States, 
particularly the developing countries, 
14. Technical assistance, scientific research, protection against radiation 
and radioisotope applications had been main concerns of the Agency during the 
preceding year. The attention given to the technical assistance needs of the 
3/ GG(v)/INF/38, paragraphs 53-55. 
4/ GC(V)/161, paragraph? 8-10 and GC(v)/1HP/41. 
5/ STl/DOC/10/3. 
6/ STl/DOC/lO/2, 



GC(V)/OR.55 
page 4 


less-developed countries was gratifying, but he agreed with the Director 
General that the present method of financing the operational program was 


11

unsatisfactory and needed improvement-1-7 . There were some administrative ^ 


shortcomings which should be remedied, such as the delay in announcing fellow


ship awards - detrimental alike to the offering country and the successful 
candidate. The difficulty of recruiting suitable experts sometimes meant 
that their services were not available in time. Scientific conferences, 


seminars and symposia were extremely useful, but an excessive numbor of them 


should not be held. 


15. During the preceding year, Turkey had concentrated on the organization of 
advanced training courses on the applications of radioisotopes in medicine and 
agriculture; nuclear training and work connected with the start-up of the 
swimming-pool reactor in Istanbul. A course on health physics had just started 
in Ankara under the supervision of an Agency expert. In 1962, an international 
training course for Middle East countries on the agricultural applications of 
radioisotopes was due to take place in Ankara, and research was being carried 
out in various laboratories. Prospecting continued. It was hoped that the 
sub-critical assembly supplied through the Agency would soon be available to 
students and research workers at the Faculty of Science in the University of 
Ankara, where radiochemistry, radiobiology and fall-out laboratories were soon 
to bo provided also. A two-year theoretical and practical program in nuclear 
engineering was now open to graduates of the Technical University of Istanbul. 
The first Turkish reactor, which had boen under construction since 1959? was 
expected to start up within the next few months and during the coming year 
new laboratories would be established for physics, chemistry, biology., metallurgy, 
medicine, agriculture and technology, 
16. Turkey welcomed the admission, every year, of new Member States, and 
particularly those from the rapidly developing continent of Africa. 
17. His Government was confident that close co-operation, devoid of political 
considerations, between the Member States of the Agency would continue to contribute 
to the welfare and prosperity of mankind. 
7/ GC(V)/0E.48, paragraph 87, 



GC(V)/0E.53 
page 5 


18, Mr. JANOSSY (Hungary), after congratulating the President on his 
election? said that certain difficulties encountered by the Agency during the 
past year had been due to one group of Member States, and the fact that China 
and the Gorman Democratic Republic were, for political reasons, denied member


ship of the Agency and that the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) was 
not gr.anted consultative status reflected a very unsatisfactory state of 
affairs which made fruitful work very difficult. 


19. The Agency should support technical and scientific progress in the 
developing countries, but many of the meetings it organized were of more 
benefit to the more advanced countries. 
20, The Hungarian Government had offered four fellowships per year, but there 
was no reference to that offer in the budget document. That might be due to 
an administrative error, but such errors should be avoided. An effort was . 
made in Hungary's Central Institute of Physical Kosearch to combine atomic 
roso'arch with other types of research, and many people in other countries who 
had .expressed the desire to work there had been advised to apply for Agency 
fellowships. If they had applied, their applications had apparently been 
unsuccessful. He understood that several countries had had the same experience. 
That indicated that for some reason fellowship applications were being rejected 
without duo cause„ 


21, Agency experts should make a^ genuine effort to help the nationals of 
countries to which they were sent and should not treat them in a condescending 
manner, as had sometimes happened. 


22. If the new Director General was a national of an African or Asian neutral 
country, it would help to eliminate the difficulties he had mentioned. He 
believed, furthermore, that if there was genuine disarmament, the Agency's 
work would be much more efficient and scientists could then do valuable work. 
A new spirit was required in the Agency, and disarmament would play a great 
part in producing it. 
23. Mr. DIAH (Indonesia), after congratulating the President on his 
unanimous election, and expressing deep regret at the tragic death of 
Mr. Hammarskjold, turned to survey the Board's annual report. 

GC(\7)/CTlo5 
page 6 


24. It was a pleasure, ho said, to learn that the Agency had made great 
progress in the past year, especially in its scientific and technical work. 
Nevertheless, he would like to put forward some suggestions. 
25. Indonesia.was one of the many developing countries which had recently 
embarked .n an atomic energy program. The difficulties which confronted 
Indonesia had doubtless boon faced by other countries and would be experienced 
by many more. Atomic scientists in Indonesia were anxious to have guidance 
in the phasing and execution of their plans once they had been formulated, 
and it was very desirable that the Agency should include in its program for 
1962 some investigations based on the experience gained in the developed 
countries and should produce a guide or directory indicating the most efficient 
linos of work. 
26. The gap between the developing and the developed countries was very wide, 
and the latter need not fear that the developing countries might become competitors. 
In the peaceful uses of atomic energy it was essential to consider 
the needs of mankind rather than those of countries or groups of countries. 
27. The Agency's budget for fellowships and technical assistance should not 
be decreased? on the contrary it should, if possible, be increased. As long 
as the facilities for training experts in the developing countries were insufficient, 
fellowships would bo necessary. 
28. In rogard to technical assistance, priority should be given to geological 
surveys and the study of nuclear power costs and development. Those problems 
should be handled seriously and without scepticism. 
29. In regions which, were in process of development but where water power was 
not available ahd the transport of conventional fuel presented problems, as 
was the case in several parts of Indonesia, serious consideration had to be 
given to the possibility of generating power from nuclear energy. The Agency 
must realize that success in geological survey was closely related to an 
acceleration of nuclear power development. 
30. With regard to the creation of isotope training centers, Indonesia 
considered that the best solution would be to create regional cente-rs, and 
was prepared to act as host country for the region of South East Asia and the 
Pacific. 

GC(V)/OR.53 
page 7 


351. There was a tendency in the Agency to increase the number of visiting 
professors. Their work'was undoubtedly useful, but it was essential that 
the country 'to be visited should already be provided with laboratories and 
other equipment, which wore expensive and not always available in the developing 
countries. They should not be provided, however, at the cost-of docreasing 
fellowships. 
52. Indonesia would like to seo a more equitable geographical distribution of 
staff in the Agency, particularly at the Professional level. It was . 
regrettable that nationals of the developing countries often served only in the 
lower echelons. A points system might be•introduced to determine the number 
of vacancies allocated to a Member State. 
3>3>. His delegation wished to make quite clear its vie?/ that the next Director 


General should be selected from the nominees of the uncommitted nations or 


some' other group of nations outside the West. That was a question of 
principle. The new Director General could succeed in his difficult task 


only if he had broad support from Member States including both the United 


States and the Soviet Union. Any candidate imposed on the Agency against the 
wish of one of those two Powers and of many uncommitted nations would not be 


able to develop the Agency successfully. 


3?4. ' The Indonesian delegation wished to express its warm appreciation of the 


assistance and co-operation which had always been offered by the Secretariat, 
under the capable and sympathetic guidance of the outgoing Director General. 


35 • Mr. BORISEVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Eepublic) said that 
the present session of the General Conference was being held at a significant 


and crucial moment. It was a significant moment in view of the' rapid progress 
that was being made in the conquest of the universe and the efforts that were 
being deployed to place atomic energy at the service of mankind. The oppressed 
peoples were resolutely casting off the chains of colonial slavery and the 
colonial system was collapsing. It was a crucial moment because the leaders 
of countries in the aggressivo Western bloc were bent on aggravating the 
effects of the Second World 'far, inflating the so-called German problem which 
they had themselves created and increasing international tension. Paced with 
the threats and military preparations of the United States and its Atlantic 



GC(v)/OiU53 
page 8' 


•bloc allies, the Soviet Union had been forced to take serious defensive action including 
the resumption of nuclear testing - in order to safeguard its own. 
frontiers and those of its allies - the sister socialist countries. 
36. The atom must he harnessed to serve mankind and the noble ideal of 
human welfare and prosperity, and not as a means of intimidation and an 
instrument of war. 
37* If general and complete disarmament were achieved, the resources of the 
whole world would be devoted to satisfying the vital needs of all peoples, and 
broad new prospects would be opened up for aiding the developing countries and 
furthering human progress in all directions. It was also the key to the unlimited 
application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and would open up 
vast possibilities of action for the Agency and enable it to contribute to the 
welfare of all countries. 


38. His delegation believed that the Agency could and should make its contribution 
to the cause of general and complete disarmament and warmly welcorned 
the Soviet Union proposal that the Conference should adopt an appropriate 
resolution—' . 
39. Nuclear science was developing apace. Recently, new successes had been 
achieved in solving difficulties connected with controlled thermo—nuclear 
reactions. If those complex problems were solved, mankind would have an inexhaustible 
supply of power at its disposal. Significant results in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy had also been obtained in the Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic^ vast research programs were being carried out on 
nuclear pov/er production, nuclear physics, solid-state physics, radiobiology 
and physiology. Isotopes and radiation sources were being successfully used 
for chocking purposes and for automating technological processes in a vast 
range of branches of the Republic1s economy. The building of a research reactor 
and the.creation of a nuclear research center, which was being equipped 
with chemical, physical, biological, medical and other laboratories, were 
opening up for Byelorussian scientists wide perspectives in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. 
8/ GC(v)/OR,51, paragraph 1 (l3>)j see also GC(v)/175. 



GC(V)/0E.55 
page 9 


40. It must be a main object of the Agency's work to provide nuclear materials, 
equipment and facilities in order to help Member States, and especially the 
developing countries; 'to carry through their peaceful nuclear energy programs. 
Over the last four years, however, the Agency had in fact done very little > 
along these lines and, .for three years, not one gram had been used of the 
5140 kg of .uranium at its disposal,. Only recently had agreement been reached. 
9/ 


on the -supply of-a small quantity of enriched uranium to Finland— and 
Yugoslavia, Instead of devising the best and most advantageous ways of 
providing aid and thus .fulfilling its statutory obligations, the Agency, under 
pressure from the United States and its Western allies, had recently focused 
its attention on working out a system of safeguards and controls which, as had 
been pointed ,put at the last session of the Conference, served only one 
purpose — to all0-7 a few countries .to subjugate and enslave others and to 
enable the strong to exercise control over the weak, 


41. One of the main reasons why the Agency's'efforts were 'being'hamstrung was 
to be sought in the domination of the Western States and their unwillingness 
to turn the Agency into a center of effective international collaboration in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. For several years, the United States, 
aided by an obedient majority, had been preventing the representatives of the 
People's Republic of China from occupying their place in the Agency, Instead, 
China's place in the Agency was taken by the bankrupt Chiang Kai-shek clique, 
which.represented nobody except itself. The same discrimination against the 
socialist countries could be seen in the opposition put up by the Western 
States to the .-admission of the German Democratic Republic and other socialist 
countries. • - • , . 
42. Impelled by political considerations, certain countries were hindering a 
just solution of the question of' granting consultative status to WFTU, although 
it was.the- most powerful trade union organization in the world and had a 
membership of over 100 million, and despite the fact that consultative status 
had long ago been granted to two far less important trade union organizations the 
International Federation of Christian Tra,de Unions and .the International. . 
Confederation of Free Trade Unions, The reason was that the United States 
viewed'with disfavor WFTU's work for peace and international co-operation. 
2/ IFFCIRC/24 and Corr.1 and Add.1. 


GC(F)/OR.53 


page 10 


One wondered how long activities to safeguard peace had been a crime and 
whether such activities were legitimate grounds for preventing such an organi


zation from being accepted by an international organization, 


43• His delegation considered that the Agency's decisions on the subject of 


technical aid to Member States were unjust and tendentious. Was it right 


that some 75$ of the Agency's appropriations for technical aid in 1960-61 should 
be earmarked for countries which belonged to military and political blocs associated 
with the United States, or that only 5$ should be allocated to the 
countries of Africa (Sudan, Morocco, United Arab Republic), while South Korea 
alone was to receive 2.5$? It was no coincidence that 10$ of the Agency's 


total EPTA funds went to Taiwan, South Korea and South Viet-Nam. Again-, in 
1959-60, over half the money spent on all forms of technical assistance by the 
Agency - including fellowships - was given to countries which belonged to 
Western military and political blocs. More was spent on Taiwan and South 
Korea than on India, Burma, Tunisia, Ceylon, Morocco, Sudan and Cambodia 


together. That was a vicious practice, which the Agency must abandon if it 
really wanted genuine international collaboration. 


44. There was another points the tendentious methods adopted by the Secretariat 
in staffing preliminary assistance missions, and especially in the appointment 
of the heads of such missions. It was the general rule for citizens from the 
socialist countries to be artificially debarred from such missions - hardly 
evidence of international co-operation in the Agency on a basis of equality. 
The result was that the recommendations made were not objective and failed to 
take account of the opinions of the Governments of the countries investigated5 
they were based instead on the interests of monopolistic circles which were not 
interested in the development of certain aspects of nuclear energy - e.g. the 
working of uranium deposits - in those countries. 
45• As regards research contracts, there were serious shortcomings because of 
the absence of proper control by the Board. Of the 104 research contracts concluded 
by the Agency to date, results had been published for 29 only and had 
appeared, not in Agency publications, but in national scientific journals. The 
value of the work done had still to be demonstrated. His delegation had ' 
pointed out at the fourth session of the Conference that the subjects of the 
contracts had very largely been selected on a haphazard- basis and were of no 


.'/•• 



GC(V)/OR.53 
page 11 


10/ 


interest for very many Member States-—^, They were in fact chosen haphazard 
by the Secretariat in a one-sided manner and in the light of irrelevant circumstances. 
Another equally bad practice was that most of the contracts were 
awarded to Western countries. Of the 94 research contracts listed in Annex XIV 
to the Board's report, more than 60, i.e. two-thirds, had been placed in Western 
countries and only 10 in Asia? Africa and Latin America, 

46. The procedure for accepting the subjects,of research contracts and allocating 
funds for them should be much stricter. They should all be discussed by 
the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) with the assistance of other scientists 
from Member States5 reports should be submitted on all research carried out 
under contract and on the practical utility of the results\ and contracts 
should be awarded in Asia, Afrioa and Latin America, 
47* Commenting on the composition of the Board of .Governors, the Agency's 
executive organ, and on the existing structure of the Secretariat, he pointed 


out that the shortcomings in the Agency's work mentioned earlier were largely 
due to the situation vrtiich had developed within the executive. Thus of the 
23 Members of the Board, 16 were representatives of Western Powers linked with 


the United States in military-political blocs, and only seven represented the 
socialist countries and the neutral countries of Africa and Asia, That could 
not be considered right. All three groups of States now existing in the world 
should be equitably represented on the Board, That would provide a guarantee 


that the work of the Board and of the Agency m general would not be detrimental 
to any one group of States, That solution would satisfy all claims, including 
the just claims of the African and Middle East countries to broader representa


tion on the Board. 


48. Parallel with the reorganization of the Board, changes should also be made 
in the structure of the Secretariat, which was responsible for carrying out the 
decisions of the Conference and the Board, There again, as in the Board7 one 
group of States was predominant. That had been convincingly demonstrated on 
the previous day by the delegate of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,— 
49. Speaking of the Secretariat, he criticized the tendency towards overstaffing. 
- Evory year 30 to 40 specialist posts remained vacant in the 
Secretariat and yet the Secretariat submitted for the Board's approval and for 
10/ GC(IV)/OR,41,' paragraph 69, 
11/ GC(V)/OR,52, paragraph 21, 


GC(V)/OR,53 
page 12 


approval by the Conference plans for increasing the establishment, which were 
in fact approved, although entirely unnecessary, despite objections from a 
number of States. In the previous year an increase in the establishment of 
27 posts had been approved, and it was now proposed to increase the establishment 
by-"another 22-posts. Constant staff increases within the Secretariat 
led to a corresponding increase in the Agency's already enormous administrative 
expenditure. That could not be considered right either. During its four 
years of existence, the Agency's expenditure had grown from $4 O89 000 to 


$6 168 000._ The Program and Budget for 1962 provided for a new increase of 
$95 000 in administrative expenditure, bringing the total to the enormous sum 


of $6 26l 000. At the same time, the Secretariat was continually complaining 


that the Agency did'not have the funds to provide assistance to Member States. 


50. Finally, there was the question of the appointment of the Director General. 
In his view, the correct way of dealing with the question was to set up a 
tripartite governing body within the Secretariat. He realized,.however, that 
many States were not prepared to approve that idea and that the question of a 
Director General had to be settled by the present Conference. He therefore 
thought that under the circumstances the most acceptable candidate for the 
post would be a representative from the Afro-Asian countries - those most 
interested in Agency assistance. 
51. Mr. MCKNIGHT '(AU stralia) paid tribute to the memory of the late 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, and went on to congratulate the 
President on his election, 
52. He noted that, in the Board's annual report, 1961 had been described as 
a year of consolidation. That might perhaps convey a slight feeling of 
disappointment. But there was sometimes a tendency to expect too much from 
the Agency at the present time. It was true that over the past four years it 
had not produced any spectacular results, but a careful assessment would show 
a total of solid achievement. 
55* That achievement flowed from many, diverse activities. In the first 


place there was a very broad technical assistance program, but the Agency had 


not been in existence long enough yet for many of its initial activities to 


have been completed. Until quite recently, comparatively few fellowship


holders had finished their training, and few individual projects of technical 


assistance were as yet complete. 



GC(V)/OR„53 
page 13 


54* The- Agency was becoming a central point of reference for scientists% there 

was clearly a growing tendency for Member States to rely on' it as a broker of 


scientific and technical advice. 


55• Whatever other functions the Agency might have, cither now or in the future, 
it was essential to roepgnize that one of its main functions must always be that 
of a high-level technical regulatory body. As radioactive materials became more 
and more common in international commerce, it became increasingly important that 
there should be world-wide regulatory codes to govern their movement. The 
Australian delegation noted with satisfaction that the Agency's regulations for 


12/ 


the safe transport of radioactive materials— had been distributed to Member 
States^ they should become the basis for national and international regulations. 
Australia spoke feelingly on that point, being so far removed geographically, from 
the advanced countries which could supply and process radioactive materials. It 
was a matter of high priority that international regulations should be developed 
which would enable nuclear materials and radioactive substances to move freely 
between supplying and receiving countries in accordance with a common code. 
Moreover, those codes required interpretation and application in an atmosphere 
of goodwill and practical common sense, 


56, Regulatory activities were generally unspectacular, but they were an es


sential prerequisite to any operational work. Atomic energy was a highly technical 
subject which many people did not understand and hence feared.. As in the 
case of other technical advances of the twentieth century, atomic energy would 
be accepted by mankind as a normal part of its economic life only when- codes of 
safety were internationally defined and accepted, 

57. An important aspect of regulation was the question of waste disposal.- It 
might well be that the economics of nuclear power would some day turn upon whether 
radioactive waste could be harnessed to economic purposes. In the meantime the 
cheapest but safest method of waste disposal must be found. Waste disposal inevitably 
had international effects, and it must therefore be included among the 
Agency's regulatory functions, 
58, In the course of the debate some criticism had been leveled at the state-


ment that the Agency was studying the evaluation of harbors with regard to the 
15/ 


safe handling of nuclear merchant ships.—^ He failed to understand the 

12/ STl/PUB/40 and STI/PUB/32. 
12/ GC(V)/OR.51, paragraph 1 (31) -(39)• 


GC(V)/Q 
page 1> 


reas criticism. Some years must inevitably olapse before a safety 
code .u.^ DC developed which would receive international acceptance. The 
legislative problems involved were complex. Anyone who had had experience of 
attempting to achieve uniform harbor regulations for ships carrying explosives 
knew that the process took many years. By 1965 or 1966 one or more nuclear 
merchant ships would be plying on'the trade routes of the world; and who knew 
how many there would be by 1970? It was not too early to commence the study 


of a safety-code. Safety was indivisible. 


59. The Agency was greatly interested in the question of nuclear power. No 
one now thought that economic nuclear power was just round the corner. But 
it was always well to remember that a pessimistic phase was often followed by 
an optimistic one. He'welcomed the reports of the Agency missions which had 
visited Finland and the Philippines, which were very realistic about the costs 
of electricity production. They had resulted from consultation between the 
national planning authorities? the Agency experts and experts from other international 
agencies. 
60. His delegation warmly approved the work being done by the Agency to 
establish a common basis for comparing the cost of electricity production from 
conventional sources with that from atomic sources. 
61. Australia's investment in atomic energy research facilities was over 
$20 million. The number of persons employed in its research establishment was 
about 1000? of whom 200 were professional personnel. He thought it would be 
agreed that, comparatively speaking, that represented a considerable effort. 
62,- Australia was still in a developing stage. In large land areas which 
were remote from coal supplies5 it had to face many of the same problems as 
the other developing countries, Industrial development in such areas in the 
first instance usually required electrical power in blocks of 30 000 kW or less. 


63. Two possibilities had been open to Australia? either to do research on 
power reactor systems which could be developed v/ithin a few years but which 
would hold out the promise only of marginal cost improvementsj or to follow 
a system which would hold out the promise of major cost reduction in the longer 
term, Australia had followed the latter alternative. Its research program 

GC(V)/OR.55 
page 15 


sought a reactor with a high operating temperature. That could result in a. 
substantial reduction in capital cost, owing for example to the smaller size 
of the heat exchangers. Attention was also being given to the less orthodox 
moderating materials because of the potential scope they offered for reduction 
in the physical size of reactors, 


64. For some years yet, the Agency might not be called upon to give much assistance 
to Member States in connection with nuclear power generation other 
than advice in the form of analytical or planning studies such as those provided 
to Finland and the Philippines. In the meantimef however, it could 
assist Member States in improving their over-all productivity by the use of 
radioisotopes. It might well be that the world was only on the threshold of 
using radioactivity to improve health by better diagnosis and treatment? to 
improve agricultural production by the elimination of pests and by the evolution 
of new species5 and to increase industrial production, 
65. But isotope applications would not, in the opinion of his delegation, 
provide a permanent objective for the Agency, Isotopes would, within a few 
years, have become a common scientific tool like the microscope. By that 
time he hoped that the Agency would be increasingly absorbed with the problems 
of electricity generation, 
66. There had been considerable discussion, in the Board about the Agency's 
objectives for the next four or five years. In the opinion of his delegation, 
the Agency must make some selection among its activities and define those to 
which the greatest emphasis should be given in its programs. That was a point 
of view which had already been put forward in the report of the Preparatory 
n • • 14/ 

Commission—' . 

67. A further point stressed in that report was. that the Agency should seek 
to work with existing national and international organizations in preference 
to engaging in an activity itself. That idea needed continuing emphasis over 
the next few years, 
68. He would conclude by saying that his delegation endorsed the view (expressed 
in paragraph 1 of the annual report) that while all existing programs should be 
deepened, a selection should be made of those which should be further developed. 
Among those his delegation hoped to see developed was the program of regulatory 
activities. 
14/ GC.l/l. 



GC(V)/OR.53 
page 16 


69. As he had said earlier, it was necessary tp distinguish between the 
spectacular and the solid. He did not foel disappointed that the Agency had 
nothing spectacular to show. He was glad it had achieved solid results of 
true worth and of value to all Member States. 
70. Sir Roger MAKIHS ("United Kingdom) congratulated the President on his 
election and thanked the Austrian Government for its hospitality. He also paid 
tribute to the memory of Mr. Hammarskjbld. 
71. The Agency's mission was essentially scientific and technical. It was 
concerned in the first instance with standardization? regulation? information 
and education. An important task was to remove the apprehensions which had 
hitherto to a large extent surrounded atomic energy development? and to assist 
its assimilation in the national economic life. 
72. The Agency was not concerned with disarmament, nuclear tests? colonialism? 
the German question or the other causes of political strife in the world. It 
was not its business to pass resolutions on political questions. It was therefore 
the policy of the United Kingdom Government to do what it could to insulate 
the Agency from the political strains and tensions of the day. 
73. The Agency was growing rapidly through the adherence of new Member States, 
The United Kingdom welcomed those new States and their participation in new 
bodies. 
74• The acquisition of new Member States had its bearing on the structure of 


the Agency. The Board had taken that into account by proposing an amendment 


to the Statute providing for the addition of two seats for representatives of 


15/ 


Africa and the Middle East on the Board—^ . His delegation supported that 
change but could not agree that? even after it had been made? there would still 
remain some lack of balance within the Board, 

75• The Conference was called upon to approve the nomination by the Board of 
Mr. Eklund as the new Director General—' , In considering such appointments 
in international organizations? the United Kingdom did not recognize any 
presumption for or against any partic\ilar region or group. In the present 
situation the United Kingdom's attitude was the following. First? he wished 
to express? on behalf of the United Kingdom, his appreciation of all that 


1_5_/ GC(V)/151 and Add.1. 
16/ GC(V)/165. 



GC(V)/OR.53 


Mr. Cole had done to build up the organization. In existing circumstances his 
delegation thought it preferable that the next Director General should not be 
drawn from one of the major atomic Powers, and advantageous that he should have 
a scientific or administrative background in atomic energy/ and preferably both. 
Mr. Eklund fulfilled those conditions, but he was above all oxitstandingly 
qualified by training and experience to direct an international scientific and 
technical organization, 


76, It had been suggested that Mr. Eklund was unknown to many delegations and 
17/ 


that he should be in Vienna—u . On the first point it seemed strange that a 
man who had been.Secretary-General of the Second United Nations International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, held at Geneva in 1958? 
should be described as unknown. On the second point he would only say that it 
would be considered most unusual in the United Kingdom for a person whose 
appointment was .under discussion to come and be present while the discussion 
was actually going on, 

77• He had listened with attention to the Director General's remarks on the 
18/ 


work of the Agency in his valedictory address—. He felt sure that what the 
outgoing Director General had had to say about the organization of the 
Secretariat would be taken fully into account by the new Director General in 
consultation with the Board. He would limit his own comment to Mr. Cole's • 
observations on the question of drawing up a five-year plan for the Agency—^/# 


78. .He was in principle in favor of that proposal. But the basis for any 
such plan had to be a firm estimate of the resources which would be available 
to support it. The Agency's present resources wore limited. Moreover, it 
did not even receive the whole of the sums to which it was entitled, and some 
of what it had received was not in convertible form. That was mainly because 
contributions to the General Fund were on a voluntary basis. The first step 
was surely to gather in the money that was promised. 
79. It was evident that at present the lion's share of the contribution to the 
finances of the Agency should come from the more advanced countries. But-in 
order to avoid drawing invidious distinctions," it was surely bettor that each 
Member State should as a matter of "principle make some contribution to those 
12/ GC(V)/173. 


18/ GC(V)/OR.48, paragraphs 68-94. 
12/ Ibid., paragraph 86. 


GC(V)/OR.55 
page 18 


finances. Therefore the next step, in the United Kingdom's view, should be to 
plan the contributions to that fund on a percentage basis like the contributions 
to the regular budget, or perhaps to merge the two budgets. The Agency would 


then be tolerably sure of receiving a definite amount in a form which it could 
use freely. The United Kingdom delegation would either support, or, if need 
be, introduce at a suitable moment, an amendment to the Statute providing for 
such a change. In the meantime, it welcomed the draft resolution which had 


20 / 


been put forward by Brazil and South Africa—', 


80. The United Kingdom would pay its share of the enlarged operational budget 
for the current year. But it was necessary to give warning that, unless 
Member States were willing to accept the principle that they would contribute 
in convertible currency that proportion of the target which was equivalent to 
their proportion of the regular budget, the United Kingdom would with great 
reluctance have to consider whether it should in the future continue to pay the 
same share'of what had been a steadily.increasing total. 
81. He would next deal summarily with the two main aspects of the Agency's work, 
that of concern to all Member States, and that of special concern to the lessdeveloped 
countries. 
82. First, in the work of interest to all Member States, the Agency's arrangements 
for facilitating the exchange of information and the spread of scientific 
ideas were now well established. . But the United Kingdom delegation was rather 
concerned about the number of international scientific meetings. There was a 
real risk that the multiplication of meetings would lead to a reduction in the 
quality of the results. 
85. Secondly, his delegation welcomed the progress made in the development of 
the Agency's regulatory functions over the past year. Completion of the 
transport regulations would much facilitate the increasing traffic in radioactive 
materials. The United Kingdom Government was now preparing new national 
regulations, based on the Agency's recommendations. It hoped that other 
Member States would do likewise. 
84. The United Kingdom took the problem of waste disposal very seriously. 
All high-activity wastes were concentrated, only low-activity ones wore disposed 
of. Assertions that waste disposal into rivers and seas under proper control 
20/ GC(V)/163 and Gorr.l. 



GC(V)/OR.53 
page 19 


had harmful effect on marine life had, he understood; no scientific foundation. 
It was the pollution of the atmosphere through nuclear bomb test explosions 
which had serious effects for the people of the world, and for that the Soviet 
Union had assumed a heavy responsibility. As far as the Agency was concerned? 
the United Kingdom would be glad to support the joint efforts for further 
research into the problem of radioactive waste which had been proposed during 
the debate. 


85. With regard to the Agency's work of special interest to the less-developed 
Member States, the United Kingdom attached groat importance to the technical 
assistance programs, and approved of the way in which they were being developed 
on the basis of a thorough assessment of needs. The preliminary assistance 
missions had, he understood, been of great value in that respect. 
86, He hoped the Board and the Secretariat would be able in due course to • 
build up a complete picture of the long-term outlook as well as of the results 
obtained with the technical assistance already given. 


87. The United Kingdom's ability to provide, practical help to the lossdeveloped 
countries would be increased, since the next few, months would see 
the commissioning of the reactors of the first nuclear power stations specially 
designed and built to supply electricity - Bradwell and Berkeley. Much existing 
United Kingdom experience had already been made available to other States 
Members of the Agency. The United Kingdom was now ready to make available the 
experience gained from the planning and operation of the new stations. The 
electricity generating authority in England had agreed in principle to accept 
a limited number of Agency-sponsored fellows on long-term attachments of up to 
two years in its nuclear power stations as soon as Bradwell and Berkeley were 
fully commissioned. Wo foes would be charged. The arrangements would bo 
similar to those for the research fellowships placed at the Agency's disposal 
at the Atomic Energy Authority's isotope and irradiation research laboratory 
at Wantage. 
88, Another point on which a practical approach was important was the provision 
of experts for technical assistance missions. The United Kingdom was 
glad that, of the forty experts so far appointed to the Agency's technical 
assistance missions, ten had come from the United Kingdom. If, however, 
Member States were to get the benefit of the practical experience and advice 



GC(V)/OR.55 
page 20 


of the highly qualified and busy men staffing those missions, it might be 
necessary to have rather more short-term missions., He would remind the 
Conferonce that the United Kingdom's offer to meet reasonable requests for 
experts for short-term missions without charging for their services still held 
good. 


89. In conclusion, he repeated his hope that all Member States? in spite of 
the political differences which divided their Governments and which inevitably 
intruded from time to time into the Agency's business, would give their support 
to what was essentially a technical and scientific organization, .On behalf 
of the United Kingdom Government, he pledged continued support to the Agency's 
constructive work. 
90. Mr. PE KIN (Burma)> after paying tribute to the memory of 
Mr. Hammarskjold, associated himself with those who had congratulated the 
President on his election. 
91. Although Burma,'s participation in the Agency's activities had been modest 
so far, his country had great confidence in the Agency and its programs and 
would willingly co-operate with it whenever possible. Bxxrma was grateful for 
the Agency's help in connection with agriculture and nuclear raw materials.. 
That assistance had made a considerable impact, particularly in agriculture. 
The recommendations made by the follow-up mission had been appreciated. Burma 
had a strong preference for assistance on a multilateral basis through international 
organizations such as the Agency and was looking to the Agency for 
further guidance and assistance. 
92. Although the Agency's present role in some international aspects of atomic 
energy did not perhaps quite live up to earlier hopes, there was no cause for 
pessimism. The development of a dynamic technical assistance program? 
logically the most important activity for developing countries, was very encouraging 
and indicated that an increasing number of those countries were 
turning to multilateral rather than bilateral assistance. He appealed to the 
major atomic Powers to channel more of their valuable assistance through thei 
Agency. Apart from the basic difficulty of lack of funds, there was the problem 
of recruiting experts. It would be greatly appreciated if the major atomic 
Powers could"make the services of qualified experts available to the Agency5 
it would be regrettable if some requests for assistance could not be met because 
the exports required were not available. 

GC(V)/OR.53 
page 21 


93. While fully.aware of the regulations and limitations of the Technical 
Assistance Board regarding the supply of equipment.; he wished to stress the 
fact that the noed of most of the developing, countries for- specialized equipment 
was sometimes greater than their need for expert knowledge. Any possible 
relaxation of those regulations would he greatly appreciated by needy countries 
such as Burma. 
94• One of the basic difficulties faced by countries initiating an atomic 

energy program was the dearth of up-to-date publications and documentation. 


Help from the Agency in organizing documentation facilities in Jiuclear science 


and in the training of personnel would bo most valuable, 


95* Since the Agency's- Laboratory was now complete, it could be developed into 
an international reference laboratory for nuclear technology; to which all the 
ill-oqtiipped laboratories in developing countries could turn for guidance. 
Efforts should be made to provide certain facilities and services for those 
countries. Apart from metrology, standardization and environmental sanitation, 

•the possibility of its providing help in connection with carbon dating and the 
assay of radioactive ores should be considered* 
96. Studies connected with the economic feasibility of nuclear power, radiation 
protection and reactor safety should be continued. The application of safeguards 
should not be unnecessarily hard on the recipient countries or some 
would be compelled to seek bilateral assistance instead. 
97• The Program and Budget for 1962 appeared to be reasonable. However, as 


the Director General had pointed out, there was an obvious need to re-organize 
certain overlapping activities within the Secretariat. If that re-organization 
was undertaken, he hoped that those making it would ensure a continued 
equitable geographical distribution, especially at the senior professional 


levels. 


98, Much had been said during the past four years on the question of the competence 
and propriety of the Agency's discussing matters of political interest. 
He did not believe that any organization, whatever its character, could afford 


to detach itself completely from what was happening around about it. By that 
he did not, of course, mean that the Agency, which had been established with a 
definite non-political purpose, should dabble- in the political controversies of 



GC(V)/0?L.53 
page 22 


the day or allow itself to become a pawn in the cold war. Apart from the 


organizational limitations of the Agency, it would be morally wrong for it to 


allow itself the luxury of present-day power politics. On the other hand, 
mankind was passing through a moment in its history when its very survival was 
at stake. Life on earth had a right to exist, and when it was being threatened 
with complete annihilation, ho failed to see how any institution, least of all 


the Agency, whose purpose was to "seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribu


tion of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world", 
could be indifferent to such threats, irrespective of the quarter from which 


they came. 


99. He believed, therefore, that there was no need either to apologize for or 
to tire of repeating or giving ear to the universal desire for peace, progress 
and prosperity. In demanding peace, however, care should be taken not to turn 
the Agency into a cold war arena. He urged his fellow delegates not to echo 
the familiar slogans of the one side or the others; that would not bring peace 
any nearer. He was certain that if all spoke softly and gently, the world 
would hear. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



international Atomic Energy Agency 
GG(V)/OR.54 
4 December 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 


FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-FOURTH PLENARY METTING 


Hold at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 29 September 1961, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* 


Tribute to the memory of Mr. Dag Hammarskjold 


11 
General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1960-61 
(continued from the 53rd meeting) 


Statements by the delegates ofs 


Tunisia 


Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 


United Arab Republic 


Senegal 


Morocco 


Belgium 


Ghana 


Bulgaria 


* GC(V)/171. 
Paragraphs 


1-9 
10 - 89 


10 
17 
48 
60 


66 

73 
78 
83 


16 
47 
59 
65 
72 
77 
82 


89 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(V)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5896 



GC(V)/0E.54 
page 2 


TRIBUTE TO THE MEMORY OF MR. DAG HAMMARSKJOLD 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that, simultaneously with the present meeting, 
the funeral of Mr. Dag Hammarskj'old was taking place at Uppsala in Sweden, where 
the Director General was representing the Agency at a ceremony which was also 
being attended by the heads of the Secretariats of other organizations of the 
United Nations family. 
2. As the Temporary President had said at the opening of the current session, 
Hr. Hammarskjold's death would have important consequences for the United 
l/ 


Nations.-7 Many were the delgates who during the past few days had paid a 
tribute to his memory and emphasized the grief whioh the news of his death had 
caused in all circles connected in any way with the United Nations. 


3. He laid stress on one aspect of the work accomplished by Mr. Hammarskjold, 
namely the important role he had played in encouraging international-cooperation 
in the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, 
4. The Secretary-General had not been a man of science, hut he had been fully 
conscious of the mission of science and technology in present-day society. 
He had understood in particular the hopes which they aroused among the lessdevoloped 
peoples and their importance in bringing together great and small 
nations. It vras under his direction that the United Nations had begun to 
study actively the various scientific problems of the day and to attempt to 
solve them for the benefit of all peoples of the world, 
5. tlr, Hammarskjbld had given great attention to the nuclear sciences and 
their possibilities, and since 1953 he had tried to promote co-operation in 
that sphere. It was enough to recall the work done by the most important 
scientific conference since the end of the Second World War - perhaps of the 
present generation - which had taken place at Geneva in 1955* That conference 
had given a fresh impulse to science and technology, and had done muoh to break 
down the wells which had hitherto surrounded the secret of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. The interest which Mr. Hammarskj'dld had taken in that problem 
had been confirmed on the occasion of the second Geneva Conference in 1958, Bis 
unceasing efforts had also contributed greatly to the establishment of the Agency. 
l/ GC(V)/OR.48. paragraph 2. 



GC(V)/OR.54 
page 3 


Since the idea of an organization had first been brought up in 1953, he had done 


all in his power to ensure the success of the Agency and to make it into an 


efficient working instrument, closely associated with the United Nations. It 


had not teen a mere accident that the Conference on the Statute in 195°" had 


taken place at the United Nations Headquarters and that Mr. Hainmarskjold had 


oonsented to act as its Secretary-General. All those vho, like the President, 


had taken part in the work of the Preparatory Commission in 1956-57 knew the 


extent of the assistance provided hy the United Nations and Mr. Hammarskjold's 


personal efforts to ensure that the Agency should be solidly based. Until 


his death he had continued to take an interest in the Agency's progress, as 


was evidenced by the fact that he had appointed a personal representative to 


'the Agency - an action unprecedented in the United Nations family, 


6. Several of the scientists who were attending the present' session had 
acted as technical advisers to Mr. Hammarskj "old on atomic energy questions and 
had collaborated with him in the activities already referred to, and particularly 
in the establishment of relations between the Agency and the United 
Nations. Many delegates had had other opportunities cf coming into contact 
with him, and several members of the Secretariat had worked under his orders. 
He was sure that he was expressing the feelings of all in sending to His 
Majesty the King of Sweden the following message of condolences "On behalf 
of the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency I have the 
honor to convey to Your Majesty, the Government and People of Sweden, our deep 
sympathy and condolences on the tragic death of Dag Eammarskjold. Sweden has 
lost a .great man and the United Nations, under whoso aegis this Agency was 
created, will not forget his name and his work, . With' his bereaved family and 
country, the General Conference is to-day paying tribute to his memory. "--' 
2/ 


7. At the opening meeting of the Conference on the. Statute in 1956* 
Mr. Harnmarskjold had asked whether it was too much to hope that that Conference, 
like the Conference which had taken place a year before at Geneva, would help to 
reduce tensions in international life through a reassertion of the spirit of enlightened 
co-operation, 
^J The following is the text of His Majesty's reply to the President dated 
16 October 196ls "I beg to extend to you and to the General Conference of 
the International Atomic 3nergy Agency my most sincere thanks for your kind 
expression of sympathy on the occasion of the passing of United Nations 
Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjold." 
2/ IAEA Conference on the Statute, OB.1, page 6. 


GC(V)/OR.54 
page 4 


8. The President invited the members of all delegations and the staff of the 
Secretariat to pay a tribute to Mr. Dag Hammarskjold's memory by observing one 
minute of silence. 
9. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND R3P0BT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1960/61 
(GC(V)/154, 168) (continued from' the 53rd meeting) 


10. Mr. EL AMABI (Tunisia) congratulated the President on his election. 
He shared the feelings of those who had paid a tribute to the memory of 
Mr. Hammarskjold7 whose efforts had been of such great service to the cause of 
international co-operation. He welcomed the new Members of the Agency. 
11. The Agency's record of work for the past year appeared quite a good one. 
Important progress had been made thanks to the devotion of the Director General 
and his colleagues. Among the positive achievements were the organisation 
of many scientific meetings, the development of technical assistance, the 
granting of research contracts and the setting-up of a laboratory. 
12. He regretted that there had been a reduction in the number of fellowships, 
and that the administrative services had been slow in the'investigation of requests 
and the establishment of programs. Moreover staff-was being recruited 
on a rather arbitrary basis and there were inexplicable differences of category 
between persons with the same qualifications. In that connection differences 
in the standard of living in the countries of origin should not be considered 
as a valid criterion in an international organization. It was also regrettable, 
that authority should be concentrated in the hands of a representative of the 
Great Powers and that the small Powers- should find themselves with little or no 
share in the directorial posts. 


13. In order to solve all those difficulties it was necessary to speed up 
administrative procedures, to send out follow-up missions composed of'traveling 
inspectors with a view to drawing up programs, and to establish objective 
rules of recruitment. The post of Director -General should be allocated 
in accordance with the principle of rotation between geographic regions. 
14. One of the most important problems was the financing of long-term projects. 
Greater use should be made of the Special Fund and the Expanded Program of 
Technical Assistance (EPTA). While the interest on all funds from those sources 

GC(Y)/OR,54 
page 5 


could be spent, the capital should he used.as security for loans, with which the 
Agency could finance profitable undertakings on the basis of projects proposed 
by the Agency or by Member States, like the laboratory - which could become an 
international research center - and the international center for theoretical 
physics which had been advocated. 


15. As far as nuclear power was concerned, projects could pay their way only 
if there was a fall in the price of uranium, which presupposed that the Powers 
would give up using that metal for military purposes and that they would agree 
to the cessation of nuclear tests and to complete and controlled disarmament, 
Moreover, in the opinion of experts, grave risks to the health of mankind were 
involved in the testing of nuclear weapons. The use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes itself presupposed the solution of certain problemss the disposal 
of radioactive waste in deep geological strata, the preparation of legislation 
and appropriate security measures, not to mention the study of the possibilities 
of protection by biological means, Some control by the United Nations Scientific 
Advisory Committee appeared necessary in order to determine the usefulness of 
any tests it was proposed to make-to increase existing knowledge, Those tests 
should as far as possible take place underground in order not to be too dangerous 
and should be held in the presence of scientists from all countries, Nuclear 
energy could be used for excavations, for merchant ship propulsion and for 
large-scale radioisotope manufacture. The smaller countries were already able 
to use it themselves for the production of industrial heat, urban heating and 
salt-water distillation for example, electricity production being still too 
costly, Clearly the price of uranium would have to come down and technological 
knowledge would have to be extended more widely, Nothing could be done without 
peaceful collaboration between the two blocs .and their co-operation with the 
non-aligned States, which should be given a share in the administration of 
activities and the diffusion of knowledge. At the fourth session of the 
Conference Tunisia had accordingly requested two more seats for Africa, and 
supported the views of those who wished for a reform in the Agency's structure, 
16, In conclusion, he expressed his pleasure at the progress accomplished by 


Tunisia as a result of assistance from the Agency and of bilateral assistance. 


Bilateral assistance had allowed Tunisia to set up a nuclear physics laboratory 


equipped with material to the value of $60 000 and to acquire a cobalt*-60 bomb 
which was soon to be installed. With the Agency's assistance two projects had 
been carried outs an agricultural radiochemistry laboratory and a metal-testing 
laboratory. Tunisia had also set up a radiodiagnosis laboratory on its own 



GC(V)/OR.54 
page 6 


account. A 100 kW reactor was under construction and other projets were being 
studied. Lastly Tunisia had just given its support to the plan for setting up an 
international center for theoretical physics at Dubrovnik, wishing in that way 
to demonstrate that the problems arising were not all insuperable for the 
smaller countries, and that the latter could make a modest contribution to the 
welfare of humanity. It was to be hoped that co-operation within the Agency 
would be strengthened, though that would net be possible unless certain shortcomings 
were rectified. 


17. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that after 
a long period of evolution, during which steady development had alternated 
with sharp advances, periods of calm with revolutionary upheavals, joy with 
disappointment, mankind had now entered upon an era of scientific expansion 
and triumph. The rate of scientific and technological advance was now such 
that mankind had in a few decades made progress as great as during the whole 
of its previous history. Science's true vocation lay in discovering the laws 
of nature and in using them to alleviate human suffering and to improve the 
human condition. Were science and its achievements used in a rational manner, 
all mankind could be released from its exhausting labor, hunger, poverty and 
sickness. 
18. If, on the other hand, such achievements were used not wisely but wildly, 
there was a danger that untold disasters would befall humanity. Fortunately 
the present stage of mankind's historical development was characterized by the 
fact that a growing number of scientists, politicians and statesmen^ with 
millions of men of goodwill, were beginning to understand that it was essential 
to place the achievements of science, and all the wealth which was the fruit 
of man's effort, at the service of peaceful and not of military ends. The 
Soviet Union was in the forefront of the forces v/hioh were revolutionizing 
contemporary science. 
19. Together with the other peoples of the Soviet Union, the Ukrainian people 
had undertaken the task of building communism, which would be inconceivable 
without considerable scientific and technical development - notably in nuclear 
science. 
20. Among the scientific problems which Ukrainian scientists were trying to 
solve, the most important were those raised by the industrial use of nuclear 

GC(V)/OR.54 
page 7 


energy, the direct transformation of nuclear power into electrical power and the 
control of thermonuclear fusion. Much effort was being devoted in the Ukrainian 
Soviet Socialist Republic to nuclear physics research, that being the basis of 
nuclear power engineering and of the economic application of nuclear energy, 


21. A gigantic linear electron accelerator with a capacity of 2 BeV had been 
built at the Kharkov Institute of Nuclear Science. It was to be hoped that it 
would allow Ukrainian scientists to make a valuable contribution to world 
soience. Important work had also been done in installing Van de Graaff accelerators. 
Thermonuclear fusion and other important fields of nuclear science 
were being studied there.' 
22. The Ukraine possessed another nuclear research center, the Kiev Institute 
of Physics, which comprised several large nuclear laboratories and had at its 
disposal an abundance of up-to-date equipment - a cyclotron, electrostatic 
generators, neutron generators, eto. That institute was undertaking the most 
varied research work into neutron physics, radiation, physics, thermonuclear 
fusion, etc. 
23. The value of the work done by Kiev doctors had been recognized by the choice 
of that city in 1959 for the so-called Rochester Conference. Reports on the 
work done at Kiev had also been sent to several international conferences in 
Switzerland, Canada, France, the United States and other countries. 
24. Another nuclear center was at present on the way to completion at Kiev, 
namely the Nuclear Physics Laboratory of the State University, which would begin 
operating at the beginning of next year. It would be devoted not only to 
scientific research but also to the training of highly qualified specialists in 
nuclear energy. 
25. Kiev University had recently acquired a Faculty of. Propaedeutics, the 
courses of which had already been attended by 300 students from 23 developing 
countries, including the United Arab Republic, Cuba, Ghana, Guinea, Cambodia, 
etc. During the current year the number of students was being doubled and 
everything possible had been done to ensure the success of their studies,' In 
addition, a number of young specialists from the United Arab Republic, Nepal and 
other countries had been taken as trainees in physics and biology, which would 
represent an appreciable contribution to the development of science in those 
countries. 

GG(V)/0E.54 
page 8 

26, The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic would be very glad if the Agency 
could arrange for a number of the fellows being sent to the Soviet Union to go 
to Ukrainian research institutes and higher educational establishments. 


27. His delegation considered that it would be a good thing if the-Agency could 
examine and make known the results of- experience acquired in the various countries 
as -regards the training of key personnel in the field of peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
28. In the Ukraine, specialists in a number of fields were working on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. Extremely important research in that sphere was being 
•carried out in the Ukrainian Academy of Agronomical Sciences, During the current 
year detailed studies had been carried out on crop improvement by seed irradiation. 
Most of the experiments had yielded positive results. The Ukrainian SSR would 
be happy.to communicate the data obtained on the subject to countries that were 
interested. 
29. The Bogomolets Institute of Physiology was now carrying out research and 
experiments on the therapy of acute cases of radiation sickness. Preparations 
had been developed which permitted the effective treatment of radiation sicknessand 
reduced the death rate amongst irradiated animals. The institute was continuing 
to study the mechanism of organic disturbances under the influence of 
ionizing radiations. The morphological composition of the peripheral blood and • 
of the bone-marrow of patients suffering from radiation poisoning had been determined, 
as well as changes in the organs and tissues during the various stages 
of the disease, 
30. Work had been carried cut at the Institute of Microbiology of the Ukrainian 
Academy of Sciences concerning the way in which pathogenic micro-organisms were 
affected by gamma and neutron radiation emitted by a, reactor. 
31. The Agency should first and foremost promote extensive international 
collaboration in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and help developing countries.--
The Board's report (GC(v)/154) and certain delegates had properly given great 
prominence to that aspect of its work. During the past year the Agency had to 
some extent increased its help to less-developed countries,' and several countries 
had received technical assistance, particularly for training specialists. It 
had also arranged scientific conferences and symposia, disseminated scientific 
and technical information and helped in the provision of equipment. 

GG(V)/OE.54 
page 9 


32. Unfortunately serious gaps in the Agency's work still hindered the development 
of collaboration in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. In allocating 
technical assistance there was a marked tendency to favor countries forming part 
of the military and political blocs directed by the United States. Equally to 
be condemned was the practice of increasing annually funds for research contracts, 
the outcome of which so far had not proved of great service to Member States. 
33. As a result of the existing practice of preferring nationals of Western 
countries when recruiting for survey missions, and of dispatching missions without 
regard to the real needs of the recipient countries or proper consultation 
with their Governments, missions' recommendations were sometimes out of touch 
with reality. 
34. The Agency's program for 1962 provided for scientific and technical 
assistance to less-developed countries, training of specialists and organization 
of scientific conferences. The Ukrainian Soviet Spcialist Republic would do its 
best to help the Agency to strengthen international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and in helping developing countries. 
35. Unfortunately the 1962 program took no account of the observations and 
wishes put forward by certain Member States concerning the subject-matter and 
the number of scientific meetings. At the fourth session of the Conference a 
number of delegations, including his own, had opposed the Symposium on Jiuclear 
Ship Propulsions it was patently obvious that at the moment that subject 
chiefly concerned the military uses of nuclear energy. 
36. Delegates from socialist countries were often reproached for undervaluing 
the Agency's role, criticizing its work and bringing politics into their 
speeches; but there was clear evidence that the leaders of the Western Powers 
had no intention of abandoning their policy, which was intensifying the armaments 
race and exacerbating the international situation, One hundred thousand 
million dollars were spent in the world every year on military purposes. Economists 
had estimated that a mere 10fo of that sum would build forty Bkhilai 
factories and ten Aswan dams, and that ifo would pay for more reactors than 
existed at present in the world. 
37. His delegation valued the Agency's work at its true worth but would not go 
so far as to admire it. In numerical terms the Agency's budget was minute compared 
to mili-t&ry expenditure. At present values it would take over 12 000 years 

GC(V)/0E.54 
page 10 


to equal one year's military expenditure - a shocking fact.. The Agency's work 


could therefore not be admired, and means must he found to turn the Agency into 
an international organization which would contribute effectively towards diverting 
nuclear materials from military to pe tceful uses. The McKinney report 


said .that their application to exclusively peaceful uses would strengthen peaceful 
relations between States. Unfortunately many examples showed how far that 


dictum was removed from reality. 


38. The first example was that for five years, through the fault of the Western 
Powers, the Chinese People's Republic had not been able to take its rightful 
seat, in an international body concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Its place had been usurped by a decaying clique whose arrears of contributions 
were tolerated by Western Member States to the detriment of the Agency. 
39. Secondly, the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), which with its membership 
of over one hundred million was doing much to improve working conditions in 
atomic industrial plants, had not yet been accorded consultative status with 
the Agency, owing to the discriminatory attitude of the Western Powers. 
40. Thirdly, anyone could see how at the beginning of the present session the 
Western Powers had made sure of a majority in the General Committee and the 
Credentials Committee, and would not on any account agree to equal representation 
of the three groups of Powers. 
41. Fourthly, four years.ago the delegates of the socialist countries had 
agreed to the nomination of a United States national to the post of Director 
General. At the end of his term of office it might seem proper to appoint his 
successor from the Afro-Asian groupj but that the Western bloc consistently 
opposed. Their attitude infringed the most elementary rules of international 
collaboration. His delegation was emphatically against the nomination of 
Mr. Bklund to the post. Lack of flexibility in the settlement of that question 
would gravely prejudice collaboration among the Members of the Agency. 
42. ' Fifthly, the efforts of Western States to use .the Agency's resources for 
studies of doubtfully peaceful character did not show a sincere desire for 
collaboration. It was scandalous that the Agency shotild be spending its 
modest resources on the study of safety in bases from which death and destruction 
might be spread. 

GG(V)/OR.54 
page 11 


43• Those examples, which could bo multiplied, showed that the United States 
and the other Western Powers were loading the Agency off along a perilous 
path in disregard of the facts. The Ukrainian delegation was ready to 
collaborate, but the persons responsible for a policy like that could never 
count on its support. 


44. All the participants in the Conference know that the policy of nonintervention 
had unleashed the horrors of the Second World Yfer. It was 
therefore the duty of all countries and all men to show wisdom and understanding, 
to profit by the lessons of world history and to take a realistic'' ' 
view of the present situation, in order to prevent a now conflagration which 
would bring irreparable suffering'to mankind. Only the destruction of 
nuclear arms would put an end to the ever-present fear of imminent disaster 
and onable all peoples to join together in,harnessing the hitherto unused 
forces of nature and^all the riches hidden in their own planet and in outer 
space. 
45* The peoples of the Soviet Union and other countries in the socialist 
camp had unhappily boon forced into a painful decision, but they had been left 
without choice. The Soviet Union, whose attitude was completely understood 
and approved by the Ukrainian people, had been obliged to prepare itself -fully 
by all necessary means to overcome any possible aggressor. As part of those 
means the decision had been taken to carry out experimental oxplosions with 
nuclear devices. It- had been a difficult decision, for the Government of 
the Soviet Union had been perfectly awaro in taking it that all experiments 
with nuclear arms caused fear and moral suffering to all peoples. 


46. The Ukrainian delegation warmly supported the draft resolution by- the • 
Soviet Unio inviting the 'Agency to participate in* international activities 
designed to settle the problem of general and complete disarmament. It also 
welcomed the joint declaration made by the Soviet Union and the United States-" 
sotting forth the principles which should guide the disarmament negotiations, 
and expressed the hope that, following the example of the Soviet Union and 
other socialist countries, the Western Powers would put those principles 
into practice. 
3/ Subsequently issued as GC(v)/175. 
j/ United Nations Document A/4879• 



GC(V)/OR.54 


page 12 


47* Only if definite measures were taken by all countries to turn to peaceful 
uses the immense resources at present spent for military purposes" could the 
Agency achieve its noble aims. 


48, Mr. MAHMOUD (United Arab Republic) said that his delegation was 
happy to congratulate the President on his election by acclamation^ it was 


convinced that under the direction of Mr. Quihillalt the Conference would 
fulfill its allotted task in a relaxed and friendly atmosphere. 


49• The Conference was, meeting at a time of mourning for the United Nations 
family. The tragic end of Mr. Hammcrskjold during a mission which ho was 
fulfilling on behalf of the United Nations had boon deeply felt by nations 
throughout the world. 


50. The delegation of the United Arab Republic also wished to express its 
complete satisfaction at the admission to the Agonoy of the Republic of the 
Congo (Leopoldvillo), which would certainly make a valuable contribution to 
the Agency's various activities. 
51. His delegation was greatly pleased that the League of Ara"h States had sent 
an observer to the Conference. The League had played an important part in 
organizing the first regional training course in radioisotope techniques, which 
had boon held in Cairo under the joint auspices of the Agency and the UAR 
Atomic Energy Establishment. The League was currently assisting the competent 
authorities to prepare a second regional course, and organizing a conference 
on ionizing radiations and protection, to bo attended by the Arab nations, 
other African and Asian countries and scientific organizations and specialized 
agencies. The Agency would of course take part in the conference, and its 
co-operation with the League of Arab States would continue to develop to the 
greater benefit of the region. 


52. The United Arab Republic delegation wished to express to the Director 
General its deep gratitude for his unremitting efforts throughout his term of 
office. Amongst the Agency's achievements of the last four years should be 
mentioned the results obtained in training and exchange, the organization of 
scientific meetings on fundamental problems of nuclear science, the supply of 
material, the granting of aid to several countries for the initiation of their 
atomic energy programs, and the establishment of an information center. Those 

GC(V)/OR,54 
page 13 


results could not fail to contribute to scientific progress and to the 


development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy in all parts of the world. 


His delegation was convinced that the Agency's chief aim should he to help 


developing countries, so as to increase the contribution of atomic energy to 


peace and prosperity throughout the world-in accordance with Article II of 


the Statute. 


53. The United Arab Republic was somewhat concerned by the thought that 
international tension might affect the work of the Conferonoe and the future 
of the Agency. His delegation would spare no effort to promote international 
co-operation within the Agency; it hoped that, by adherence to its' 
scientific and technical aims, and in a spirit of conciliation and mutual 
understanding, it would be possible to find specific solutions for the 
problems which it encountered in drawing up its programs and in its 
organization. 
54* The United Arab Republic had always followed a policy of international 
co-oporati.on with respect to atomic energy, and the relations which it 
maintained with the Agency, and with other countries on a regional or bilateral 
basis, wore well known. That co-operation had helped it to carry out its 
atomic energy program, and recently to evolve a program on the photographic 
localization of tumors with radioactive tracers. It hoped that its request, 
submitted to the Agency in 1959 and recently renewed, for a cobalt teletherapy 
installation could bo granted under the 1962 program. 


55• Also as a result of the policy of close collaboration between the Agency 
and the UAR Atomic Energy Establishment, the Board's decision of June 1960 to 
sot up a regional radioisotope center for the Arab countries of the Middle 
East had been put into effect, and the first of the courses provided for by 


the Board had boon held at the National Radioisotope Center in Cairo from 
March to May 1961. The Agency had invited Middle Eastern and African countries 


to send students'to the course. Of the 86 candidates applying from eleven 
countries,- 20 had boon picked, only 5 °f whom were nationals of the United 
Arab Republic. The largo number of applications was clear evidence of the 
need for a regional center in that part of the world. Moreover, the marked 


success of the course guaranteed success for a regional center. A second 
course, on the medical applications of radioisotopes, would be hold in 



GC(V)/OE.54 


page 14 


November and December 1961. • The Government of the United Arab Republic judged 
that the conditions necessary for the establishment of a regional center in 
accordance with the Board's decision would thereby bo fulfilled. An agreement 
could be concluded with the Agency in 1962. 


56. The progress made by the Atomic Energy Establishment also appeared in the 
opening of a nuclear physics laboratory with a 2.5 MoV Van do Graaff accelerator. 
The 2 MW research reactor at Inshas had gone critical in July 1961 and trials at 
various power levels were being carried out, a program had boon established to 
use it for research in nuclear physics, radiochemistry, radiobiology and isotope 
production. At the beginning of 1962 the nuclear chemistry laboratory would 
be able to conduct research and to produce and process a number of radioisotopes. 
All the work at present being done in the provisional radiobiology, geology, 
Qnginoorlng and radiation protection laboratories would in fifteen months be 
performed in the Inshas Nuclear Research Center. 
57. To carry out the nuclear power program and the decision to build an 
80-100 MW nuclear power plant under a five-year plan, an administrative and a 
technical committee had been appointed and had almost completed their study of 
the main technical and economic features of the program and the question of the 
site^ that preliminary work should enable practical measures to be taken in 
the near future. The UAR delegation welcomed the Agency's assiduous study of 
the economics of nuclear power throughout the world^, a matter of especial 
importance to the developing countries. 
58. The five-year plan of the United Arab Republic covered many other important 
activities. The main projects included an annual production of 20 tonnes of 
heavy water as a by-product of the Aswan fertilizer plant, uranium refining 
and the manufacture of fuel elements. 
59• The United Arab Republic was convinced that no effort should bo spared 
to enable the Agency to do full justice to its important task. It was therefore 
important to make the general review of the provisions of the Statute 
prescribed in Article XVIII.B, so as to bring the Agency's functions into line 
with the needs of a changing world. First, Articles V and VI should bo amended 
to make the main organs of the Agency more representative. The designations 
made under Article VI should not make certain States semi-permanent members 


_5_/ GC(V)/16l and GC(v)/INF/38. 



GC(V)/OR,54 
page 15 


of the Board? and the Conference, as the most representative organ, should 
play a moro positive part in the Agency's work. Secondly, the Board of 
Governors had studied the resolution adopted at the fourth regular session 
for an equitable representation on the Board of the "Africa and the Middle 
East11 area-'9 and the draft resolution it had submitted to the Conference-^ 
could he used as a basis for discussion? the draft resolution, however, did 
not sufficiently recognize that a growing number of new States in that area 
wore joining the Agency and the situation was changing rapidly. Thirdly, the 
attitude of the UAR Government towards safeguards was well known and had been 
clearly explained at the fourth session of the Conference—' . Article XII 
should also he thoroughly examined during the general review. 


60. Mr. DAGUBRRE (Senegal) congratulated the President on his election 
and expressed great satisfaction at the admission of the Republic of the 
Congo (Leopoldville) to membership. He hoped that soon all independent States 
would take their place in the Agoncy, 
61. He paid tribute to the French teachers in his country who, leaving all 
political considerations aside, had fulfilled a scientific and cultural task 
which had always done credit to France. Thanks to France, Dakar now possessed 
one of the most modern universities in West Africa, which would very shortly 
have an institute of nuclear science to co-ordinate all the "nuclear research 
now 'conducted in Senegal on the use of radioisotopes in agriculture and 
medicine. 
62. His Government made the following suggestions for the Agency's program. 
More attention should bo paid to the peaceful uses 'of atomic energy that would 
holp to solve the special problems of developing countries, particularly want 
and endemic disease. Efforts should bo directed particularly to reducing the 
cost of energy produced by small nuclear power stations,' to intensifying 
medical research against endemic diseases and insect vectors, and to 
agricultural research for improving crop production and acclimatizing certain 
crops needed for a balanced diet, 
63. His Government wholeheartedly approved the Agency's training program, 
but hoped that the courses could be given in French and the administrative 
.formalities for the award of fellowships simplified, .Delay between the 


6/ GC(l?)/RES/85. 
ll GC(V)/151 and Add.1? sec also GC(V)/RES/92. 


8/ Cf, GC(IV)/OR.42, paragraph 11. 



GC(V)/OR.54 


page 16 


approval of technical assistance projects and their implementation often 
imperiled the proper execution of programs for the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. He hoped that the Agency would take the necessary steps to remedy that 
situation by improving co-ordination between the departments concerned. 


64. In order to carry out its program the Agency would have to induce the 
nations possessing considerable scientific and technical resources to place a 
greater number of experts at its disposal. His delegation did not think that 
the Agency would be able to resolve the particular problems of the developing 
countries unless it established, side by side with regional training centers, 
laboratories for specifically regional studios and research. Dakar would bo 
prepared to act as host to one of those centers. 
65. He was convinced that the standard of living of the underdeveloped people 
could be improved only if there was peace - at present threatened by the 
resumption of nuclear tests - and he thought that its Statute entitled the 
Agency to recommend that nuclear tests should be stopped immediately and that, 
atomic weapons should bo destroyed, The Agency had a grat role to play in 
nuclear science and the Government of Senegal had every confidence in it. 
66* Mr. SIHAC3UR (Morocco) associated himself with the tribute paid 
to Mr. Hammarskjold, whoso tragic death was a catastrophe for all countries. 

67• Morocco, which had followed the Agency's activities since its 
establishment, had in 1957 shared the optimism of the world concerning the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. At that time it had been hoped that the Great 
Powers would use that new form of energy to improve the conditions of mankind, 
particularly in the less-favored regions, and that they would stop using it 
for military purposes. Unfortunately, various difficulties had caused the 
abandonment of that hope. In spite of the obstacles it had-encountered, the 
Agency had been able to do satisfactory work, and Morocco remained convinced 
that sooner or later, it would accomplish all the tasks originally envisaged, 


the most important of which was to-help the insufficiently developed countrios. 


68. Morocco did not wish to commit itself lightly to extremely costly programs, 
and for that reason no important practical undertaking in the atomic field had 
as yet been initiated in his country. Morocco would for many years to come 
have sufficient energy from conventional sources to cover its needs, and had 

GC(V)/OR .54 
page 17 


enough material and staff for ordinary activities in geology, medicine and 


agricultural science, Thus it had been able to devote the past few years to 


the preparation of an optimum program which, would fit harmoniously into the 


framework of its general developmentt On that basis it had three times 

invited Agency experts to study on the spot the possibilities of developing 


nuclear activities. 


69. A first expert had been sent by the Agency in April 1960 to study the 
question of extracting uranium from natural phosphates. In May of the same 
year a preliminary assistance mission had recommended that the Agency should 
send two experts to Morocco to prepare a step-by-step program for the development 
of atomic energy and to study the possibilities of using radioisotopes in 
agriculture and medicine. According to their report, which had just been 
sent to the Moroccan Government, certain applications of radioisotopes could 
be introduced without delay. The installation of an experimental reactor 
seemed desirable but required thorough preparation, which would take at least 
three years after the initiation of the general program prepared by a 
commission consisting of two Agency experts and representatives of the 
Moroccan services concerned. That program, which would be spread over five 
years, called for the training of 50 specialists and loans estimated at 
$4 million for equipment alono. The administrative work would be entrusted to 
a national nuclear energy commission which would shortly be set up. The 
program would soon receive the approval of the Moroccan Government but its 
implementation would necessitate substantial Agency assistance, 


70, It could thus be said that in nuclear energy Morocco was on the point of 
passing from a period of exploration to a period of practical realization, 


The same process would have to take place in many countries which had recently 


become independent and some of which had become Members of the Agency, for 


example the Congo, So far the Agency had given those countries the aid 
which they had requested by sending experts and granting fellowships to their 


students, However, it was to be anticipated that that aid would have to be 
more substantial in the future, and he wondered whether the Agency would be 


able to cope with the new situation. To facilitate the necessary adjustment, 
as many technicians and administrators as possible from those countries should 
at once be allowed to take high positions in the Agency, and an equitable 
method of representation of the new Member States on the Board should be 



GC(Y)/OR,54 
page 18 


adopted, The Moroccan delegation had already expressed its views on the 
question of representation at the fourth session of the Conference^ ' It 
believed that all countries, regardless of their size, had the same rights and 
obligations? that the present composition of the Board was inequitable and 
that all members of the Board ought to be elected by the Conference, 

71 # A reform in the structure of the Board would certainly be no easy matter, 
and Morocco would have favored the full application of the resolution adopted 
by the Conference at its fourth regular session recommending the Board to 
submit to the fifth regular session a draft amendment to the Statute and 
suitable proposals to ensure the equitable representation of the "Africa and 
the Middle East'1 area as soon as possible, However, the Board had only put 
forward a draft amendment, so that it would be some time before the present 
injustice could be remedied. The Moroccan delegation hoped that all delegates 
would take note of those observations, because the solution of the problems 
at issue was of the greatest interest to many countries which were playing an 
increasingly important role in the international sphere, as the recent conference 
at Belgrade had shown, 


72P In conclusion, he paid a tribute to the Director General, who had done 

everything in his power to ensure the efficient operation of the Agency, 


73. Mr. ERRKRA (Belgium) congratulated the President on his election, 
paid tribute to the way in which Mr. Hadjakov had presided over the fourth 
regular session and thanked the Director General for his work during the first 
four years of the Agency's existence. 
74* One example of the importance of the Agency's work for the establishment 


of atomic energy programs of Member States was its co-ordination of the 


studies on the problems of nuclear merchant-ship propulsion, referred to by 


the delegate of the Soviet Union at an earlier meeting—' . He proposed to 


stress another aspect of that activity, which to him appeared the only real 


one. The Agency had in fact investigated the risks presented by the entry 


of nuclear-powered ships into harbors and had assessed their safety, ' It had 


9/ GC(IV)/0H.41, paragraph 80. 
10/ GC(Y)/OR,51, paragraph 1 (51) - (39). 



GC(V)/OR.54 
page 19 


examined the economic, technological and safety aspects of nuclear-powered 


ships, and had dealt with the problem of water pollution through accident, 


and the protection of water from contamination. Finally, at the Diplomatic 


Conference on Maritime Law—^ it had played an important technical part in 

drawing up a convention concerning the liability of.operators of nuclearpowered 
ships, 


75. One of the main points of the program which Belgium was about to execute 
was to study and construct a nuclear reactor called "Vulcain", one model of 
which, with an output of 65 MW(t), was intended for ship propulsion. The 
Vulcain was a pressurized-water reactor using enriched uranium oxide as fuel 
and mixtures of heavy and light water as moderator and coolant. It combined 
the advantages of spectral shift with the additional flexibility conferred by 
ability to vary the moderator temperature. The Belgian Government had been 
able to undertake that study and might decide on the construction of a prototype 
and a boat because the problems of entry into port, water- contamination 
and the civil liability of operators would be solved in time through the 
Agency's activity - which, he emphasized, had a very minor effect on the ., 
budget, 
76, In the budget, absolute priority should be given to technical assistance. 
Unfortunately, in 1961, for lack of funds, only 300 fellowships would be granted 
as compared with 429 in 1960—' , 554 man-months of experts would be provided 
as against 620 requested, and only 40% of requests for visiting professors 

13/ 


would be satisfied-^-* , In 1962 the program of regional and international 


courses vrould suffer, as in 1961, from shortage of funds, which was resulting 
in an accumulation of requests--" . On the other hand, under the scientific 
programs, 90 .research contracts were running at present, most of which were 
not related to technical assistance, and it was thought that their number 
would increase to 120 by 1962. He was aware that in the program for 1962 it 


11/ Held at Brussels, 17-29 April 1961, 


12/ GC(v)/154. paragraph 200, 
13/ GC(v)/155, paragraph 528, 
14/ Ibid., paragraph 531. 



GC(V)/OE.54 
pago 20 


was said that "The expansion of certain of the Agency's scientific programs 
proposed for 1962 should not be regarded as minimizing the groat importance 
which, in the opinion of the Board, should continue to be attributed as far 


15/ 


as possible to rendering technical assistance . .. . "—^ . However, on second 

thoughts he regretted the use of the conditional "should" and the phrase "as 
far as possible". The Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) would therefore bo 
well advised to examine, before approving now research contracts for 1%3, 
whether, priority should not rather be given to requests for technical 
assistance. Moreover, the research contracts 'wore not always part of a 
coherent long-term program, and were often given to countries which could 
afford to execute them without the Agency's assistance. Ho thanked the Italian 
Government for paying the expenses of the research contracts which it was 


16/ 


going to accept from the Agency,—' and also for its offer concerning the 


establishment of an international center for theoretical physics, and 
17/ 


supported the candidature of Trieste as the site of the institute—J . 

77* The Agency's scientific function was to co-ordinate research undertaken 
by Mombor States rather than to grant research contracts, which imposed a 
heavy burden on its budget. The Agency's co-ordinating activities had proved 
efficient, and ought to increase in the future without great budgetary 
implications. 


78. Mr. BREM (Ghana) congratulated the President on his election, paid 
tribute to the memory of Mr. Hamrnarskjold, Y\rhoso loss was deeply regretted 
by all countries, and expressed his gratitude to the Director General, whoso 
name would always remain associated with that of the Agency, 
79 • Several delegates had already stressed the Agency's efforts to initiate 
the use of atomic energy in their countries for peaceful purposes. It was 
true that the present world tension was casting a shadow over the deliberations 
of the Conference, but it was too early to decide that the hope placed in 
the goodwill of the nations had gone up in smoke. Moreover, nuclear weapons 
wore so destructive that an atomic war would bring the victor nothing but' 
ruin and desolation. 


15/ GC(v)/155, paragraph 21. 


16/ GC(V)/OR.50, paragraph 68. 


17/ Ibid, paragraph 69, 


GC(V)/OR.54 
pago 21 


80. Ho welcomed the initiative taken by the Board to enable developing 
countries to participate in its work. The draft amendment to the Statute 
cloarly showed the Agency's wish to distribute between all people the 
responsibilities so far borne by the Groat Powers, and to encourage young 
countries to achieve economic independence. 
81. With regard to the nomination of the Director General, ho hopod that, if 
the decision could not be changed, it would be possible in futuro to fill the 
post by rotation. Moreover, several delegates were of the opinion that high 
post3 should not bo reserved for nationals of certain regions of the world. 
Ho hopod that opinion would be borne in mind. It would bo a disaster if the 
Director General and his chief collaborators could not count on the support 
of the majority of Member States. 
82. In conclusion, ho said that Ghana would do everything in its power to 
servo the noble cause of the Agency. 
83. Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria), on behalf of his delegation and himself, 
congratulated the President on his election and wished him ovory success in 
his task. The Board's annual report presented the positive side of the 
Agency's work, but also revealed difficulties which.the Agency had been unable 
to surmount. No one, for example, would dispute the usefulness of the work 
done in training personnel, which made it possible for many Member States to 
benefit from the experience of other States more advanced in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. The procedure for the award of fellowships should, 
however, be revised, since the time taken was far* too long. Only large 
research centers possessing a well-established scientific tradition could" 
train highly qualified scientific workers. Young research workers of proved 
ability ought to bo given the benefit of longer courses in such centers, in 
order that they might acquire the necessary knowledge and experience to train 
in their turn the scientific personnel of their own countries. 
84. One of the Agency's essential functions - if not its actual raison d'Stro was 
to provide fissionable materials. Unfortunately, the Agency had done 
vory little in that direction. Since it had a very large stock of 
fissionable materials at its disposal, the reason for that omission must bo 
sought in the safeguards system, which was damaging to the prestige of 

GC(V)/OR.54 
pago 22 


States applying_for aid, and infringed their sovereignty. There seemed to be 


an implication that the Agency suspected that every State which made an 
application intended to divert the fissionable materials supplied to it to 
non-peaceful purposes. Such an assumption was absurd, since practically 
none of the applicant Status possessed cither the means or the necessary 


experience to use for military purposes fissionable materials supplied by the 
Agency, To remedy that state of affairs, the Agency should carry out a 
fundamental revision of the safeguards system0, otherwise there was a risk 
that fissionable materials would bo supplied on the basis of bilateral 
agreements rather than through the Agency. Moreover, such a revision would 
release large funds which could be allocated to other Agency activities. 


85. Another of the Agency's duties was to bring together all countries and 
organizations that were able to contribute to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The position in that respect called for severe criticism. Countries 
such as the German Democratic Republic, the People's Republic of Korea, the 
People's Republic of Mongolia and the Democratic Republic of Viet—Nam wore 
being kept out of the Agency as a result of unjustifiable discrimination. And 
why were the Chinese, that groat people, who had achieved remarkable results 
in the peaceful application of atomic energy, still not properly represented 
in the Agency? That state of affairs must bo brought to an end without delay. 
There the Agency could sot an example which might facilitate the solution of 
the problem of admitting the countries concerned to the United Nations, 


* 


86. Similarly, consultative status with the Agency had been accorded to a 
number of international non-governmental organizations, yet it had been refused 
to WFTU, whose influence was nevertheless world-wide, 
87. In the matter of research contracts, the Board's annual report confined. 
itself to listing contracts which had been granted. It was difficult to 
decide, in the absence of any indication as to the results of the work done, 
whether the contracts concerned were really useful and whether they 
contributed to the success of the Agency's work. It was preferable in his 
view to replace the contracts system, at least in part, by competitions and 
prizes, which would attract not only a greater number of research workers- but 
the most qualified among them. 

GC(V)/OR,54 
page 23 


88. Referring to the appointment of the now Director General, he recalled 
that his delegation, together with those of Poland and the USSR, had 
1 8/ 


introduced a draft resolution on the subject—' . The choice of Mr. Eklund 


created a very difficult and embarrassing situation. In the interests of the 
Agency's future work it would be a good thing to invito Mr. Eklund to attend 
the discussions under item 22 of the agenda. The Bulgarian delegation was 


strongly opposed to the appointment imposed upon the Board by the United 
States and the othor Western countries, despite the opposition of the 
socialist and Afro-Asian countries, which by force of circumstance were in a 
minority on the Board. 


89. In conclusion ho assorted that the aggressive policy of the imperialist 
Powers was plunging the whole of mankind into a state of anxiety and 
insecurity, The armaments race was being speeded up. Intensive rearmament 
was in progress in Western Germany., where militarists were no longer 
concealing their desire for revenge, oven at the cost of a now war, the 
consequences of which would be incalculable. Paced with suoh a prospect, the 
forces of poaco and progress could not remain idle. International tension 
had compelled the Soviet Union, very much against its will, to resume tosts 
of its new nuclear weapons. The Pugwash Conference, which had just hold its 
seventh and eighth conferences in the United States, was seeking to promote 
constructive co-operation in the field of science, because such co-operation 
could not fail to restore confidonce among nations. Unfortunately a spirit 
of understanding had not yot been established and the negotiations on the 
cessation of nuclear tests and on disarmament had shown that the Western 
Powers did not want effective disarmament. Complete and general disarmament, 
however, was the only way to avert the catastrophe threatening the human race. 
It was for that reason that he was appealing sincerely to all delegates to 
show proof of their good will, thereby facilitating the conclusion of an 
agreement on the disarmament problem. 
The meeting rose at 5°50 P.m. 


18/ GC(Y)/173. 



international Atomic Energy Agency GC(V)/OR.55 
4 December 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 
OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 2 October 1961, at 10.50 a.m. 
President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
11 
12 
20 
10 
General debate and report of the Board 
of Governors for 1960-61 
(continued from the 54th meeting) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Austria 
India 
Opening date of the sixth regular session 
The Agency's relations with other 
organizations in the United Nations family 
(a) Annual reports to United Nations organs 
The composition of the Board of Governors 
1-44 
1 
16 
45 
47 
- 15 
- 55 
- 46 
- 50 
51 85 


* GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(v)/INF/42/Rev.5. 


61-5900 



GC(V)/OR.55 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1960-61 
(GC(V)/154, 168) (continued from the 54th meeting) 


1. Mr. WODAK (Austria) congratulated the President on his election. 
2. The Austrian delegation considered that it was time that States Members 
of the Agency thought about its future., Some criticisms had been made of the 
work which had been done so far, bu$ on the whole it could be said that the 
verdict had been positive. 
3. Since the establishment of the Agency it had become apparent that it was 
difficult to fulfill all the aims laid down in the Statute, It had been 
intended that one of the Agency's main tasks should be to act as a clearinghouse 
for fissionable material, but earlier theories regarding the world's 
natural fuel resources had proved to be too pessimistic, and the still very 
high investment cost for nucloar power plants and nuclear installations had 
hampered not only national atomic programs but also the Agency's activities. 
Moreover, various political developments, such as the admission of many new 
countries, had also left their mark. Furthermore, the idea of the internationally 
controlled use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes had lost 
some of its original strength, which he deeply regretted. Happily, the 
Agency had been able to adapt itself to the changed conditions, and to make 
good use of the unexpected delay in the development of industrial uses of 
nuclear energy. It had been able to help Member States, especially the 
developing countries, to prepare themselves for coming tasks, by spreading 
knowledge of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
4. During the past year the Agency had given a large number of scientists 
and technicians the opportunity of becoming acquainted with the technical, 
economic and legal aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The 
Agency's activities in the field of training were extremely valuable, and 
studies regarding future prospects and costs of the industrial use of nuclear 
energy were of special importance. He would also like a unified method of 
cost evaluation to be worked out so that smaller countries who were thinking 
of producing power from nuclear resources should be fully aware of the 
financial burdens involved, 
5. The regulations concerning the transport of radioactive materials—', as 
well as the draft Convention on Minimum International Standards regarding Civil 
1/ STl/PHB/40 and STI/PUB/52, 



GC(Y)/OR.55 
page 3 


Liability for Kuclear Damage, were of the highest importance to national 
legislation in that field, and represented a basis for international 
collaboration. 


6„ His delegation was very much in favor of the Agency's giving more 
consideration to the practical uses of atomic energy in research and industry, 


2/ 
and it also welcomed the Agency's collaboration in the NORA project—^ . It 
was convinced that the Agency would in future be able to fulfill all the tasks 
laid down in the Statute 


7. Nevertheless Member States would have to collaborate in an atmosphere of 
mutual confidence, and the idea of international control would have to be 
accepted. Austria had therefore not hesitated to put at the Agency's disposal 
the services of an Austrian scientist for the post of Director of the Division 
of Inspection, Moreover Austria would seriously consider transferring to the 
Agency control of the safeguards provided under the bilateral agreement with 
the United States, if the latter agreed. 
8. The Austrian Government welcomed the admission of the Republic of the 
Congo (Leopoldville) to membership of the Agency, and was happy to see the 
interest shown in the Agency by the newly independent countries. The Agency 
should not disappoint them5 smaller countries could also contribute to the 
development of nuclear energy if they were given an opportunity to do so. 
9. Two trends of opinion existed among Members as to the respective roles 
which the' more developed countries and the developing countries should play 
in the Agency. The Austrian Government felt that only the fullest and 
frankest co-operation between all States Members of the Agency would allow 
that organization to fulfill its functions. In that connection, he thought 
that new Member States should be given an opportunity for active collaboration, 
especially on the Board. 
10. With regard to the question of the appointment of a new Director General, 
the Austrian Government believed that no political considerations should 
influence the choice of higher officials5 as the outgoing Director General 
had stated, the composition of the Secretariat should be such as to promote 
the collaboration of all Member States, 
2/ nwc::^/29s 



GC(V)/OR.55 
page 4 


11. On behalf of the Austrian Government he thanked the outgoing Director 
General for the work which he had done at the head of the Secretariat, and hoped 
that the Conference would seriously consider the recommendations he had made, 
especially the suggestion that the Board should work out a long-term program 
for the Agency based on sound financial principles and the conclusion he had 
3/ 


reached regarding the reorganization of the Secretariat—7 „ Mr. Cole had 
succeeded in co-ordinating the work of the different international organizations 
in the field of nuclear energy and had established particularly fruitful 
collaboration with the European Nuclear Energy Agency, 


12, He also wished to express his appreciation to Dr. Jolles, the former 
Deputy Director General in charge of the Department of Administration;, Liaison 
and Secretariat, and was gratified at the extremely good relations established 
between the Secretariat of the Agency and the Austrian Government, which would 


give all possible assistance to the new Director General. 


13. It was to be hoped that the construction work at the Agency's Headquarters, 
on which Austria had spent a considerable amount of money, would soon be 
finished. Austria would then be free of its financial obligations and able 
to put fellowships and other training facilities at the Agency's disposal. 
14. Effective collaboration had already been established between the Austrian 
reactor center at Seibersdorf and the Agency's isotope laboratory. The former 
had contacted both the Agency and the European "Mucle?.r Energy Agency in order 
to draw up a joint project for studies concerning low-dose radiation for food 
preservation. 
15. Austria had confidence in the future prospects for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, but was vory much concerned that the testing of atomic bombs 
had been resumed. It hoped that the difficult issues which faced the 
Conference, and would face the Board during the coming year, would be settled 
in a spirit of collaboration and that the long-term aims of the Agency would 
not be forgotten. 
3-6. Mr. BHABHA (India) congratulated the President on his election. 


17. In his delegation's opinion, the present session was of particular 
importance since, apart from the Annual Report of the Board of Governors to 
the General Conference (GC(V)/154) on the Agency's work and the Program and 
3/ GC(V)/0E.48, paragraphs 86-87. 



GC(V)/OR.55 
Page 5 


Budget for 1962-^ , it had to consider the question of the general revision 
of the Agency's Statute and. to appoint a new Director General. 


18. During the four years it had existed, the Agency had done very useful 
work despite serious handicaps, By 1 April 1961, there had been 600 fellows 
from 50 different countries who had either completed their training or were 
receiving it in 26 Member States, That activity> which was of great importance 
to the developing countries, was the result of a real co-operative effort 
between countries with atomic programs in varying stages of development. It 
could be seen from the review of technical assistance given by the Agency 
in 1959 and 1960^ that oven advanced countries in the field of atomic energy 
like the United States of America and France had been recipients of fellowships 
side by side with the developing countries, and also that a number of 
developing countries like Brazil, the United Arab Republic and others had 
offered fellowships which had been utilized. He hoped that in the years to come 
the fellowship program would expand oven further, along with technical 
assistance activities. For that reason he welcomed the statement in the 
Program and Budget for 1962 to the effect thats "The expansion of certain of 
the Agency's scientific programs proposed for 1962 should not be regarded as 
minimizing the great importance which, in the opinion of the Board, should 
continue to be attributed as far as possible to rendering technical assistance 
to countries requiring it".—' 
19. His delegation noted with gratification that consistently through the 
years there had been expansion of the technical assistance activities of the 
Agency. The total budget for technical assistance had risen from 
fa 100 000 in 1959-^to $3 562 520 in 1962-/. Expert missions had been sent 
out by the Agency to 31 countries in South East Asia, the Far East, Africa, 
the Middle East, Latin America and Southern Europe. Though there were minor 
differences of opinion regarding details, all the countries visited had 
expressed satisfaction at the help given by those missions in drawing up plans 
for the peaceful uses of atomic energy. By the'end of 1961, about 100 experts 
recruited by the Agency were likely .to be serving in many different parts of the 
world. In that manner too, developing countries were making their contribution 
4/ GC(v)/i55. 
5/ GC(V)/DIF/37. 
6/ GC(v)/155, Paragraph 21. 
7/ GC(ll)/36, Annex I. 
8/ GC(V)/155, Annex I, note b. 



GC(V)/0B.55 
page 6 


as well as the advanced countries, Indias for example, was about to receive 
two experts from the Agency, and had also provided experts through the Agency 


to assist other Member States. 


20, As regards research contracts, there had been a great deal of discussion 
both in the Board and in the Scientific Advisory Committee concerning the 
utility as well as the placing of those contracts, It was probably safe to 
say that the kind of contracts which were now being placed would not only 
assist in the dissemination of scientific knowledge throughout the world, but 
would also encourage laboratories in developing countries to expand their 
research activities. That was entirely in accordance with Article III.B.3 of 


the Statute, 


21, Another important activity of the.Agency was the exchange of scientific 
information through the holding of conferences, etc. As already pointed out 
at previous sessions, the Indian delegation considered that it would be 
desirable for the Agency to hold a number of such meetings in geographical 
areas where there were a large number of developing countries. Such countries 
generally could not afford to attend meetings held in distant parts of the 
world, and in any case the country in which a symposium was held generally 
derived more benefit from it than other participating countries because a far 
larger number of its specialists could participate or attend as observers 


than would be possible otherwise. He thought the remark in paragraph. 30l(e) 


of the Agency's Program and Budget for 1962 concerning the cost of meetings 
held outside Vienna did not go far enough. The Agency must make a point of 
holding its scientific conferences in all parts of the world, and especially 


in the less-developed areas, 


22, The Agency's achievements, important though they might be, did not amount 


to a great deal when compared with the hopes entertained in 1956—57 by .many 


countries that wero greatly in need of nuclear power sources. It was 


necessary to ask why those hopes had not been fully realized. Very often the 


opinion was expressed, either clearly or in veiled terms, that underdeveloped 


countries would be better advised to concentrate on the application of radio


isotopes in agriculture, medicine and industry rather than to attempt 


grandiose schemes of nuclear power generation. He was unable to agree with 


that view, which he considered superficial. The research on and development 


of power production from nuclear sources was expensive, and a great deal of 


research and development still remained to be done to bring to a commercial 


stage the many different typos of power reactor which were being studied. 



GC(V)/0E,55 
page 7 


That was where the advanced nations had a role to play, hut unfortunately they 
wore more concerned with the military applications of atomic energy. According 
to published figures, the expenditure on the development of military uses of 
atomic energy throughout the world was running at the rate of about 100si compared 
with expenditure on peaceful purposes. Even if one tenth of the effort which 
was being devoted to military applications was devoted to research on and the 
development of nucloar power, the capital cost of such power could undoubtedly 
be reduced so as to make nucloar power competitive, not only in areas of high 
conventional fuel costs, but also elsewhere. 


23. Such a state of affairs was all the more regrettable because the cost of 
energy from nuclear fuel was already lower than the cost of energy from coal 
or oil in many parts of the world. In areas of India where there was coal, 
the cost of energy from coal was twice as much as that of energy from nuclear 
fuel. Where there was no coal and transport costs had to be included, the 
cost was six to eight times greater. That difference in the cost of energy 
was reflected in the cost of electric power. The fuel cost of a kWh of 
electricity generated from nuclear fuel amounted to between 1 and 2 mills, 
whereas on the west coast of India or in the south, the fuel cost of a kWh of 
electricity, at the current prices of coal or oil, was between 4.5 an& 5.5 mills, 
or more than double that of electricity from nuclear power. Countries which 
had no fuel resources of any sort, either conventional or nuclear, and therefore 
had to import everything, would make substantial savings every year if 
they imported nuclear fuel instead of conventional fuel. If a J00 MW power 
station located on the west coast of India were to be run on imported coal or 
oil at current prices, the fuel bill would come to between $8 and $10 million 
a year, whereas for a natural uranium-based power station, on the assumption 
that the entire fabricated fuel elements were imported, and not merely the 
crude uranium concentrate, the import bill would be between $1.2 and $3-6 million 
a year. The saving of some $6 million a year thus made would very soon offset 
the present higher capital costs of the nuclear versus conventional power 
station. 


24. That example showed what a vast area would open up for nuclear power 
generation and what a groat contribution it could make to power-hungry areas 
if the capital costs of nuclear power stations were substantially reduced. 
That in turn showed how necessary it was for the advanced countries, which 
were at present engaged in developing the military applications of atomic 

GC(V)/OR.55 
page 8 


energy, to focus their scientific and technical research efforts on the 
generation of nuclear electricity. Many of the underdeveloped countries were 
some 20 to 50 years behind in modern technology as compared with the 
industrialized nations. If they wanted to avoid being in the same position 
in 30 to 40 years' timo in the nuclear field, they would have to make great 
efforts to train scientists and technicians and to provide them with facilities 
for their work, It was not suggested, however, that they should devote a 
disproportionately largo part of their efforts to research. They must make 
sure that they had the personnel to service and operate nuclear power stations 
but it was for the technologically advanced countries to put in the effort 
necessary for producing economic nuclear power, 


250 The word "underdeveloped" covered a vast spectrum of differing conditions 
and could be interpreted in a variety of ways, but normally it meant countries 
in which the standard of living and the per capita income were low. When, 
however, that low standard of living existed in countries with vast natural 
resources and large populations, the potentialities for scientific research 
and industrial development were quite different from those in small underdeveloped 
countries. India was an example of such a country? it had many 
universities and laboratories, a very large student population and a large 
number of scientists. It had steel works and a heavy chemical industry .and 
its engineering industry was far from negligible* It built cars, locomotives 
and aeroplanes. By the end of the third Five-Year Plan, in March 1$66, it 
would be able to produce practically anything that could be produced in any 

other country. 


26, That was the basis for India's considerable effort in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. Of the ^270 million due to be spent on the development of 
new scientific research and technical facilities 'during the third Five-Tear 
Plan - nearly double what had been spent- during the second Five-Year Plan-about 
a quarter or roughly $75 million would be used for new nuclear research 
facilities. That did not of course include the recurring expenditure on 
atomic research at the present level - which was in fact higher - nor the 
sums earmarked for industrial development, including the mining and metallurgy 
of uranium and the construction of nuclear power stations, 


27. The previous year his delegation had announced that the Government of 
India was intending to build a large nuclear power station of 300 MW-^„ That 
2/ GC(IV)/OR.31, paragraph 48. 


OC(V)/OR.-55 
page 9 


project had now begun to take shape. A site had been selected on the west 
coast some 60 miles north of Bombay, and seven estimates had been received 
from four countries in response to a world-wide invitation for tenders for 
its construction. Moreover, in view of the need for power to support the 
industrial development of the country and in order to avoid the expense of 
transporting coal over large distances, the Indian Atomic Energy Commission 
had been authorized to look for a site for a second large nuclear power station 
in the region of Delhi and the States surrounding it. The Indian Atomic 
Energy Commission had appointed a high-level committee to draw up a list of 
six suitable sites throughout the country, taking into account the power 
requirements and potential of the various regions, During the coming five 
to ten years, atomic energy would be called xipon for an increasing share of 
the country's power production. 


28. The Government of India had informed the Director General of the Agency 
that it had decided to make available facilities for training in at least one 
of the atomic power stations to be built during the period of the third 
Five-Year Plan^ that would provide scientists from other countries, and 
especially the underdeveloped countries, with an opportunity of familiarizing 
themselves with the operation of such plants. 
29. He was happy to announce that, in spite of the economic difficulties 
which faced his country as a result of the efforts being made to raise the 
standard of living, his Government would contribute the equivalent of 
125 000 to the General Fund in 1962. 
30. In conclusion, he would like to say a few words on the organizational 
set-up of the Agency, which could not be said to represent adequately the 
interests of all Member States. Scientists and administrators from a 
particular area could be expected to know the needs of the area better than 
persons from outside, and as one of the most important functions of the Agency 
was to assist in developing atomic energy in areas which were underdeveloped 
industrially, more of the Agency staff should be drawn from those areas than 
was the case at present. It was regrettable that that principle had been 
completely ignored in the staffing of the top levels of the Agency's Secretariat. 
In the Indian delegation's opinion, the entire set-up should be reviewed. 
31. The first Director General - to whom he would like to express his 
appreciation of the work he had done during his term of office - had come from 
the United States. It would therefore seem appropriate for the next one to 

GC(V)/OR.55 


page 10 


be drawn from a geographical area in which the economic and social conditions 
were different from those of the United States, Western Europe did not 
fulfill that condition. His delegation would have no objection to a 
candidate from Western Europe at a later period, after the post had heen 
filled by a person from another area which satisfied the condition he had 
just mentioned. On that matter of principle, his delegation had strong 
views, which it would explain in greater detail at the appropriate time. 
For the post of Director General, a candidate must he found who was acceptable 
to the various groups in the Agency, and especially to the United States and 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the two countries most advanced in 
the nuclear field. 


32. Similarly, the constitution of the Board was not in line with current 
requirements. The world had changed a good deal since the Agency had first 
been conceived. Many new independent nations had come into existence and 
had been admitted to the United Nations, and the pattern of membership of that 
body had undergone radical changes over the last few years. The Agency, as 
a member of the United Nations family, must move with the times and its 
structure must reflect the changes which had taken place. That meant above 
all that the Board should give increased representation to the new countries 
which had recently joined the United Nations family. 
33. To sum up, he considered that the advanced countries should concentrate 
their efforts on developing the peaceful rather than the military uses of 
atomic energy and that the Agency should do its utmost to promote such 
development. The Board should represent more accurately the present situation 
in the world and the organizational set-up of the Agency, and especially of 
its Secretariat, should better reflect the different interests on whose 
co-operation the success and the very existence of the Agency depended. 
Lastly, the Agency should conduct its operations, in particular the holding 
of symposia, conferences and scientific meetings, on a more widely distributed 
geographical basis than at the present time. The Agency had performed much 
useful work but it must do more. India would do whatever it could to assist 
it to achieve the noble aims it had set itself. 
34* The PRESIDENT announced that, although the list of speakers in the 
general debate had been closed, he had decided to accord the right of reply 
under Rule 58 of the Rules of Procedure to the delegates of the Soviet Union, 
Denmark and Norway. 



GC(V)/OR,55 
page 11 


35„ Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) considered that 
the United Kingdom delegate's remarks regarding the Soviet Union's 
responsibility for the resumption of nuclear testing—' were hypocritical. 


36. In the statement it had made on the resumption of testing the Soviet 
Government made it clear that it had taken the decision unwillingly, because 
of the preparations the Western Powers; were making for- a new war. on the 
Soviet Union. The Soviet Government could not remain inactive and neglect 
to strengthen the defence of the country, so as to preserve peace and ensure 
the security of all nations. 
37. 3© recalled that in 1918 British armies had been sent against Soviet 
Russia, which had just overthrown the reactionary regime it hated. A British 
colonel, Tigg-Jones, had shot the commissars of Baku. l/ater, British soldiers 
had shot and killed his (Mr. Emelyanov's) brother, who was then under 14 years 
of age. 
38. That had happened because Soviet Russia had been weak and disarmed. It 
could not now remain disarmed and passively watch the intensive preparations 
being made by the Western Powers to wage war on the socialist world. 
39. The Soviet Union certainly had a great responsibility, but it was not 
the one referred to by the delegate of the United Kingdom. Its responsibility 
was to use every means it could to prevent war and preserve peace,. The 
Soviet Union would accordingly do everything in its power to prevent the forces 
of aggression from starting a war, 
40. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) wished to clarify various points.concerning the 
safety evaluation of'the port of Copenhagen. That evaluation was concerned 
exclusively with calls by atomic-powered merchant ships. In view of the 
international importance of the port of Copenhagen, Denmark had a legitimate 
interest in carrying out an evaluation of that kind. As everyone knew, the 
United States atomic-powered merchant ship "Savannah" was -expected to make its 
maiden voyage to Europe in 1962. It was therefore perfectly normal for 
Denmark to approach the Agency in order to arrive, with its help, at an 
internationally agreed code which could be used by Governments in future when 
they themselves needed to evaluate the ports of their countries. 
10/ GC(V)/OR.53, paragraph 84. 



GC(V)/OR,55 
page 12 


41. Since the discussion some years previously about the proposed visit of a 
United States atomic submarine, the question of visits by United States 
atomic-powered submarines had never been raised and no negotiations on whether 
United States submarines equipped with Polaris rockets should be permitted to 
use Danish bases or visit Copenhagen had ever taken place. In that connection, 
he referred to the Danish Government's negative attitude to having atomic 
weapons or ammunition equipped with atomic warheads on Danish soil or in 
Danish watersj that attitude had been repeatedly expressed by the Government. 
42. Mr. RANDBRS (Norway) confirmed that, in the case of Norway too, no 
agreement whatsoever existed permitting submarines equipped with Polaris 
rockets to shelter in Norwegian ports. 
43. Sir Roger MAKINS (United Kingdom) regretted that the delegate of the 
Soviet Union had seen fit to make the remarks which the Conference had just 
heard, in reply to a statement by the United Kingdom delegation which had 
been confined to a matter of fact. The Soviet delegate's remarks suggested 
quite a considerable reply, but he would not make it, as he thought the 
Conference was not the place to engage in controversies on historical or 
political questions. 
44. The PRESIDENT said that the Soviet delegation had submitted a draft 
resolution under item 11 of the agenda. The text was being circulated— 
and the Conference would be able to take it up later. 
OPENING DATE OF THE SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


45. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the fact that under Rule 1 of the 
Rules of Procedure, the Conference was required to set the date for its next 
regular session. The General Committee had decided to recommend the 
Conference to set Tuesday, 18 September 1962, as the opening date for the 
sixth regular session. 
46. The recommendation of the General Committee, was acceptod. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH OTHER ORGANIZATIONS IN THE UNITED NATIONS FAMILYs 


(a) ANNUAL REPORTS TO UNITED NATIONS ORGANS (GC(v)/158, 159) 
47. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the Board's recommendations 
concerning the Agency's annual reports to the General Assembly of the United 
Nations for 1960-61 (GC(v)/158) and to the Economic and Social Council of the 
United Nations (ECOSOC) for 1961-62 (GC(V)/159). He invited the Conference 
11/ As document GC(v)/175. 



GC(V)/OR.55 
page 15 


to consider, first, the draft resolution appearing in the former of those 
recommendations. 


48. The draft resolution contained in document GC(v)/158 was adopted 
unanimously. 
49. Mr. WERSHQF (Canada), referring to the draft resolution in the 
second recommendation (GC(V)/159)9 wondered whether it was necessary for the 
Conference to authorize the Board every year to submit the Agency's annual 
report direct to ECOSOC, since that was in any case the only possible 
procedure. In order to simplify matters the Conference might, for instance, 
give the Board an authorization for several years. He did not intend to 
submit a formal proposal on the subject during the current session, hut 
reserved the right to raise it at a future meeting of the Board. 
50. The draft resolution contained in document GC(v)/159 was adopted 
unanimously. 
COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(V)/151 and Add.1, 169) 


51.. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that the question of the 


composition of the Board had been placed on the agenda pursuant to a 
12/ 


resolution adopted by the Conference at its fourth regular session— . He 
called the attention of delegates to the Board's recommendation (GC(v)/151 
and Add.1), and the amendment thereto submitted by the Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic (GC(V)/169). He then called en the delegate of Iraq, who had played 
a leading part in the study of the question by the Board. 


52. Mr. HASANI (Iraq) said that in addressing the Conference for the 
first time he wished to associate himself with the congratulations extended to 
the President on his election. 
53. The question of the representation of the "Africa and the Middle East" 
area on the Board was not a new one, since it had already been raised at the 
Negotiating Group which had formulated the Statute at Washington in 1954 and 
1955. The documents circulated to delegates showed the history of the 
question. At its fourth regular session the Conference had unanimously 
adopted a resolution requesting the Board to reconsider the question. 
12/ GC(IV)/RES/85. 



GC(V)/OR,55 
page 14 


54. The recommendation before the Conference had been adopted almost 
unanimously by the Board, which had thereby shown its conviction that the 
"Africa and the Middle East" area had become one of the most important-areas 
of the world,' not only as a supplier of raw materials and as a user of the 
Agency's facilities, but also as a participant in the development of the 
peaceful uses of the atom. During the deliberations of the Board, the 
delegation of' Iraq, had pointed out that many other States in that area would 
probably ask for admission to the Agency in the near future; all the States 
that had become Members during the past twelve months belonged to it. In 
that connection, he wished to extend his warmest congratulations to the 
Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville), whose admission to the Agency had been 
approved at the beginning of the current session. It was from the "Africa 
and the Middle East" area that the'greatest number of new Members was to be 
expected and it was only logical to give .it appropriate representation on the 
Board. 
55. The adoption of the Board's recommendation by the Conference'would give 
two additional seats to the "Africa and the Middle East" area, while leaving 
the "Latin America" area its present representation. The delegation of Iraq. 
was aware that the increase did not satisfy all the requirements and 
aspirations of the countries concerned and did not entirely remove the 
injustice done them. It had, however, submitted the initial proposal to the 
Board, jointly with Mexico, because it had wished to be sure, from the 
beginning, of a unanimous vote and quick results. Its stand on the draft 
resolution before the Conference did not in any way imply that it no longer 
desired amendment of the Statute in general and of Article VI in particular. 
56, The delegation of Iraq, hoped that the Conference would unanimously adopt 
the Board's recommendation and that amendment of the Statute under 
Article XVIII.C (ii) would soon follow. 


57° Mr.' RETRZEU-TA (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) said that at the 


fourth regular session of the Conference his delegation had supported the 


draft resolution to provide better representation of the countries of the 


•* 15/ 
"Africa and the Middle last " area on the Board-*^ and was glad that the 
Conference was already in a position to take practical steps to that end. 


12/ GC(IV)/OR.45, paragraph 22. 



GC(V)/OR.55 
page 15 


58. Many Member States had, on various occasions, reaffirmed that the 
composition of the Board no longer corresponded to present world conditions. 
The balance of power had, in fact, changed considerably as compared with the 
position in 1955-56, for the world had gradually split up into three main 
groups of States% States of the socialist system. States aligned in 
capitalist political and military blocs, and non-aligned States, 
59• I"t was now possible to improve the composition of the Board by increasing 


the number of members from 2J to 25 and allocating the two additional seats 


to the "Africa and the Middle East" area, where, as the imperialist colonial 


system disintegrated, new States were rapidly emerging and many.were 
endeavoring to consolidate their independence and resist attempts to replace 
the old colonialism by a modern neo-colonialism. Those States would make 
increasing use of nuclear energy to solve their economic problems, and the 
Agency would probably soon include them among its Members. 


60. The Czechoslovak delegation welcomed the proposal to amend Article VI.A.3 
of the Statute, provided, of course, that the amendment was acceptable to the 
area concerned^ it considered that amendment to be a first practical step 
towards bringing the Board's composition more closely into line with the 
existing world situation. It would revert to that point at a later stage. 
61. His delegation also wished to raise a question that had given rise to 
lively discussions at the Board's meetings in January and April 1961. One of 
the so-called "floating seats", which had also been promised to the countries 
of Africa and the Middle East in 1956, had subsequently always been improperly 
allocated to countries in Western Europe, which was already over-represented 
on the Board. The Czechoslovak Government had never approved of that state 
of affairs and wished to stress that, in its opinion, adoption of the proposed 
amendment would in no way affect the promise of that seat to the countries of 
Africa and the Middle East, Any other arrangement would be illegal and 
against the interests of the States of the area. 
62. Since the adoption of the amendment under discussion would make it 
possible to safeguard the interests of the area in question only after the 
required number of acceptances had been obtained, and the acceptances might 
be delayed, the Czechoslovak Government considered it essential that the 
floating seat he had referred to should, from the present session of the 
General Conference on, be at long last assigned, as was only right, to a State 
of the "Africa and the Middle East" area. 

GC(V)/OR.55 • 
page 16 


6j„ Furthermore, to remove any possible ambiguity, the Czechoslovak 


delegation proposed that paragraph (c) of the preamble to the draft resolution 
rooommended by the Board be deleted. The adoption of that paragraph would 
be tantamount both to perpetuating the existing unjust system of representation 
on the Board and to.confirming the illegal procedure followed hitherto, by 
which Western Europe was over-reprosented, because of its appropriation of the 
floating seat promised to the countries of Africa and the Middle East. The 


deletion of paragraph (c) made no difference to the effect of the amendment, 
which the Czechoslovak Government supported, but it avoided prejudging the 
representation of the other areas. Besides, paragraph (c) was in no way 
related to the resolution adopted at the fourth session of the Conference, which 


dealt solely with the representation of the countries of Africa and the Middle 
iUast. 


64. Mr. SMELYAWOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pointed out that 
at its fourth session the Conference had adopted a resolution recommending the 
Trard to take steps to ensure equitable-representation of the "Africa and the 
Middle East" area on the Board. In taking that decision the Conference had 
implicitly recognized that the Board's composition left much to be desired. 
65. The composition of the Board had not been very satisfactory in 1956? when 
-he Statute had been drawn up. It was still less satisfactory now, after the 
C-,reai changes that had taken place in the world. The present composition of 
the Board provided neither adequate representation of Member States, nor the 
nocessary conditions for .their collaboration. 


66„ The main reason for that was the predominance in the Agency's organs of 

the United States and its allies of the military and political blocs. On the 
Board, the United States and its allies always had 16 votes out of 23. In 


noprly all cases, the pro-American group on the Board used that crushing 


majority to defend their narrowly egotistical interests. ' With such a 


distribution of seats on the Board, the interests of States that did not belong 


to political or military blocs, in particular the countries of Africa and the 
Middle East, could not be protected as they should. Consideration of the 


representation of Africa and the Middle East inevitably led. to discussion of 


ihe change (which was essential) in the composition of the Board as a whole. 


The present composition, which was based on the representation of arbitrarily 


CiTJorminod geographical areas, and on the progress made by countries in the use 



GC(V)/OR.55 
page 17 


of atomic energy, was found to be grossly unfair in practice. North America, 
for instance, was represented 100$, whereas the 14 States of the "Africa and 
the Middle Bast" area had only two-seats and were thus only represented 14$. 


67. The resolution adopted by the Board gave two additional seats to the 
countries of the "Africa and the Middle East" area. That would increase the 
number of members of the Board to 25. The amendment eliminated the injustice 
from which that area had suffered^ but even after its adoption the composition 
of the Board would remain unsatisfactory, since the Western Powers and their 
allies of the military and political blocs would still have an absolute 
majority. Furthermore, under the procedure in force, the actual allocation 
of two additional seats to the "Africa and the Middle East" area would be 
delayed for at least a year, i.e. until the next session of the Conference. 
68. There was, however, an immediate means of satisfying, to some extent, the 
desire of the countries of the "Africa and the Middle East" area for increased 
representation on the Board. It would suffice to give them the so-called 
"floating seat" which the Vfestern Powers had promised to Africa in 1956. The 
Western Powers had later broken that promise by supporting, in the Board,, the 
election, first of Turkey, then of Spain, and then of Y/estern Germany, At 
the current session, they were again trying to get the seat of which they had 
deprived Africa surreptitiously allocated to Greece, their ally in the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 
69. If the Western Powers really wished to increase the representation of 
the countries of the "Africa and the Middle East" area on the Board, they 
could at once, at the current session, support the allocation of the floating 
seat to a representative of Africa, namely Ghana, whose candidature had been 
put forward. 
70. The attention of delegates should also be drawn to other anomalies in the 
provisions relating to the composition of the Board. For example, since the 
admission of the Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville), as a sovereign state, to 
membership of the Agency, Belgium's membership of the Board as a country 
producing source materials was no longer* justified. 
71. That also applied to Portugal, which had no further moral right to 
membership of the Board, when it was brutally repressing the national 
liberation movement in Angola and its actions had already been examined by the 
United Nations. 

GC(V)/OR.55 
page 18 


72. Mr. de LEMOS (Portugal), intervening on a point of order., said that 
under Article III of the Statute, which defined the Agency's functions, the 
Agency was required to study purely technical questions and was not authorized 
to pass political or moral judgment on Member States, particularly one which 
had always fulfilled its international obligations.' In raising that point of 
order, his delegation merely wished to protect the character and usefulness 
of the Agency, whose strictly technical objective was to serve peace by 
promoting development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. His delegation 
hoped it would not have to raise that point again, but it reserved the right 
to do so if circumstances so required. 
75• The PRESIDENT appealed to all delegates to show moderation and, if 
possible, to refrain from any comments not relevant to the matter under 
discussion, 


74. Mr. BMELYANW (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) went on to say 
that even after the adoption of the amendment recommended by the Board;, which 
his delegation supported, the Western Powers would still have 16 or 17 votes 
in the Board, which would guarantee them an absolute majority. The noncommitted 
countries of Asia and Africa would have a maximum of five 
representatives. The injustice and impropriety of such a situation was 
aggravated by the fact that, of the 25 Members of the Board, only three would 
be representatives of socialist' countries, although that state of affairs was 
in flagrant contradiction to the contribution those countries made to 
international collaboration in the field of atomic energy. 
75° Ibe adoption of amendments making limited changes in the composition of 
the Board did not mean that the question of a radical change need not be 
placed on the agenda. The composition of the Board should reflect the 
existing situation in the world, in which there were three groups of States 
approximately equal in population and economic potential. That fact could 
not be overlooked if an improvement in the operation of international 
organizations was really desired. That consideration was fully applicable 
to the Agency. 


76. To grant equal representation on the Board to the three groups of 
countries - Western, socialist and non-committed - would be wise and equitable 
and would provide specific guarantees against diversion of the activities of 

GC(V)/OR„55 
page 19 


the Board, and of the Agency as a whole, to the advantage of any one group of 
States. It was obvious that the legitimate claims of the "Africa and the 
Middle East" area would thus he satisfied and the present situation, which was 
inadmissihle, radically improved. 


77o He recalled that the representatives of the non-committed countries of 
Asia, Africa and Latin America at the recent Conference in Belgrade had 
declared their conviction that it was essential to change the structure of the 
United Nations organs so as to secure the unity of the United Nations and to 


enable it to operate effectively. That was also fully true of the Agency. 


78. The Soviet delegation supported the draft resolution increasing the number 
of seats on the Board to 25, though it realized that the resolution did not 
provide an appropriate solution of the problem of equitable representation on 
the Board. Though it supported the resolution, his delegation considered that 
the amendment proposed by Czechoslovakia, deleting paragraph (c) of the preamble, 
should be adopted. The provisions in that paragraph could, indeed, serve to 
maintain the unfair distribution of seats on the Board and to perpetuate its 
composition, which no longer corresponded to the existing international 
situation. 
79. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) said that his country's views 
en the draft resolution (GC(v)/15l) bad already been expressed during the 
general debate—^. 
80. The United States Government had welcomed the admission of new Members 
to the Agency in recent years - all of them developing countries - and it 
hoped that trend would continue. 
81. The United States was therefore glad that the Agency had decided to have 
recourse to the procedure for amending the Statute, with a view to more 
equitable representation of all areas on the Board. The amendment recommended 
by the Board would double the representation of the "Africa and the Middle 
East" area and also maintain the present representation of Latin America, 
without altering the existing pattern of representation of other areas. The 
resolution and draft amendment under discussion provided an effective means 
of remedying the injustice of the existing situation as quickly as possible. 
1±/ GC(V)/OR.50, paragraph 7(22). 


GC(V)/OR.55 
page 20 


82„ He therefore supported the draft resolution recommended by the Board and 
was opposed to the deletion of any part, of it, for he thought- that would only 
delay its entry -into force, 


85. The United States associated itself with the request- to all Members of the 
Agency to -accept the proposed amendment as soon as possible in accordance with 
their respective constitutional procedures, His Government, for its part, 
fully intended to press for early ratification of the proposed change so that 
the inequity of the existing situation could be quickly corrected. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(v)/OR.56 
5 December 1961 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday. 3 October 1961, at 10.45 a.m. 
President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 
Item of theagenda* 
22CONTENTS 
Appointment of the Director General 
Paragraphs 
1-73 

* GC(v)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(v)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5904 



GC(V)/OR.56 
page .2. 


APPOINTMENT,-. OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL...-(GC 00/16.5,' 173? 174 and. 176) 


1. -^he -PRESIDENT••drew-a,t-tention- to the fact, that three, of the documents 
before the Conference contained draft resolutions and suggested that the 
eleven-Power draft resolution (GC(v)/176) be considered first. If so required 
by the outcome of that discussion, the Conference would proceed to debate the 
three-Power draft resolution (GC(v)/173) and, again depending on the decision 
taken, would then proceed to the nine-Power draft resolution (GC(v)/174). 
2. The procedure suggested by the President was adopted. 
3. Mr. EL ANNABI (Tunisia) said that the Ajency now'had before it a 
very serious problem. • There had been a deterioration in the spirit of 
co-operation within the Agency since 1957? when the present Director General 
had been appointed in an atmosphere of unanimity. Secure in that favorable 
background, his authority had not been contested during his term of office. 
Today, however, the authority of the new Director General was even being 
questioned in advance, and it would be desirable therefore for the question 
of his appointment to be reconsidered. 
4. He wished to stress that Mr. Eklund's integrity and qualification's were 
not under discussion, and the purpose of the eleven-Power draft resolution 
was simply to ensure that the appointment of the new Director General rested 
on agreement between, the three main groups of countries concerned. It was 
his sincere hope that the Board would be able to solve the problem by 
placing before the Conference a nomination meeting with universal approval, 
5. Mr. PS KIN (Burma) emphasized that in supporting the eleven-Power 
draft resolution his delegation was pursuing no selfish interests, There 
had been allegations in unofficial circles that Burma'-s attitude was 
motivated by the fact that a candidate from the Eastern countries had not 
been appointed. Nothing could be further from the truth. The post of 
Director General was a key post and it was essential for the incumbent to 
have general support, in the interests not only of the Agency but of all its 
Members. His delegation yielded to none in its respect for Mr. Eklund's 
character and ability, but the fact remained that his nomination had not 
been accepted by one of the major atomic Powers and by a number of developing 
countries. Since the Agency's activities were primarily directed towards 

GC(V>/OR.56 
page 3 


helping the developing countries, that division of opinion was a prime 
consideration. It was also essential that, in appointing a Director 
General, the matter should be discussed in full beforehand,.-and he felt that 
in the present case sufficient consultation ha.i. not taken place. Burma 
therefore supported the eleven-Power draft resolution. 


6. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) recalled the history of the 
appointment of the new Director General, It had been known all along that a 
new Director General would have to be appointed in 1961, the statutoryprocedure 
being for the Board to make the appointment, subject to the 
approval of the Conference,—' The Board1s decision had been reached after 
exhaustive discussions' and consultations, during which Mr.'Eklund1s high 
qualifications had clearly emerged, and which had revealed a strong measure 
of support for his candidature on the part of both developed and developing 
countries. The circumstances of the decision had been communicated to 
Mr. Sklund .who, after mature reflection, had notified his acceptance to the 
Agency. 
7. Mr. Eklund had for many years been a leading figure in the field of 
atomic energy and its peaceful uses,- and had become well known to atomic) 
energy authorities in many countries. While serving as Secretary General of 
the Second United nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
2/ 
Atomic Energy,—' his circle of acquaintances had been further extended. He-
was a distinguished 'citizen of a world-renowned non-aligned country and 
undoubtedly v/ould carry out his responsibilities with efficiency and 
impartiality. 


8. Regarding the eleven-Power draft resolution, he (Mr. Smyth) did not 
propose to 'comment on the obvious legal objections to the draft, and would 
merely point out that approval would constitute a clear' disavowal of the 
Board's action in appointing Mr. Eklund. The Conference-should now confirm 
the appointment if the Agency was not to flounder in a sea of indecision. 
He recalled the observations made by the delegate' of the United States of 
America at a previous meeting-^, and reiterated that the top posts in the 
Secretariat should not be regarded..as being the perquisite of nationals ,of 
particular States or groups of States. 
l/ Article 'VII,A. of the Statute. 
2/ Held in Geneva from 1 to 13 September 1958. 
3/ GC(V)/OR,50, paragraph 8 (17 - 18). 



GC(V)/OR.56 
page 4 


9. The United States therefore strongly supported the appointment of 
Mr. Eklund and opposed the eleven-Power draft resolution. 
10. Mr. BA3TC0RA (Argentina) said that Argentina was in the development 
stage and' was situated in what was generally referred to as a developing area, 
and he was therefore happy to note the great importance ascribed to the 
interests,of the developing countries at the present session of the Conference. 
11. The eleven-Power draft resolution stated that there had not been 
sufficient consultation with the developing countries on the matter of the 
appointment of a Director General, and he entirely agreed with that 
statement. The main desideratum, however, was that the Agency should 
function in such a way that the maximum advantages were made available to 
Member States^ and that would be achieved by electing to the position of 
Director General the best qualified person available. 
12. Narrowly chauvinistic views had, he believed, contributed-materially to 
the difficulties of underdeveloped countries. If those countries themselves 
extended such views to the international field, the logical result, in the 
present case, would be an insistence that the Director General should be a 
national of an underdeveloped country. He himself did not subscribe to 
those views. In spite of some opposition by supporters of the way of 
thinking to which he had referred, Argentina had received aid from many 
quarters, irrespective of race, creed or social standing, and would be 
honored to receive the aid of any of the scientists present at the Conference 
in furthering the development of the country. 
13. As the delegate of the United States of America had said, it had been 
known for'four-years that a new Director- General would now have to be elected, 
and there had been ample time for a full exchange of ideas. Two candidates • 
had been put forward for the post, one from a' neutral and one from a lessdeveloped 
country. "He had nothing against the latter candidate, but after 
having personally studied the qualifications of both individuals he had come 
to the conclusion that Mr. Eklund was the more suitable. A similar conclusion 
had been reached by many other delegates, 
14. He did not think that there were no suitable candidates for the post of 
Director General in the less-developed countries, and it would be a great 
source of satisfaction to him to see such a candidate appointed. The 

GC(V)/OR.56 
page 5 


probability was, however, that in a developing country any person with the 
high qualifications necessary for the post would ho of more value at home. 
In such circumstances it seemed unlikely that agreement would he reached in 
a short time if it had not been reached in four years. 


15. For all those reasons, and also'because it would be most undesirable 
further to delay the issue, he was opposed to the eleven-Power draft 
resolution. 
16. Mr. BRYNIELSSOlf (Sweden) said that it was clear from the debate 
that Mr. Eklund1s qualifications and experience in atomic energy were 'well 
known to delegates. He had himself worked with Mr. Eklund for more than 
ten years. Since 1950 Mr.'Eklund had been with the Atomic Energy Company of 
Sweden as* head of the division of reactor development and as research director, 
in which capacities he had been in charge of 600 scientists. He was a 
thoroughly competent scientist, balanced and impartial in his views, and with 
wide experience in international nuclear science. The Swedish delegation 
therefore found him well qualified for the post of Director General, believed 
that the Board had appointed him in full accordance with the Statute, and 
would consequently vote against the eleven-Power draft resolution. 
'17. Mr. EMBLYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) regretted the 
attitude adopted by the United States delegate regarding the appointment of 
a Director General. That delegate had stated that numerous consultations 
had taken place on the subject, but the Soviet delegation maintained that 
there had boon no such consultations. 


18. In June, he (Mr. Emelyanov) had had a meeting in Yionna with Mr. Smyth, 
who had been interested in ascertaining the attitude of the Soviet 
delegation to the appointment of Mr. Eklund as Director General. That had 
been the sole meeting and the sole discussion with the United States 
delegation', which at that time had expressed confidence that Mr. Eklund 
would bo appointed. 
19. A considerable number of Members of the Agency, including the most 
important countries of Asia and Africa, countries receiving assistance, and 
the socialist countries, hold the view that a representative of the Afro-
Asian countries, unconnected with military blocs, should be appointed 
Director General. That opinion had also been made quite clear during 
discussion of the matter in the Board, 

GC(V-)/OR.56 
page 6 


20. Eight of the 23 members of the Board had voted in favor of the candidate 
from Indonesia^ they represented the following geographical areas; Eastern 
Europe, Africa and the Middle East, South Asia? South-east Asia and the Pacific 
and the Par East. That meant that more than one third of the Governors, from 
countries in five geographical areas, supported the principle that the post 
of Director General should he given to a representative of the neutralist 
Afro-Asian countries, 
21. Nevertheless, the representatives of the Western Powers had decided to 
recommend Mr. Eklund for the post. If there was a desire for co-operation, 
the proper courso would he to work out a solution of the problem which was 
acceptable to both sides. A Western nominee had already held the post of 
Director General for four years. What grounds were there for giving the 
post to another representative of the West for another four years? 
22. In the discussions on the nomination of Mr. Eklund it had been stated 
that he was a representative of the neutral country Sweden, but the Swedish 
Government was not putting forward Mr. Eklund as a candidate for the post. 
If he was not a representative of Sweden, what did he represent? The United 
States and its military-political allies wore asking for approval of the 
nomination. Mr.- Eklund was a representative of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) and no amount of discussion could conceal the fact that 
he was backed by the aggressive forces of that bloc. If'Mr. Eklund were in 
charge of the Agency, its work would be subordinated to the interests of 
NATO. Hence the Soviet delegation opposed his candidature. 
23. The Soviet delegation could not agree that the post should be given to 
the Western Powers a second time. That would he a gross violation of the 
Statute. The Agency was not an estate in which the post of Director General 
could be handed on by right of succession from one representative of the West 
to another, . Clearly the violation of the principle of equitable geographical 
distribution did not disturb the Western countries. In four years they had 
held not only the post of Director General but also three of the four posts 
of Deputy Director General, At the present time the United States was laying 
claim to one of those three posts, that recently vacated by Mr. Jolles of 
Switzerland, It thus intended to have a Deputy Director General who would 
fill the role of American prompter of Mr. Eklund^ leaving the Afro-Asian 
countries still unrepresented in the higher ranks of the Agency. 

GC(V)/OR.56 
page 7 


24. In the MoKinney report to the United States Joint Committee on Atomic 
Energy it was stated that the International Atomic Energy Agency had been 
established not only on the initiative hut also with the active participation 
of the United States and that the United States had also taken full responsibility 
in the eyes of world public opinion for retaining a leading role in the 
Agency, having insisted on the appointment of an American national as the 
first Director General and on the acceptance of policies and a program drawn 
up by the United States. 
25. It could be asked by what right the United States had claimed to reserve 
for itself the leadership in the affairs of the Agency. It had all the loss 
right to do so at the present time, when groat changes had taken place in the 
world. The number of independent States had been increased by the countries 
which had thrown off the yoke of colonialism in Asia and Africa. Their role 
in the international arena had grown greatly, but because of outworn customs 
they were not yet being allowed to take their rightful place in international 
life. The idoa that the Afro-Asian countries were not able to provide 
suitable candidates for the post of Director General was a dolusionj it led 
logically to a racialist theory of the superiority of some peoples over others. 
26. Most of those present knew well that the Soviet Union, which had built 
an atomic ice-breaker,' powerful particle accelerators and nuclear fusion 
devices, and which had launched space ships and sent its people into space, 
could find experts who had 'all the necessary equalities for directing the 
Agency. Such exports were also to be found among the scientists of other 
socialist countries. The proper and reasonable course would bo that a 
single administrator, i.e. the Director General, should be replaced by a 
collective executive- organ consisting., to an equal degree and with equal 
rights, of representatives of the three, basic groups of countries. The 
acceptance of that principle would, mark .the end of the supremacy in international 
organizations of the United States and their allies in military blocs. 
27• At the time of the establishment of the Agency, the candidature of the 
well-known Swedish scientist, Mr.. Brynielsson, had been proposed for the post 
of Director General, It had been supported by the Soviet Union, France, 
India and the United States, but at the last moment the United States had 
gone back on the agreement and had put forward another candidate, Mr. Cole, a 



GC(V)/OR.56 
page 8 


United States national. Mr4 Cole was an administrator and a lawyer by-
training. Four years later they were being told that in the position of 
Director General there should he not an administrator hut a scientist, who was, 
incidentally, quite unfitted to have the direction of the Agency. It was 
desirable that the Director General should bo a scientist but it was not 
essential, and at the present time it appeared to be difficult' to agree upon 
a candidate from the ranks of the scientists. 


28. It might have boon possible to agree-to a candidate who was not a 
scientist but who possessed the qualities of a good organizer and administrator. 
29. For four years the Agency had been led by an administrator. No delegate 
had over said in the general debate that the work of the Agency would, have 
been more productive if the Director General had been a scientist instead of 
an administrator. The thesis that at the present time the Agency needed to 
bo led by a scientist was being put forward not as a matter of principle but 
as one of expediency. It was being put forward in order to place the-Afro-
Asian countries in a difficult position and prevent them from aspiring to 
leadership. For the same reasons it was being suggested that Mr. Eklund was 
an eminent scientist. Nobody was denying that, but as far as was known he 
had worked in a highly restricted field of physics, which was of very little 
interest for the Agency's activities. . One could rightly ask by what 
outstanding r'osoarch Mr. Eklund had enriched science or what largo-scale 
facility- connected with the use of atomic energy had been constructed under 
his direction. 
30. The Soviet delegation could not agree that -Mr. Eklund had played a 
particularly important part in the organization of the Second Geneva Conference, 
That conference had been organized by the United Nations Scientific Advisory 
Committee, comprising scientists from seven countries, including the wellknown 
French scientist, Professor Porrin. 
31. Until recently, it had seemed to his delegation that Mr. Eklund realized 
that his work would bo very difficult-' if ho obtained the post of Director 
General only through the Western Powers' voting machine and without universal 
support. The Swedish newspaper "Stockholms Tidningen", dated 7 July 1961? 
had written that, before the vote was taken, Mr. Eklund had indicated that he 
would accept the appointment of Director General only on condition ikhat he 
was elected unanimously by the Agency's Board of Governors. 

GC(V)/OR.56 
page 9 


32. When he had boon in Moscow, Mr. Eklund had stated to him (Mr. Emelyanov) 
that ho would accept the post only if his candidature were supported both by 
the .United States and the'USSR. It was now clear that Mr. Eklund had in no 
way obtained general support. That being so, how was one to interpret his 
words when, nevertheless, he had accepted the nomination as Director General? 
33. The effectiveness and success of any candidate for the post would depend 
on the support and co-oporation he received from all Members of the Agency. 
But' Mr. Eklund was not concerned with that, he was only waiting for the moment 
when the voting machine wont into action, in order to take up the post. 
34• Ho wished to read from a letter which a compatriot of Mr. Eklund had sent 
him from Sweden. The letter stated that Mr. Eklund had been accused of' handing 
over a Swedish atomic invention to a British national who had formerly worked 
at Harwell, and of wrongly dismissing the inventor himself. The subsequent 
investigation of the matter had been carried out by the polioe in secret. 
However, about a year later, so the letter concluded, it had been .made known 
that it had been decided not to prosecute Mr. Eklund. 


35. The above considerations proved that it was impossible to entrust the 
direction of ;the Agency to Mr. Eklund. All honest scientists who had striven 
to build up an international organization to promote co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy would accept.with regret a decision to appoint 
Mr. Eklund to the post of Director General. That would be a further obstacle 
to the development of scientific relations. 
36, The Soviet Union had previously displayed great understanding'and 


eagerness to co-operate in accepting a candidate from the United States, 
although it had found it difficult to do so, and it had always supported 
Mr. Colo in the performance of his duties as Direotor General. It would bo 


commendable if the Western Powers now showed the same understanding and 


eagerness to co-operate by accepting a candidate from the Afro-Asian countries. 


37• When the question had been before the Board, the Soviet delegation had 
supported the candidature of Mr. Sudjarwo. In doing so it had taken into 
account Mr. Sudjarwo's great desire to further-the aims of the Agency and the 
fact that he was well acquainted with the Agency's history and also with 
the needs of the less-developed countries,- The Soviet position remained 



GC(V)/OR.56 
page 10 


unchanged. Both the losss-developed countries and the countries in the socialist 
camp were primarily interested in taking advantage of contemporary scientific 
and technical achievements in order to promote the economic development and 
prosperity of peoples. They wished to make use of all the achievements of 
science in the interests of peace and progress, and it was easier for them 
to determine what trends should be followed and what priorities observed. 
The representatives of the industrialized countries should share their 
knowledge and experience3 that would be the most reasonable solution. 


38. If the nomination already proposed was not acceptable, his delegation 
would propose that there should be further consultation with a view to 
finding another candidate from those countries. In the existing circumstances, 
his delegation considered that the only possible solution was to postpone 
discussion of the question and continue consultations with a view to finding 
an agreed candidate rather than one who had been imposed. 
39• His delegation supported the eleven-Power draft resolution and was 
prepared to vote for it. 


40. Mr. GQLDS.CHIflJT (France) said that his delegation opposed the 
eleven-Power draft resolution because continuation of the discussion could 
only be harmful to the Agency. Periods of uncertainty were bad for work, 
they led to backstairs politics and in the present case had even led to 
production of a defamatory letter which had nothing to do with the business 
of the Conference, and the authenticity of which could not possibly be 
verified in time. It would be in no one's interest to extend the delay. 
41. The delegations which had supported Mr. Sklund's nomination had been 
criticized for their failure to hold sufficiently full negotiations with other 
delegations. In that connection, .ho recalled that after the preceding session 
of the Conference the Indonesian delegation had put forward Mr. Sudjarwo for 
the post of Director General. Some of the countries that wore now 
complaining bitterly about the lack of unanimity over the appointment had 
then promised their support for Mr. Sudjarwo without consulting either the 
other atomic Powers or certain countries of Africa and Asia which would have 
preferred.a candidate who had been closely associated with the atomic energy 
commission of his own country. 

GC(V)/OR.56. 
page 11 


42. It should be recalled that progress in atomic energy depended on teamwork, 
and a technical director in charge of research rarely had the time to undertake 
laboratory vrork himself, as all technicians engaged in administration 
knew only too well. Naturally that was the case of Mr- Eklund. However, 
Sweden, like the other Scandinavian countries, had offered fellowships to 
many applicants from less-developed countries, so that Mr. Sklund was well 
acquainted with their problems. 
43. T?o one need be surprised that a large majority in the' Board had voted for 
a man with so distinguished a record, and who was also a national of a country 
whose achievement lay between that of the Great Powers and of the developing 
countries. In those circumstances, Mr. Eklund was in an excellent position 
to serve and understand all Member States, regardless of their degree of 
development in the nuclear energy field. 
44- In spring 1961 he had consulted some of his colleagues on the choice of 
Mr. Eklund for the post of Director General. Then, as now, he had heard only 
favorable comments. But some of them had not concealed the fact that their 
Governments had previously promised to support Mr. Sudjarwo. Consequently 
'Mr. Sklund had always known that he would not have the support of all Member 
States, including one of the most advanced atomic Powers, He had therefore 
taken his decision in full knowledge of the facts, knowing the high personal 
esteem in which all delegations held him. 


45- ^or the political reasons just described, Mr. Sklund could not have the 
unanimous support of all countries, and in particular that of the Soviet 
Union. But while the political climate could change rapidly - sometimes for 
the better - talent always remained. Disagreements arising in the Board from 
lack of unanimity over Mr. Tlklund's appointment were hardly likely to- interfere 
with his work more than similar disagreements had done in respect of 
Mr. Coles for, in spite of the latter's unanimous election, there had been 
disagreements in his case also. In 1958 it ^a(i been the delegate of India 
who had proposed that Mr. Eklund should be elected Secretary-General of the 
second Geneva Conference, and the United Nations Scientific Adivsory Committee 
had unanimously adopted the suggestion. Mr. Ii>klund' s deputies at that 
conference, from Western and socialist countries respectively, had always 
praised his work, and a parallel task awaited him in the Agency. 


GC(V)/OR,56 
page 12 


46, Franco deeply regretted the disagreement which had arisen ovor the 
appointment of a man whom many delegates had never met. He felt sure that ' 
thoy would soon learn to value him if, as he hoped, common sense finally 
prevailed. 


47 • Mr. DIMITRIU (Rorrania) expressed his warm support for the eleven-
Power draft resolution, and drew attention to the seriousness of the present 
problem and the heavy rosponsihility of both Board and Conference. All Member 
States had agreed that, in order to develop its activities, the Agency 
required certain positive conditions, including a Director General who could 
mobilize all efforts 'and all States in a joint effort to achieve the Agency's 
objectives. One of the most important of those objectives was the provision 
of effective assistance to the loss-developed countries. Should the 
universal character of "Che Agency disappear, it would become the preserve of 
a small group of States pursuing their own interests only; in other words, 
a co-operative effort on, behalf of the less-dovolopod countries would be 
impossible. Unfortunately, the principle of universality had boon abandoned 
by the Western Powers on the grounds that no suitable candidate for the post 
of Director General could bo found in the whole vast geographical %,rea of 
Asia and Africa. On those false promises, thoy had neglected to hold thorough 
consultations with the Afro-Asian countries. For those reasons, the Romanian 
delegation could not accept the candidate imposed by the West, and therefore 
supported the eleven-Power draft resolution. 


48. Mr. NAKICEWOVIC (Yugoslavia) said that during the four years of 
the Agency's existence his Government had offered its fullest support and 
co-operation, and was therefore highly dissatisfied at the difficulties that 
had arisen over the appointment of a now Director General. Yugoslavia 
disapproved of the failure to hold full negotiations earlier in the year, 
which had led to disagreement in the Board and finally to the present dispute 
at the Conference, The conflict threatened the Agency's whole future. 
Believing that the matter should be settled by general agreement, his 
Government had sponsored the eleven-Power draft, resolution which v/ould, he 
trusted, load to a solution. Yugoslavia would not indulge in any 
recriminations concerning the past; its sole desire was to bridge the present 
gap, and iron out the difficulties which had arisen between the various 
groups of countries

GC(V)/OR.56 
pago 13 


49• In arriving at a general solution, he believed that throe main points 
should bo 'takon into consideration. First, the principle of rotation should 
bo interpreted in a comprehensive and consistent manner. Secondly, the 
appointment of the Director General should he preceded by wide consultations, 
which should include countries not represented on the Board, as the latter's 
present composition did not conform to the principle of oq_uitablo geographical 
distribution. Thirdly, wide agreement on the candidate was essential. The 
Agency could not work smeethly if the Director General was opposed by a 
large number of Member States. He therefore recommended adoption of the 
cloven-Power draft resolution. 


50. Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgari a) believed that the appointment of the Director 
General was one of the most important questions facing the Conference5 the 
incumbent of the post was responsible for carrying out the Agency's entire 
policy and all its concrete activities. The appointment should therefore be 
unanimous, i.e. approved by all throe groups existing in the world today the 
Western countries, the socialist countries and the Afro-Asian group, A 
unanimous decision would be the best guarantee that the Director General 
would foel himself under a moral obligation to remain objective and independent 
in all his actions. Unanimity was necessary in an organization that 
included 76 Member States, with varied political and social structures, so 
that there would be no differences over its approach to basic problems. In 
addition, such unanimity would underline the spirit of co-operation essential 
to the Agency. He regretted that agreement had not been reached, but 
recalled that despite difficulties in 1957s a unanimous decision had been 
taken on the appointment of the present Director Gene ral^/. 
51. During the Board's discussions, the socialist countries and the Afro-
Asian group had supported a candidate from the Afro-Asian area, which would 
bo one of the Agency's most important areas of activity, Howevor, the Western 
countries had sponsored and imposed Mr. Eklund instead. It was no criticism 
of Mr. Eklund personally to state that delegates know no more than that he 
was a Swedish scientist and had boon Secretary-General of the second Geneva 
Conference. Those facts had boon stressed by his sponsors, who had claimed 
them to be the sole requirements for the post of Director General. 
4/ GC,l(S)/0H,6, paragraph 9. 



GC(V)/OR,56 
page 14 


52, The Bulgarian delegation considered that in the interests of equality the 
post should not he occupied once again by a Western candidate. Mr. Colo was 
a representative of the United States, and it could well ho argued that ho 
should ho replaced by a representative of the Soviet Union. Although a 
suitable candidate could have been found in the Soviet Union, no such proposal 
had been made, .as the socialist countries believed that changes in .international 
life made it essential to appoint a candidate from the developing 
countries in order to ensure that assistance was administered in a way 
compatible with their dignity and national sovereignty. He therefore 
supported the candidate from the Afro-Asian group. That person had been 


'rejected by the West, although, during unofficial conversations, the view had 
boon advanced that the nomination of a scientist from the Afro-Asian group 
might have been acceptable. 


53. That showed, so ho believed, that the procedure followed by the Board had 
been wrong. The Board should first have considered whether it wanted a 
scientist or a statesman, and then decided from what group of countries ho 
should come. Only afterwards should the group concerned have been asked to 
propose a candidate. Had that boon done, a unanimous decision could have 
been reached. 
54* , In fact, the appointment of Mr. Bklund had not been a co-operative 
decision, but a diktat imposed by the United States on the other two groups. 
The appointment did not reflect the real world situation, and did not satisfy 
Member States. It was contrary to the interests of the Agency, to its 
future development, even to its very existence. In an effort to right that 
deplorable situation, a group of Afro-Asian countries had presented the 
eleven-Power draft resolution, which Bulgaria fully supportod. 


55, Mr. BRYHIIDLS30H (Sweden) said that he felt it necessary to reply 
to only one of the points made by the Soviet delegate concerning Mr. Eklunds 
the letter alleging that Mr. Eklund had been accused of transmitting atomic 
secrets to another country. Ho could state that the matter had boon' 
thoroughly investigated by the Swedish legal authorities and the charge had 
been found to bo utterly groundless. 


56. He reiterated his delegation's support for Mr. Eklund1s nomination. 

GO(V)/OR',56 
page 15 


57. Mr. BHAEHA (India) said that his delegation had spared no effort to 
avert the deplorable situation which had arisen but the inflexible attitude 
adopted by Mr. Eklund's supporters apparently made it impossible to find a 
via media or even to roach agreement on postponing a decision. 
58. Ee had a high regard for Mr. Eklund's qualifications but it was patently 
clear that a Director General of the Agency must enjoy the confidence of the 
atomically most advanced countries^ otherwise effective co-operation within 
the Agency would become impossible. The sponsors of the eleven-Power draft 
resolution; representing countries from different parts of the world, had been 
prompted to submit their proposal because of the strong opposition to 
Mr. Eklund's candidature. 
59• The contention that adequate consultations had taken place prior to the 
Board's decision was not borne out by the facts, nor had there been a proper 
discussion of the qualifications that candidates for the post ought to possessas 
would be the normal procedure at the national level for selecting, say, a 
vice-chancellor of a university. His own delegation had been consistently of 
the opinion that it was desirable for the Director General to be a scientist, 
but that was far from being the solo requisite and there might bo others of 
varying importance. 


60, He had already suggested in the general debate that it would be 
appropriate for the next Director General to come from a country where 
economic and social conditions wore different from those found in the United 
Statos,2/ but at that juncture had expressed no views as to whether he should 
be chosen from Asia, Africa or Latin America, 


61. When the matter had been discussed informally by members of the Scientific 
Advisory Committee, Mr. Smolyanov had made it plain that Mr. Bklund would not 
be acceptable to the Soviet Union, In the Board, the Governor from India had 
voted for the candidate from Indonesia and, because there wore no objections 
on personal grounds to Mr. Eklund, had abstained from the vote on the latter1s 
nomination. In reply to a letter from Mr. Eklund, he (Mr. Bhabha) had felt 
obliged as a friend 'to tell Mr. Eklund of what had transpired and the situation 
as ho saw it, and to inform him that India would be unable to support him, 
because of the strong opposition by certain important countries and in the 
interest of the smeeth working of the Agency. 
y GC(V)/OR,55, paragraph 31. 



GC(V)/0K.56 
page 1.6 


62. The question at issue was not Mr. Tflclund's suitability or the fact that 
ho came from Sweden, with which India had the most friendly relations, but that 
agreement must he reached on a candidate acceptable to both sides. For that 
reason ho strongly urged the Conference to adopt the eleven-Power draft 
resolution so that the nomination might be reconsidered by the Board, 
63. Mr. PETRZEhKA (Czechoslovakia) said that the Czechoslovak delegation 
was opposed to Mr. THklund's nomination, and doubted whether his supporters 
could ignore the strong opposition it had provoked if they wished the Agoncy 
to continue as a truly international organization and not one under the 
complete control of the United States and its allies. The present complications 
could have been avoided if the Western Powers, which were solely responsible 
for them, had made the slightest attempt to co-oporato with the other groups 
of States. If the United States wore genuinely anxious to foster the kind of 
international co-operation for which the Agency had been created, it ought 
to give full consideration to the views of individual countries as well as to 
those of groups and recognize the changes that had taken place during the 
past few years with the emergence of new sovereign States. Asian and African 
countries wore no longer under colonial domination and the many now States 
had every right to just representation in the Secretariat. 
64. The Agency would succeed in fulfilling its tasks only if it wore to 
narrow the gap between the advanced and the developing countries, and no 
other Director General would be as well fitted to understand t-he developing 
countries' needs as would one of their own nationals. 
65. The assertion that Mr. Bklund was a candidate from a non-alignod country 
had been disproved by the discussion, from which it was clear that he was a 
United States candidate, nor were his scientific qualifications a decisive 
factor, since there wore many men of similar caliber in other countries. 
Again, his work as Secretary-General at the second Geneva Conference had 
been of a specialized nature and could hardly bo advanced as a reason for 
appointing him. 
66. The appointment of a man from one of the scientifically advanced countries 
would be in direct conflict with the principle of equitable geographical 
distribution, particularly in view of the fact that it was proposed to 

GC(V)/OE,56 
pago 17 


appoint a United States national as one of the Deputy Directors General;, 


which would result in all but one of the most senior posts in the Secretariat 


being hold by men from Western countries. 


67. The Board's proposed nomination quite overlooked the claims of the 
loss-developed countries? in particular the Afro-Asian group, and his 
delegation was emphatically opposed to further strengthening the position 
of Y/estern countries at the expense of the loss advanced. 
68* The Western Powers, particularly the Unitud States, had adopted an 


extraordinary attitude. They had strongly opposed the matter being 


discussed by the Board in September instead of June, which would have given 


enough time for negotiation and thus for finding a reasonable solution. 


Instead, at the instigation, of those countries, an issue of such vital 


importance had been decided by the Board at its June meetings in one day, 


The Agoncy should not countenance violation of the principle followed in the 

United Nations that no one group of States must enforce its will at the 


expense of others. 


69. Declaring his support for the eleven-Power draft resolution, he said 
that his delegation would oppose any candidate not representing the less 
advanced countries. The Governor from Czechoslovakia had already criticized 
the inadequate representation of the Afro-Asian group in the Board, and the 
Czechoslovak delegation could certainly not countenance the same thing in 
the Secretariat. 
70, Mr. EL AMABI (Tunisia) observed, in connection with the statement 


that a large majority in the Board had favored a Western candidate, that 
the privileged position enjoyed by that majority was due to the provisions 


of the Statute. The criteria which had inspired those provisions had now 
altered radically and, though the special claims of the technologically 
advanced countries must b; recognized, there was no longer any justification 
for their permanently wielding an overriding authority. It was now 
universally recognized in international bodies that there existed three main 
groups of countries, agreement between which was necessary on all major issues. 



GC(V)/OR.56 
page 18 


71. The Agency's first Director Goncra! had corno from the Wostorn group and 
it was therefore right for the next Director General to come from one of 
the other two groups. The Eastern group had not put forward a candidate-, and 
it was therefore for the uncommitted countries to do so. In order to honor 
the principle of equitable geographical distribution as laid down in the 
Statute, the Director General, his deputies and indeed the Secretariat 
should be chosen in rotation from among the three groups. 
72. The Director General of only one specialized agency., the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, came from a developing 
country. It was fortunate that the Argentine Government had not itself 
followed the advice of its delegate to developing countries that they keep 
their highly qualified scientists at home. Such a practice would have been 
prejudicial to the quality of the Argentine delegation at the present 
Conference and, if generally adopted, would place an excessive burden on the 
more advanced countries. 
73* Mr. Eklund's personal qualifications wore not in doubt, and he had 
shown proof of great scruple in stating to the press that ho would need wide 
support. It was regrettable that for political reasons his name had been 
put forward without first making certain of the support of all three groups 
of countries, support which was essential if the Agency's work was not to 
be paralyzed. It went without saying that a candidate from the Eastern 
group who was unacceptable to the West and to the developing countries 
would have had no more chance of success. 


The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(V)/OR.57 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

5 December 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 3 October 1961, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
22 Appointment of the Director General 
(continued from the 56th meeting) 1-99 

* GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(v)/INF/l42/Rev.3. 


61-5908 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page 2 


APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL-(GC(V)/165, 173, 174? 176) (continued 
from the 56th meeting) 


1. Mr. BORISEvICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
the Agency was faced with a crucial choices either the spirit of co-operation 
and mutual understanding would triumph and the post of Director General would 
by occupied by a candidate acceptable in practice to all Member States, or 
else, under pressure from the United States and other Western Powers? a candidate 
approved by those Powers alone would be surreptitiously pushed through 
to fill that high office. The latter eventuality would be very damaging to 
the Agency and would seriously hinder its work. 
2. The delegates of certain countries had been at pains to prove that, in 
choosing a Director General? their only consideration was the personal qualifications 
of the candidate. Was it then really true that the United States 
had been the only country in the world where a suitable candidate could be 
found to be the first Director General of the Agency? It was common knowledge 
that the United States had made its support of the Agency contingent on a .
.. . 
United States national being Director General? it had not even hesitated to 
violate the arrangement for choosing another candidate concluded with the 
majority of the countries concerned. In order to maintain the spirit of cooperation 
in an organization that had just been set up, the delegations of 
many countries which did not share the United States view had not officially 
opposed the appointment of a candidate of the Western Powers. Now those same 
Powers were again imposing a candidate of their choice, yet expressed surprise 
that many Member States protested against that shameful procedure and 
accused those opposing them of introducing political arguments into the Agency's 
discussions. 
3. He asked the Western Powers what reasons had prompted the choice of the 
first Director General and were now prompting the choice of the second, if not 
political reasons which they were attempting to disguise behind talk about the 
personal qualifications of the candidate. 
4. The Byelorussian delegation could not agree with the delegates of the 
United States, France and certain other countries that Mr. Eklund's qualifications 
made him virtually the only possible candidate for the post of 
Director General as well as a scientist of outstanding ability. Without underestimating 
Mr. Eklund's qualities as a scientist'-" theTcontribution of every 
scientist to the development of nuclear science was valuable, whatever its 

GC(V)/OE.57 
page 3 


importance - lie appealed to delegates not to offend the national honor and 
sentiments of a large number of scientists from different countries. He 
agreed with those delegates who had said that the majority of States Members 
of the Agency could put forward a worthy candidate for the post of Director 
General. 


5. He then drew the attention of delegates to the following sentence from 
Mr. Eklund's telegram accepting his appointment as Director General? "I have 
noted that the decision of the Board of Governors was broadly supported and 
that both industrialized nations and developing countries concurred in,the 
decision". It was well known that many countries, including both industrialized 
and developing countries, had vigorously opposed his candidacy in the 
Board, and Mr. Eklund had been fully informed on the matter. Many countries 
would find it difficult to collaborate in the Agency with a Director General 
who had such an idea of broad support. 
6. He asked delegates to work out a solution which would satisfy all States 
Members of the Agency without exception. 
7. Article III.B.3 of the Statute, which defined the Agency's functions, 
specified that it should allocate its resources bearing in mind the special 
needs of the underdeveloped areas of the world". His delegation considered 
that only a representative of the Afro-Asian countries could fully understand 
every aspect of the needs of the developing countries and perform the duties 
of Director General in conformity with the principal objective of the Agency. 
8. For the reasons he had explained, the Byelorussian delegation again emphatically 
protested against the approval of the appointment of Mr. Eklund as 
Director General of the Agency. It supported the eleven-Power draft resolution 
(GC(V)/176), for which it would vote. 
9. Mr. WERSHOF (Canada) said that Canada, as one of the five countries 
most advanced in the technology of atomic energy, could not hold aloof from 
a question of such importance as the appointment of the Director General. 
10. The Board had appointed Mr. Eklund to the post of Director General in 
June. In accordance with Article VII of the Statute, that appointment would 
take effect only after it had been approved by the Conference. The Board had 
taken its decision by 17 votes to 3, with 3 abstentions? and the 17 countries 
which had voted in favor belonged to six of the eight geographical areas 
mentioned in the Statute. 

GC(V)/OR.5T 
page 4 


11. Some delegates had suggested that the Board should have postponed its 
decision till September! the Canadian Government considered that it had been 
essential for the Board to take a decision in June, in order to give Members 
of the Agency sufficient advance notice before they were called upon in the 
Conference to consider the appointment made by the Board. 
12. During the discussion, various arguments had been advanced against the 
appointment made. It had been said that the choice ought to fall on a 
representative of an Afro-Asian country, a less-developed country or, lastly, 
a country that was uncommitted from the military or political point of view. 
The delegate of the Soviet Union had advanced all three arguments. The 
Canadian Government, for its part, agreed that an increasing number of key 
positions in organizations of the United Nations family should be given to 
qualified persons recruited from Afro-Asian countries, especially recently 
established States. Canada had given many proofs of its goodwill with regard 
to the new countries. Ho was unable to agree, however, that the principle of 
giving preference to nationals of less-developed countries applied without 
qualification in the present case. Persons with all the qualities required 
for performing the duties of Director General could certainly be found in 
Afro-Asian countries, and in Latin America, and his delegation would have been 
glad to support such a candidate if one had been put forward5 but that had 
not been the case. His delegation also rejected the argument that since the 
first Director General had been a United States national, his successor must 
necessarily be from a loss-developed country. 


13. The Byelorussian delegate had asked what were the motives of the Western 
Powers. For its part, Canada was guided only by the desire to see the best 
qualified candidate appointed, and considered the Director General's country 
of origin to be a subsidiary question. After asking the advice .of Canadian 
scientists, in particular Dr. Lewis, his delegation had come to the conclusion 
that'Mr. Eklund fulfilled the required conditions. No one but the delegate 
of the Soviet Union had made any personal criticism of Mr. Eklund. The 
Canadian delegation did not think that the Director General must necessarily 
be a scientist. Four years previously it had supported the candidature- of the 
first Director General, who was not a scientist. It seemed, however, that it 
would now be to the Agency's advantage to have a scientist at its head, since 
that would make it easier to obtain the support of scientific circles throughout 
the world. 



GC(V)/OE.57 
page 5 


14. The director of an international organization could not be regarded as 
the representative of a government or of a political bloc. Mr. Eklund was 
a scientist who was also an administrator, and in addition he had had wide 
experience of international co-operation, since he had acted as Secretary to 
the second United Nations Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
at Geneva in 1958. To suggest that he would be an instrument in the hands of 
certain organizations or certain Powers was an absurd accusation without any 
foundation, 
15. The Canadian delegation categorically rejected the argument of the Soviet 
delegate that the Board's decision had not been preceded by adequate consultations-^. 
The difficulty had been that a first candidate, from an Asian 
country, had been officially put forward in November 1960. At the beginning 
of 1961, before the Government of the United States or any other government 
had approached Mr. Eklund, it had been known that the Soviet Union, and some 
time later India, had decided to support Mr. Sudjarwo, without consulting 
other governments. The Canadian and other Governments had subsequently come 
to the conclusion that the candidate in question did not fulfill all the 
conditions required for the post of Director General and had therefore sought 
another candidate. In February and March 1961 conversations had taken place 
between different members of the Board, but they had been inconclusive. It 
could not well have been otherwise, when two of the most important members 
had taken the premature decision to support a candidate of their own choice. 


16. The Canadian Government wished to collaborate with the Soviet Union, but 
would not go so far as to agree to what it considered an irrational veto of 
a qualified candidate solely because he came from a European country which had 
attained a high degree of development. 
17. As to the conversation which was said to have taken place between 
Mr. Emelyanov and Mr. Eklund, without wishing to cast any doubt on 
Mr. Eraalyanov's good faith, he thought there must have been some misunderstanding,' 
and that probably Mr. Eklund had merely said, as he•had said elsewhere, 
that he would not accept the post of Director General unless he had 
the support of a largo number of countries. It seemed that that condition had 
been met and that Mr. Eklund had found the support he had wished to obtain in 
large areas of the world. 
l/ GC(V)/OR.56, paragraphs 17-18. 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page 6 


18. The eleven-Power draft resolution? in spite of all the courtesy with 
which its authors had submitted it, contained a rejection of Mr. Eklund's 
appointment. If it was adopted, the Conference would be reversing the 
decision of the Board. The Canadian Government approved the Board's decision 
and would therefore vote against the draft resolution. 
19. Mr. MELLEK-COWRAD (Poland) said that the views of the socialist 
countries on the composition of the secretariats of international organizations 
were known to all. With regard to the Agency, the representatives of the 
socialist countries on the Board had shown moderation and a spirit of conciliation 
which the Western Powers had refused to recognize. 
20. The post of Director General had been occupied for four years by a representative 
of the Western countries. It was now the turn of a representative 
of the socialist countries. Nevertheless, since the Agency should first of 
all serve the.interests of the underdeveloped countries so as to enable them 
to catch up as soon as possible, the socialist countries considered that the 
new Director General ought to be a national of one of those countries5 their 
own turn would come later. Moreover, the appointment of such a candidate 
would show that the underdeveloped countries wore at last playing the prominent 
part on the international scene which was their due. 
21. The Polish delegation had a right to hope that that argument would find 
favor with the Western countries, whose representatives wore in the habit of 
making declarations of friendship toward the underdeveloped countries. It 
had a further reason for hoping that its point of view would be unanimously 
approved? four years previously, when Mr. Brynielssen's candidature had'met 
with general agreement, the United States delegation had changed its mind and 
presented its own candidate. The Polish delegation had given way on that 
occasion, as it wished the Director General's appointment to be decided 
unanimously. It had considered then, as it did now, that if the Director 
General was not appointed unanimously, the Agency was bound to disintegrate. 
Many of the delegates present could testify that there was no example of an 
international organization whose Director General had not been unanimously 
appointed by all its members. 
22. At the June meetings of the Board, the Governor from Poland had stated, 
with regard to Mr. Eklund's candidature, that his -delegation had nothing 
against Mr. Eklund, that Poland maintained good relations with Sweden and that 

GC(V)/OR.57 
page 7 


its opposition was a question of principle. The. Polish delegation must admit 
that it had changed its opinion regarding Mr. Eklund. The fact that he had 
taken no notice of the opinions expressed about him made it impossible to 
retain confidence in him. It might well be wondered what the situation in 
the Agency v/ould be if, after all that had been said, Mr. Eklund was 
appointed Director General. 


23. At the Juno meetings of the Board, the Polish delegation had made 
numerous attempts to reach a compromise and had asked that other candidates 
should bo put up$ but no other name had been submitted. Under those conditions, 
the Board had been practically confronted with an ultimatum. The 
supporters of Mr. Eklund, having exhausted their arguments, had then said 
that it was too late to propose other candidates. 
24. Referring to the eleven-Power draft resolution deferring the appointment 
of the Director General, he said that as far as his delegation could see it 
was the only way to reach a decision which could obtain the unanimous support 
that was essential. His delegation would support the draft resolution without 
reservation and regretted that those who opposed it had been so off-hand in 
their treatment of a draft resolution submittod by eleven countries which 
were deeply interested in the Agency. 
25. Judging by the tone of the French delegate's statement-' , it seemed that 
France did not admit the possibility of finding a candidate in another country. 
However, there was no shortage of outstanding scientists in the rest of the 
world, as was shown ~bj the presence of Professor Bhabha, the delegate of 
India. It was known that the great scientists had many qualified scientific 
workers around them, so it would not be difficult to..find a candidate in that 
country. It was not a question of personalities? the real problem was the 
future of the Agency and one thing seemed certains if Mr. Eklund was appointed, 
the Agency could not fulfill the hopes placed in it by many countries. 
26. The Polish delegation was convinced that it was not too late to find a 
solution whioh would cause no embarrassment to anyone. Its wish was to continue 
to co-operate with the other delegations to the. Conference and it hoped 
that the eleven-Power draft resolution, which respected all opinions 
and was intended to provide a last-minute solution acceptable to all, would 
be supported by the majority of Members. 


2/ GC(V)/OR.50, paragraphs 51-54



GC(V)/OR.57 


page 8 


27. Mr. LEE (China) thought that during the discussion everything 
possible had been said about the qualifications of Mr. Eklund, who was 
particularly well qualified to fill the post of Director General. During 
the general debate the Chinese delegation had already stated that it supported 
his appointment. 
28. Ho did not think any of the arguments advanced against Mr. Eklund were 
justified. It had been said that the Director General should be chosen in 
turn from among nationals of countries belonging to the Western, Eastern and 
Afro-Asian blocs. But the very idea of such blocs was arbitrary and artificial. 
It might be wondered what rational motives lay behind such a demand. 
29. It had also been asserted that the successor to the present Director 
General? who was a citizen of the United States of America, should be a 
national of an underdeveloped country or, in any case, of a country whose 
economic and social conditions were different from those of North America. 
The Chinese delegation fully agreed that posts in the Secretariat should bo 
distributed equitably among the various geographical areas but that did not 
S-PPly to the post of Director General. It had been claimed that if the new 
Director General came from an advanced Western country he would not be able 
to understand conditions in the other geographical areas. But those areas 
were represented in the Secretariat by a number of high-ranking officials "who 
were fully qualified to advise the Director General on the needs of their 
respective areas. There was no basis whatever for fears on that score. 
30. Some delegates said that the appointment of the Director General should 
be decided unanimously, but they were the first to sow discord and spread 
dissension in the Agency. 
31. The delegate of the Soviet Union had spoken of violation of the Statute 
in connection with the appointment of Mr. Eklund^% but the Canadian 
delegate had cited the relevant provisions of Article VII, which made it 
quite clear that in choosing that candidate the Board had not violated the 
Statute in any way. It was rather the eleven-Power draft resolution which 
was not in conformity with the spirit of the Statute\ hence the Chinese 
delegation would vote against it. 
y GC(V)/OR.52, paragraph 774/ 
GC(V)/0E.56, paragraph 23. 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page 9 


32. Mr. ZEMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
the principles on which international co-operation between countries of 
different social structures should be based precluded giving preference to 
any one country or group of countries. The Ukrainian delegation was not 
urging that at the present stage of the Agency's activities preference 
should be given to the socialist camp, but it could not relinquish its rights 
in order to please the Western Powers. 
33. Four years previously the Ukrainian delegation had agreed to the appointment 
of Mr. Cole, a national of the United States of America, to the post of 
Director General. That had been a real concession made to the United St&tes 
and to the group of countries supporting it, because it had been necessary to 
get the Agency started without delay and any discussion on the appointment of 
the Director General would have been prejudicial to its start. Four years 
had elapsed and the States Members of the Agency were again faced with the 
same problem. 
34• The Canadian delegate's remarks suggested that ho had forgotten what 
had happened four years before. From the same platform, without troubling to 
present any arguments, the delegates of Canada and France had declared? • 
"This is what wc want, this is what we have decided and this is how we shall 
vote,". The representatives of the socialist countries and certain other 
countries had long been aware of what those gentlemen wanted and what they 
wore seuking to obtain. The only thing they did not want was true international 
co-oporation. The United States and the countries supporting it 
wished to make the 76-momber international organization their fief, but the 
peoples of the world wanted no such things they were seeking true cooperation. 


35* In the Agency, as in all other international organizations, there were 
representatives of three well-defined groups of countries5 the socialist 
countries, the Western countries and the uncommitted countries. There was 
no legal reason why the work of the Agency should be directed by representatives 
of one and the same group of countries for eight years. If the .Canadian 
delegate attached no importance to the country of origin of the future 
Director General, he should refrain from speaking and, more particularly, 
should not advocate the candidate of the Western bloc. 



GC(.V)/OR.57 


page 10 


36. In reality, the purpose of the Western Powers' diktat was to obstruct 
any co-operation in the Agency. All who favored such co-operation should 
support the appointment of a candidate from the Afro-Asian countries as 
Director General. There could he no other course if it was desired that 
due consideration should he given to the interests of that group of States, 
since it was they that were most in need of the Agency's assistance. A 
representative of those countries could evaluate the extent of their needs 
hetter than anyone olse. That was the first reason why the Ukrainian 
delegation was opposed, in principle, to the appointment of a representative 
of the Western bloc as the second Director General of the Agency. 
37. The second reason for its opposition to the appointment of Mr. Eklund 
was that in presenting his candidature the iVestern bloc had departed from 
the procedure normally followed in international organizations and had taken 
no notice of the opinion of a number of countries which had requested that 
Mr. Eklund should be invited to the meetings of the Board. That unprecedented 
attitude was contrary to the elementary rules of international co-operation. 
38. Thirdly, the Ukrainian delegation considered that Mr. Eklund was not a 
suitable person to be Director General, either on account of his administrative 
qualities or on account of his moral qualities. He had insufficient experience 
of the work of international organizations and what limited experience 
he might have acquired as Secretary-General of the second Geneva conference 
did not qualify him for carrying out the many tasks of the Agency. Moreover, 
if, in the present situation, he continued to disregard the opinion of a 
number of countries, in particular the opinion of the Soviet Union, that 
would prove his lack of high moral qualities. If Mr. Eklund were a true 
scientist, he would understand that the contemporary development of science 
called for international co-operation and was much more important than the 
salary of a Director General, and he would refuse the post. 
39. In the opinion of the Ukrainian delegation, the only reasonable 
decision likely to strengthen international co-operation in the Agency in 
the present situation was to adopt the eleven-Power draft resolution. He 
asked all participants in the Conference to show understanding and to make 
every effort to prevent the abnormal situation that had arisen in regard to 
the appointment of the Director General from paralyzing the Agency's activities 
- to quote the words of the Tunisian representative^, 
5/ GC(v)/OR.56, paragraph 73. 


GC(V)/OE.57 
page 11 


40. In conclusion? he said that if the Western Powers did not take into 
account the arguments put forward by the delegations of a large number of 
countries and if, by using the voting machine, they secured the appointment 
of Mr. Eklund as Director General, they would be responsible for the deterioration 
in relations within the Agency. 
41. _ Mr. QUANSAH (Ghana), drawing attention to the fact that he was one 
of the sponsors of the eleven-Power draft resolution, said that statements 
made during the meeting showed that the Board had recommended the appointment 
of Mr. Eklund without prior consultations between its Members. He did not 
question the qualifications of Mr. Eklund who, as a scientist and an administrator, 
would certainly be capable of performing the duties of Director 
General of the Agency if he could count on the co-operation of all Members. 
However, it appeared that one of the great atomic Powers and many other States 
were refusing him their support. Thus, an embarrassing situation had been 
created and it would be difficult to find a solution unless Mr. Eklund, as a 
gesture of conciliation, agreed to withdraw. By so doing, he would give 
proof of his disinterested attitude and would enable Member States to come 
together and agree on another candidate. 
42. Mr. RANDEPS (Norway) said he wished to speak as a scientist. He 
was sorry to see that diplomatic methods of work were raising difficulties 
that did not really exist. He had participated in the Agency's work as an 
advisor to the present Director General, whose organizing ability he had 
greatly admired. He had also acted as a panel chairman and as Governor from 
Norway. 
43° At the present stage of the Agency's work, the person needed was one 


qualified in atomic science and familiar with technical assistance questions. 
Mr. Eklund was known for his interest in assistance to underdeveloped coun


tries and he also had first-class scientific qualifications. Ho (Mr. Panders) 
saw no reason for not approving the appointment made by the Board. 


44. Since the main activity of the Agency was essentially scientific, the 
only problem was to find a man qualified in science and technology. No 
consideration of nationality should enter into the matter. It was generally 
agreed that the appointment recommended to the Conference was satisfactory 
in every respect. If some delegations thought differently, it was to be 
feared that they had a peculiar conception of the duties of an international 
civil servant, 

GC(V)/OR.57 
page 12 


45. No Swedish citizen - or for that matter Scandinavian citizen - who was 
an international civil servant would tolerate any pressure; even from his 
own country. That principle must be vigorously defended if the international 
organizations wore to be prevented from becoming a mere puppet show*, 
46. Norway would firmly oppose any text that changed the appointment 
procedure while there was a candidate of recognized competence. He was 
convinced that Mr. Eklund would bo able to prove his skill in directing the 
Agency and show his interest in the underdeveloped countries as well as in 
all the other countries of the world. 
47• Ho called on all delegates of developing countries not to weaken the 
feeling of unity to which all scientists and all citizens of the Scandinavian 
countries were so strongly attached. No one in that part of the world could 
agree that one of its scientists might become the tool of some plot by obscure 
forces, 

48. Ho asked the Conference not to make a political or diplomatic issue out 
of an extremely simple problem, the solution of which was within its reach. 
In order to extricate itself from an unfortunate situation, the Conference 
should appoint Mr. Eklund Director General and hope that a national of an 
underdeveloped country would accede to that high office in the not too 
distant future. 
49. Mr. ESCHAPZIER (Netherlands) thought that the Director General 
could be selected from any part of the world. It was certainly desirable 
for the candidature to receive unanimous support, but the rule of democratic 
procedure should be accepted and, in the event, it must be recognized that 
Mr. Eklund had been approved by a largo majority. The minority should understand 
that they must respect that rule, and it served no useful purpose whatever 
for them to attack the majority in offensive terms. 
50. Mr. Eklund had himself shown his intention of tackling the problem of 
assistance to underdeveloped countries. He was well qualified to collaborate 
with all Member States. He (Mr. Eschauzier) joined with the Norwegian 
delegate in asking the Conference to approve Mr. Eklund's appointment. 
51. Mr. HAD I (Indonesia) recalled that at the Board's meetings in 
June 1961 Indonesia, like Sweden, had been directly involved in the question 
of the appointment of a Director General. At that time, the Indonesian 

GC(V)/OR.57 
page 13 


candidate had boon warmly supported by the representatives of seven States, 


while two Governors had abstained. He wished to express his gratitude, and 


that of Mr. Sudjarwo, to those who had voted for him. 


52. Although the Indonesian candidature was no longer a factor, serious 
difficulties remained. Approval of Mr. Ekluhd's appointment by the Conference 
would depend on the votes of the Western Powers and be contrary to the wishes 
of several other countries. 
53. Since the post of Director General had been occupied by a representative 
of the West for four years, it should, in accordance with the principle of 
the equality of rights of Member States, now go to a nominee from another 
geographical area. One of the Agency's most important duties was to supply 
technical assistance to the developing countries, and ho believed he was expressing 
their views also in saying that the new Director General should come 
from that group for the simple reason that he would have a clearer idea of the 
needs of countries which resembled his own. 
54• Some representatives of the Great Powers had complained that there had 


not been enough consultation with a view to selecting a candidate acceptable 


to all Member States. It was to avoid further deterioration of the situation 


that eleven African and Asian countries, including Indonesia, had submitted 


a draft resolution which suggested the only solution possible to a delicate 


problem which was of the greatest importance for the Agency's future. 


55. Mr. EMBLYA1TOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), replying to 
the Canadian delegate, said it was well known that Mr. Wershof endeavored by 
every possible means to obstruct collaboration and complicate the Agency's 
work, collaboration and peace being words which were equally abhorrent to him. 
When, in the Board, some time previously, speaking as Governor from the Soviet 
Union, ho had pronounced the word "peace", Mr. Afershof had immediately requested 
that he be ruled out of order. That had aroused the indignation of all 
Governors, and the meeting had had to be suspended. Mr. Wershof had been 
obliged to withdraw his revealing and unprecedented request. 
56. It was a matter of common knowledge that, at the fourth session of the 
Conference, Mr. .-fcrshof had tried to prevent the delegate of India from speaking 
- and had earned a well-merited reprimand. Mr. Wershof did not know what 
Mr. Sklund had in fact said but was trying hard to discredit the Soviet 
representative. 



GC(V)/OR.57 


page 14 


57. Mr. Bklund had stated that ho could not accept the post of Director 
General unless he had the support of both the United States and the Soviet 
Union. When the Governor from Poland had proposed that the Board invite 
Mr. Eklund to attend its meeting, Mr. Wershof had said that that would not 
be necessary. Why? 
58. As the Tunisian delegate had quite rightly pointed out, representatives 
of the Western countries had appropriated all the leading posts in all 
United Nations organizations, e.g. from its foundation to date, the 
International Labour Organisation had been directed by a United States 
national? the United Nations Educational,.Scientific and Cultural Organization 
had had a United States national as Director General from 1948 to 195^s and 
now had an Italian5 the Pood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
had had as its head a United Kingdom national from 1945 "to 1948 and a United 
States national from 1948 to 195&, the International Civil Aviation 
Organization had boon headed by a Canadian and by a Swede? the International 
Telecommunication Union had as its head a United States national} and so had 
the Agency. 


59• That could not be considered right. The domination of a single group 


of States in an international organization was prejudicial to the very principle 


of international collaboration and contrary to the aims of the organizations 
themselves. That policy operated within the Agency, and the Western countries 
were-not prepared even to discuss any alteration in what was an intolerable 


situation. That state of affairs could not be allowed to continue* 


60. The discussion had shown that all the Afro-Asian countries which were 
not yet Members of the Agency wore opposed to Mr. Eklund's candidature. Only 
the isolated voice of the representative of Chiang Kai-shek had been heard in 
its favor, but everyone knew that he represented nobody. 
61. The socialist countries were also unanimously opposed to the candidature 
which it was sought to impose on the Agency. 
62. What forces supported Mr. Eklund? The answer was very clear. He was 
the candidate, not of all the Member States, but of a single group, viz. the 
countries of the West. 

GC(V)/OR.57 
page 15 


63. In insisting on Mr. Eklund, the Western countries were assuming a great 
responsibility insofar as the Agency's future was concerned. The Tunisian 
delegate had rightly said that if the appointment of the future Director 
General was imposed, the Agency's activities would he paralyzed in consequence. 
To prevent that happening, collaboration and not dictation was 
wanted. The eleven-Power draft resolution pointed the way to such collaboration. 
64. Mr. MAHMOUD (United Arab Republic) regretted not being able to 
support the candidature of a man who was a scientist and the citizen of a 
friendly country, but whose nomination had taken place without prior consultations 
with a view to obtaining the agreement of the various Member 
States. The senior posts in the Agency should not be monopolized by any one 
group of States. No one could deny that the countries of Africa and Asia 
were not adequately represented, mostly occupying subordinate posts. The 
other international organizations had undertaken to remedy so deplorable a 
situation, and the Agency should follow suit. 
65. He failed to see hoy/ the Agency could function satisfactorily when the 
Director General, irrespective of his personal qualifications, had to face 
the opposition of a group of States that included one of the world's two main 
atomic Powers and also the Afro-Asian States, whose interests did not appear 
to have been taken fully into consideration. 
66, His delegation was most anxious that there should be consultations with 

a view to finding an acceptable solution and had therefore co-sponsored the 


eleven-Power draft resolution. It was to be hoped that the Conference would 


adopt it and thereby end the present dissensions and pave the way for con


ditions which would enable the Agency to operate smeethly. 


6T. Sir Roger MAKBfS (United Kingdom) shared the views of the delegate 
of Norway and considered that the issue was being unduly inflated. Mr. Eklund's 
nomination had been supported by a large majority in the Board, and could thus 
be said to have a wide measure of support. No objections had been raised 
against him personally and his experience was not questioned? he was recog


nized as a scientist and as a first-class administrator. The only possible 
reproach was, in fact, that he belonged to a bad" region, and so would not 
have1 the collaboration of certain Member States. That argument was 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page -16 


inadmissible^ the appointment of a Director General could not Toe made 


conditional upon his belonging to any given geographical area. Moreover, it 
was difficult to see haw any bettor solution could be found by adopting the 


course suggested by the sponsors of 'the eleven-Power draft resolution. The 
United Kingdom delegation had therefore decided to approve the appointment 
made by the Board. 


68= Mr. IPPOLITO (Italy) stressed the technical nature of the Director 
General's functions%, his duty was to carry out the-decisions of the 
Conference and the Board. 

69. The outgoing Director General had done his work with remarkable tact and 
efficiency, and there was no doubt that Mr. Eklund would do likewise, ^he 
Conference knew Mr. Eklund well, as he had been Secretary-General of the 
second' United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy, held at Geneva in 1958, but probably knew less of his remarkable 
scientific'career and his experience in international co-operation^ he was 
one of the organizers of and most active participants in the meetings and 
symposia of the European Nuclear Energy Agency, and had close links of esteem 
and friendship with -the' leading figures in nuclear science. The Italian 
delegation would give him its full support, and was sure that ho would guide 
the Agency effectively, devoting particular attention to assistance to the 
developing countries. 
70. Mr. BHABHA (India) pointed out that the Board's decision did not in 
any way preclude the Conference from referring the question back to it for 
reconsideration in the light of new facts^ there would be nothing discourteous 
in that. The Statute, itself provided, in Article VILA, that the Director 
General be appointed by the Board "with the approval of the General Conference".. 
That approval was not merely an automatic formality. It conferred certain-responsibilities 
on the Conference, which .had a .perfect right to refer matters 
back without any discourtesy to the Board. During the Board's discussions, a 
large majority of Governors had supported the nomination of Mr. .Eklund,''some 
had opposed it, others, had abstained. The Indian delegation had explained 
the reasons for its own abstention. Now the situation was very different. 
The matter had been considered by the Conference.and by many countries which 
were not represented on the Board. It had become clear that the appointment 
of Mr. Eklund had not secured wido support and even that there was strong 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page 17 


opposition. In those circumstances it seemed to be quite legitimate to ask 
the Board to reconsider the question. It appeared unwarrantable that so 
reasonable a request should be rejected by those who, assured of their 
majority? sought to impose their own point of view. That was not an attitude 
conducive to genuine international co-operation. 


71. It had been stated that India demanded that the Director General should 
come from a certain region. In fact, the Indian delegation had gone no 
further than to suggest - and that point must be stressed - that the candidate 
should appropriately come from a region with a different economic and 
social pattern from that of the United States. The fact that that suggestion 
had apparently never been considered hardly betokened a conciliatory attitude 
or a spirit of co-operation. 
72. Much had been heard of what was alleged to have been said in discussion 
between Mr. Eklund and the delegate of the Soviet Union. He himself merely 
wished to emphasize that the director of an international organization must 
have the support of all groups of countries. It was clear., however, that 
Mr. Eklund had not the support of the Soviet Union, the socialist countries 
or of a large number of African and Asian countries. To accept the post of 
Director General under those conditions would seem to indicate a lack of 
political sense. Ho would urge all delegates to consider the problem in a 
spirit of conciliation, so that the Agency would be enabled to work harmoniously. 
In asking the Board to' reconsider the question of the appointment of 
the Director General, the Conference would not be opposing the Board's 
decision, but it would pave the way to a more satisfactory solution. 
73- Mr. S IMC EUR (Morocco) said he was astonished and saddened by the 
turn the debate had taken. Mr. Eklund was not present at the meeting, but 
it was public and a record of it would appear^ -the candidate designated by 
the Board for the post of Director General could not fail to be affected by 
what had been said about him, and particularly by those who claimed he was 
not a sufficiently representative candidate. Unacceptable to one of the two 
Great Powers, his appointment contested by a group of uncommitted countries, 
would Mr. Eklund have the requisite authority? It had been said that 
qualifications and not geographical distribution should count in appointing 
a new Director General. But although Article VII.D of the Statute stated 
that the paramount consideration in the recruitment of the staff should be 



GC(V)/0£.57 
page 18 


to secure employees of the highest standards of efficiency., technical competence 
and integrity, it also said that "subject to this consideration, due 
regard shall bo paid to ... the importance of recruiting the staff on as. 
wide a geographical basis as possible", 


74- Other delegates had. claimed that, as the statutory procedure had been 
followed to the letter and as the Board's designation of the Director General 
had beon perfectly in order, all that remained for the Conference to do was 
to endorse the appointment. That purely mechanical and formalistic approach 
simply ignored the facts. 


75. At the United Nations as elsewhere, 1961 had been called "The Tear of 
Africa" and still more African countries would soon become independent. 
Those who wanted +0 be formalistic would do well to rofloot on the consequences. 
If, in a fow years' time, the emancipation of the Afro-Asian 
peoples resulted in a reversal of the majority in the various organizations 
of the United Nations, there would undoubtedly be an outcry and accusations 
that the new majority was being unco-oporativo if it in turn adopted the same 
mechanical ideas- The countries which were economically underdeveloped refused 
to be considered intellectually underdeveloped. Given as good an 
education, their nationals wore perfectly able' to measure up to those of the 
advanced countries - it was only necessary to mention as an example • -
Mr. Mongi Slim, the current President of the United- Nations General Assembly. 
That would apply equally to an African or Asian candidate for the post of 
Director General. 


76. But what was the way out of the present impasse? Unless there was to 
be a compromise - and he himself could not sec any sign of it - Mr. Eklund 
was the only person who could help. The Moroccan delegation therefore 
associated itself with Ghana's appeal to Mr. Eklund to withdraw his candidature3 
that decision could bring nothing but credit to the illustrious 
Swedish scientist. Mr. Eklund's maintenance of his candidature, however, 
would in no wise alter Morocco's attitude to the eleven-Power draft resolution 
which it had co-sponsored. 
77. At the request of Mr. Sinacour (Morocco), a roll-call vote was taken 
on the eleven-Power draft resolution (GC(V)/176). 
Australia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon 
to vote first. 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page 19 


The result of the vote was as follows? 


In favors Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Ceylon, Cuba, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ethiopia, 
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Morocco, Poland, 
Romania, Senegal, Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United 
Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania. 
Against§ Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, 
China, Colombia, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, 
Prance, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, 
Iceland, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, 
Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, 
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, South 
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
United States of America, Venezuela, Argentina. 
Abstentionss Holy See, Lebanon, Viet-Nam. 

78. The eleven-PpY/or draft resolution was rejected by 42 votes to 22, wif"1 
3 abstentions. 
79. Mr. REGALA (Philippines), explaining his vote, stated that, at the 
time of the designation of the Director General by the Board in June 196l, 
the Philippines had first voted for the Indonesian candidate, considering 
it preferable that the Director General should come from a developing 
country^ that candidate, however, had received only 8 votes against 13, 
with 2 abstentions. At the second ballot, two countries which had voted 
for Mr. Sudjarwo - Thailand and the Philippines - had transferred their 
votes to Mr. Eklund in the belief that the second Director General should 
be designated by a large majority of the Board. 
80, The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to discuss the draft 
resolution submitted jointly by Bulgaria, Poland and the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics (GC(V)/173). 



GC(V)/OE.57 


page 20 


81. Mr. MBLYANOV (Union of Soviot Socialist Republics) stated that 
all the reasons for inviting Mr. Eklund" to "mcetings of the Conference at 
v/hich the question of his appointment to the post of Director General was 
being examined were set out in the explanatory memorandum submitted with the 
draft resolution. 
82. It was quite unheard-of to attempt to appoint in his absence a future 
Director"General, the highest official of the Agency5 it was unprecedented 
in the practice of international organizations, the Agency included. The 
first Director General had boon present at the meetings of the 3oard and of 
the Conference at which his candidature had been discussed. The attempt 
made to impose a candidate in his absence could only be interpreted as a 
dictatorial 'maneuver, and must necessarily provoke the opposition of States 
which wore trying to achieve genuine collaboration within the Agency. 
83* Replying to the United Kingdom delegate's statement that it would be 


unsuitable to invite Mr. Eklund because it would bo considered most unusual 


in the United Kingdom for a person whose appointment was under discussion to 


be present during the actual discussion—' , ho said that an international 
.•organization of 76 States having varying structures and traditions could not 


be bound by Unitud Kingdom customs*. Mr.. -Eklund must bo invited to the 


Conference and find out what the various delegations thought about his 


appointment. • . 


84. He could not believe that Mr. Eklund would agroo to accept the post when 
he know that groups as important as tlio non-aligned Afro-Asian countries as 
a whole and all the socialist countries opposed his candidature. It was a 
matter of profound regret to him to see Mr. Eklund become a plaything in the 
hands of a group of countries which were imposing on the Agency policies 
incompatible with genuine international co-operation. It was for that very 
reason that the draft resolution had boon 'submitted, 
-Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) stated that •tt.o draft 
resolution was improper and not in the interests of the. Agency. It would 
require Mr. Eklund to appear before the Conference, but the real object was 
to submit the candidate to attack and humiliation. Mr. Eklund was not unknown. 
Humorous scientists in every country had learned to appreciate his 
6/ GC(V)/0E.53, paragraph 76. 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page- 21 


talents as a high official in his own country and as Secretary-General 


of the second United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses 


of Atomic Energy. If the sponsors of the draft resolution had genuinely 
desired to obtain further information about Mr. Eklund and his scientific 
views, they had had plenty of time and opportunity to do so. Any government 
could have written, telegraphed or telephoned to Mr. Eklund, or 
arranged to have its diplomatic representatives in Sweden talk directly 
with him. 


86. At its last scries of meetings, in September, the Board had emphatically 
rejected a proposal identical in substance to the present draft resolution. 
Naturally, the Conference had the right to approve or disapprove of the 
Board's choice. But it was neither right nor proper to cross-question the 
candidate as to whether he had really known his own mind when he accepted. 
87. The United States delegation was absolutely opposed to the draft 
resolution as being beneath the dignity of the Conference and harmful to 
the prestige of the Agency. 
88. Mr. NADJAKOV (Bui garia) considered that the debate on the appointment 
of the Director General would have taken a different turn if Mr. Eklund 
had been able to present himself before the Board and, later, before the 
Conference. But, contrary to established procedure in international 
organizations, the candidate had been prevented from doing so. The Bulgarian 
delegation would therefore be happy to see the Conference decide to invito 
Mr. Eklund| the doubts raised by the delegate of Canada about the authenticity 
of the discussion in Moscow between Mr. Eklund and Mr. Emelyanov could 
be cleared up at the same time. Once Mr. Eklund knew all that had been said 
in the Board and in the Conference, he would no doubt himself see his way to. 
extricating the Conference from the difficult situation in which it was 
placed.' But' if he was not disposed to draw the obvious conclusions, it was. 
for the Conference to decide if the post of Director General should be entrusted 
to a man who had been appointed, not unanimously, but in the face .of ' 
strong opposition. The Bulgarian delegation hoped that the Conference would 
support the draft resolution, but would not insist that it be put to the vote. 

GC(V)/OR.57 


page 22 


89. Mr. MBLLER-CCMRAD (Foland) explained that Poland had co-sponsored 
the draft resolution in the hope that the Conference would invite Mr. Eklund 
to attend and find out what a large minority, moro than one-third of the 
Member States, thought of him, his work and what he could do at the Agency. 
A similar proposal had been submitted by Poland to the Board in 
September 1961. 
90. Ho was astonished that the United States delegate should speak of 
humiliating Mr. Eklund. In point of fact it was the United States more 
than anyone else that was creating a situation that might be humiliating 
for the Swedish scientist, whose presence, incidentally, would also permit 
the Canadian delegate to clear up his doubts regarding the conversation 
that had taken place in Moscow between Mr. Emelyanov and Mr. Eklund. Had 
Mr. Eklund said he would not accept the post of Director General if opposed 
by the Soviet Union, or had he not? 
91. In his letter to the Board, Mr. Eklund had said that he would accept 
the post of Director General if he had the support of a substantial majority. 
But the vote just taken on the cloven-Power draft resolution clearly showed 
that, if a two-thirds majority had been required, the appointment would not 
have been confirmed. After the discussion that had taken place at the 
Conference, no one could conscientiously say that Mr. Eklund's acceptance 
would be a matter for congratulation on the part of the Agency. 
92. The PRESIDENT took it that the sponsors of the three-Power draft 
resolution (GC(V)/173) were agreed that it need not be put to the voto. He 
therefore proposed that the Conference voto on the nine-Power draft resolution. 
In accordance with a request made to him, the vote would bo by 
roll call. 
93. A roll-call vote was taken on the nine-Powor draft resolution (GC(v)/174). 
South Africa, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called 
upon to vote first. 



GC(V)/OR.57 
page 23 


The result of the vote was as followss 


In favors South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela, Viet-Nam, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
Chile, China, Colombia, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, 
Ethiopia, Finland, Prance, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Greece? Guatemala, Iceland, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Republic of Korea, Lebanon, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, 
Now Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, 
Philippines, Portugal, Senegal, 


Against% Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, 
Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic? 
Cuba, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ghana, Hungary, 
India, Indonesia, Poland, Romania. 

Abstaining? United Arab Republic, Burma, Ceylon, Holy See, Iraq., 
Morocco. 


94* The nine-Power draft resolution was adopted by 46 votes to 16, with 
6 abstentions. 


95. Mr. PHUONG (Viet-Nam) explained his votes. His delegation had 
abstained from voting on the eleven-Power draft resolution because, while 
in general approving the preamble, it considered that the operative part 
was not such as to facilitate a solution. It had voted for the draft' 
resolution approving Mr. Eklund's appointment, since it was anxious that 
there should bo no break in continuity! an interregnum would be prejudicial 
to the interests of the Member States, and of the developing 
countries in particular, and must be avoided. 
96. Mr. HESBURGH (Holy See) explained why his delegation had abstained. 
The reason'for the presence of the Holy See at the Agency's meetings was its 
desire to promote the use of science and technology for exclusively peaceful 
purposes. The Agency constituted an important means to that end and its 
duties were not only of a scientific, but also of a moral character. It 
would need the wisdom of Solomon to find a universally acceptable solution 

GC(V)/OE.57 


page 24 


to the controversy which had arisen about the appointment of the Director 


General and to bring peace out of the existing discord. Not possessing that 


wisdom, the delegation of the Holy See did not presume to judge the rights 


and wrongs of the case and had therefore decided to abstain. It did believe, 


however, that whatever decision was taken should be dictated by the desire 


to ensure the growth and proper operation of the Agency. 


97. His delegation firmly believed in the aims for which the Agency was 
founded and would spare no efforts in working to achieve them, since it 
saw in a sincere desire to use science for peaceful ends the best hope of 
mankind. If it was desired to have an Agency and that the Member States 
live and work in hope and friendship rather than in fear and hatred, a more 
rational method of communicating with one another and of understanding one 
another must be found without delay. The problem certainly could be solved^ 
and if it were not, the Member States would have failed miserably in their 
responsibility to respond to the deepest hopes of mankind. 
98. Mr. DAGUEEBE (Senegal) explained why his delegation had voted first 
for the eleven-Power draft resolution and then for the confirmation of 
Mr. Eklund's appointment. The delegation of Senegal had taken part, in an 
informal meeting, in framing the eleven-Power draft resolution without, 
however, co-sponsoring it. It considered that a moans must" bo found of 
breaking the deadlock and had voted for the draft resolution in a spirit 
of solidarity with the Afro-Asian countries. It had subsequently voted for 
Mr. Eklund because it did not want to expose the Agency to a year's interregnum. 
It had furthermore wished to pay tribute by its vote to the candidate's 
nationality, since ho was a compatriot of the lato Mr. Hammarksjold, 
to whom the less-developed countries largely owed their admission to the 
United lations family. It was thanks to him that their voice was now making 
itself heard. 
99. The PRESIDENT said that consideration of item 22 was concluded for 
the time being. It would be resumed at a later date to enable the new 
Director General to take his oath of office before the Conference. 
The meeting rose at 6.25 P.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(V)/OR.58 

6 December 1961 

GENERAL Distr . 
General Conference ENGLISH 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE FIFTY-EIGTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 4 October 1961, at 5.25 p.m. 

President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Para&T; aphs 
agenda* 

10 
23 
24 
18 
19 
The composition of the Board bf Governors 
(continued from the 55th meeting) 
Appointment of an External Auditor 
Election of members to the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee 
The Agency's accounts for 196G 
The Agency's relations with inter-governmental 
organizations 
1 71 
73 
7476 
70 
72 
75 
94 
GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(v)/INF/42/Rev.3. 
61-5912 


GC(V)/OR.58 
page 2 


TSE COMPOSITION 0^ THi BOARD OF GOVWOE.S, (GQ(v)/151 and Add.1, 169) 
(continued from the 55^^ meeting) • 


1° Mr. G.RAL'F F'lRffAFD^Z (Mexico) said that his Government was most 
sympathetic towards the desire of the new African States to he represented on 
the Board of Governors. Mexico recognized that at present the "Africa and 
the Middle ""ast" area had the lowest representation on the Board, and justice 
required that that situation he remedied, ^Tew States were continuing to 
gain independence in that part of the world and they might soon he Members 
of the Agency| hence it was clear that the adoption of a resolution providing 
them with adequate representation on the Board was urgently required. 

2. At itc; fourth regular session, the Conference had adopted a resolution—' 
recommending the Board to solve the prohlen of equitable representation of 
the "Africa and the Middle, -^s;•:•'.! arer, "Fallowing detailed consideration of 
the qiiestion, the Board had reconmendod the Conference to amend Article VI.A.3 
of the Statute to provide two additional seats on the Board, for allocation 
to the "Africa and the Middle Tast" area. 
3. During.-.the Board's discussions on the question, Mexico had sought to 
secure better representation for the Latin American area which, after Africa 
and the I'liddle Fast, had relatively the smallest number of representatives 
on the Board. Under the Statute, it was entitled to only two Memhers, one 
heing the State in the area which was most advanced in the technology of 
atomic energy and the other elected from the area under Article VI.A.3 of 
the Statute. For the time hoing,. Latin America also had two "floating" 
seats. The Government of Mexico considered that the, four seats it now 
occupied on the Board should he expressly allocated to Latin America in the 
Statute. The two floating seats would he converted into area seats and 
permanently allocated to Latin America. The draft resolution recommended 
by the Board for adoption (GC(v)/15l) satisfied those claimsp it created two 
new seats on the Board, which it allocated to the "Africa and the Middle Fast" 
area, and definitely reserved for Latin imerica the four seats currently held 
by that area. Moreover, it changed the representation of other areas as 
little as possible. 
1/ GC(IV)/ESS/85. 



GC(V)/0E.58 
page 3 


4. His delegation supported the draft resolution, and would vote against 
the amendment submitted by Czechoslovakia (GC(v)/169) because the purpose of 
paragraph (c) of the preamble,.which Czechoslovakia wished to delete, was, 
precisely, to explain the reasons justifying the provision concerning Latin 
America in the operative part. It was in order to avoid any action detrimental 
to the existing pattern of area representation on the Board that it 
was proposed to write the existing representation of Latin America into the 
Statute. The proposed amendment of the Statute would satisfy the just 
aspirations of the new African countries, without prejudice to the rights of 
other areas. 
5. Mr. SOU;; (South Africa) said he was deeply gratified that the 
Conference was taking steps to approve the amendment of the Statute in a 
?fay which would secure equitable representation of the "Africa and the Middle 
"ast" area on the Boardf it was the culmination of the efforts he had made 
in common with the Governors from Iraq, and Mexico, to whom he would like to 
pay tribute. 
6. During the consultations which had led to the Board's present recommendation, 
many Governors had at first not thought it possible to allocate 
more than one additional seat to the "Africa and the Middle East" area. It had, 
however, been possible to convince them that two new seats and their allocation 
to the area were essential if equity and the needs of the States concerned 
were both to be satisfied. 
7. During the negotiations, South Africa had submitted to the Board a 
proposal which was identical with the draft resolution recommended by the 
Boa'rd except in two respects. At first South Africa had not considered that 
Conference Resolution GC(IV)/tos/85 gave the Board a mandate to consider 
problems relating to areas other than "Africa and the Middle ^ast", hence no 
mention had been made of Latin America in its original proposal. I^irthermore, 
sub-paragraph (c) of the preamble had not appeared in the text. As the 
delegate of Mexico had pointed out, that sub-paragraph had been inserted in 
order to justify the fact that the proposed amendment of the Statute applied 
to an area other than Africa and the Middle Hast. If the sub-paragraph was 
omitted, it could be maintained that the amendment referring to Latin America 
which had been introduced was not in conformity with the mandate given the 
Board by the Conference. 

GC(V)/OR.58 
page 4 


8. South Africa had always been mindful of the moral obligation it had 
undertaken during the Conference on the Statute in respect of the allocation 
of the three floating seats| as in the past, it would continue to honor 
that obligation. 
9. Mr. ALLARS (Sweden) warmly supported the amendment of the Statute 
in the manner recommended by the Board. In order to permit the two new 
Members to take part in the Board's work as soon as possible, his Government 
would deposit an instrument of acceptance of the amendment as soon as it had 
been approved by the Conference, 
10. Sweden would vote against the Czechoslovak amendment, 
11. Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) pointed out that many changes had taken 
place in the world since the adoption of the Statute, As at present composed, 
the Board included only three representatives of the socialist countries and 
three of the neutral countries of Asia and Africa, as against 17 representatives 
of Powers linked to the Western bloc by military and economic pacts 
or by ideological affinities. That no longer reflected the real international 
situation. 
12. Accordingly, at its fourth regular session, the General Conference had 
asked the Board to review the relevant provisions of the Statute, at least 
insofar as they related to the "Africa and the Middle East" area. The 
amendment proposed by the Board did not offer a radical solution. Bulgaria 
was, however, ready to accept it, since it would at least improve the 
existing situation on the Board. The Board's amendment would, however, be 
improved by the adoption of the further amendment proposed by Czechoslovakia. 
Actually, having regard to the time taken by the acceptance procedure, the 
two new seats could, at the earliest, be filled at the Conference in 1962. 
But the existing representation of Africa and the Middle East was universally 
recognized to be inadequate. Hence it would, in the meantime, be no more than 
just to allot the third floating seat to a country of that area, and Bulgaria 
proposed Ghana. * 
13. Mr. EL AFKTABI (Tunisia) recalled that his country had supported 
Resolution GC(IV)/EES/85, ivhich proposed an increase in the number of seats 
allocated to the "Africa and the Middle East" area. Even at the time of 

GC(V)/OR.58 
page 5 


the Conference on the Statute, the representation provided for the area had 
appeared inadequate, and at the time the United States representative had 
let it be understood that the third floating seat would he allocated to it. 
In point of fact, that seat had gone successively to Turkey, Spain and the 
Federal Republic of Germany, and was now to' go to Greece. If that was in the 
interests of the countries in question, Tunisia did not object, but wanted 
the two supplementary seats to be permanently allocated to Africa and the 
Middle East. 


14. Rumor had it that it was proposed, pending the entry into force of the 
amendment to the Statute, to provide the area with two provisional observer 
seats. Tunisia was not opposed to that course, but wondered how it was to 
be given effect. Actually, nothing was said in the Statute about observers, 
Should the Board be able to overcome that difficulty and establish an appropriate 
procedure, the Tunisian delegation would agree to one of the two observers 
being selected from among the African countries- to the north of the Sahara and 
the other from the countries to the south. 
15. He hoped that the Statute would be progressively improved with a view to 
ensuring the most equitable representation possible of all parts of the world. 
In any case he was confident that the Conference would unanimously approve 
the proposed amendment. 
16. Mr. BORISEVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said his 
delegation supported the draft' resolution submitted by the Board, which would 
go some way towards eliminating the injustice represented by the existing 
representation on the Board of the countries of Africa and the Middle East. 
17. However, the draft resolution was no more than a half-measure and 
offered no real solution of the question - long since urgent - of modifying 
the structure and composition of the Board. 
18. As early as 1956, during the Conference on the Statute, the Byelorussian 
delegation had pointed out that the Board's structure was far from satisfactory. 
In the light of the profound changes that had taken place and were 
continuing to take place in the world, the imperfections had become intolerable. 
Ever since the Agency's establishment, the United States and those that formed 
part of its military grouping had never ceased to impose their will on the 

GC(V)/OR„58 
page 6 


Board. That hampered collaboration in connection with the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and could have serious consequences for the Y/ork of an international 
organization such as the Agency, The Board1s structure must be 
brought into line with the present balance of power and the existence in 


the world of three groups of States. If that were done, an end would bo 
put to the absolute power exercised in the Agency by certain States. 


19. The United States delegate, in saying that any amendment to the draft 
resolution submitted by the Board would make it difficult for the United States 
2/ 


to accept the amendment to the Statute—' , was using undisguised pressure on 

those who desired to meet the just requirements of the countries of Africa 
and the Middle Bast and to support the Czechoslovak amendment. 


20. Paragraph (c) of the preamble to the draft resolution should be eliminated, 
since it was totally irrelevant to the question referred to in 
Resolution GC(IV)/RES/85. The paragraph was unsatisfactory even from the 
legal point of view. 1Fi/hat did the words "any statutory amendment" mean? 
The Member States might in future consider that the Statute must be so 
amended that the Board would become essentially different in structure from 
what it now was. Their freedom of action would however be restricted by the 
provisions of paragraph (c). His delegation would accordingly vote for the 
Czechoslovak amendment. 
21. Mr. AZAD (Iran) wholeheartedly supported the Board's recommendation. 
Moreover, the question of the insufficient representation of the "Africa and 
the Middle East" area should bo resolved not only as regards the Board, but 
also as regards the allocation of senior posts in the Secretariat. 
22. If the proposed amendment was adopted by the Conference, his Government 
intended to deposit its instrument of acceptance without delay. However, 
it would not agree that the composition of the Board should be further changed 
until it had been possible to study the practical effects of the present 
amendment. 
23. Mr. MELLER-COHRAD (Poland) supported the Board's recommendation, 
but with several reservations. The present period of time was characterized 
by two phenomena? the ever-growing power of the socialist camp, and the 
process of dccolonialization. The most spectacular aspect of that process 
2/ GC(V)/OR.55, paragraph 84. 



GC(V)/0E.58 
page 7 


was the triumphal entry of most of the African countries onto the international 
scene. The structure of the Agency, however, and particularly that of the 
Board, reflected neither the changes which had taken place in the world nor 
those which had occurred in the Agency itself, as a result of the admission 
of new Member States from Africa, That was an obvious fact, and the Board's 
recommendation and the present debate wove only a very pale - but nevertheless 
true - reflection of it, 

24. It was only a pale reflection, because the majority of the Board, being 
bound to the Western bloc, had tried to neutralize in practice, what it had 
been forced to concede in principle, 3ven when the proposed amendment came 
into force, two-thirds of the seats on the Board would continue to be occupied 
by representatives of the West and only one-third by those of the socialist 
and non-aligned countries. In all fairness, the scats should be divided 
equally between the three groups, in accordance with the real relationship 
betv/een forces in the world and in the Agency. The Polish delegation did 
not expect that the change would come about immediately, but a start must be 
made now on the urgent aspects and the most blatant injustices rectified. 
That was why the Governor from Poland, at one of the Board's meetings, had 
proposed allocating one of the floating scats forthwith to an African Member 
State, That proposal had not been accepted, but the Polish delegation 
intended to repeat it during the Conference, The Western Powers had to make 
room for the young countries of Africa, and Poland would therefore support 
the Czechoslovak amendment which had that as its aim. The least which could 
be done would be to elect Ghana, to the Board;; that would be a gesture of 
goodwill and good intentions to countries which had just become independent. 
25, Mr. MAHMOUD (United Arab Republic) recalled that his delegation had 
been one of the co-sponsors of Resolution GC(IV)/RES/85, and it was with the 
aim of putting that resolution into effect that the Board proposed modifying 
the wording of Article VI.A.3 of the Statute, That recommendation still did 
not take sufficient account of the new developments in Africa and the increase 
in the number of African Member States, but it did represent some improvement 
on the present situation^ his delegation would therefore vote for the draft 
resolution submitted by the Board. 



GC(V)/OR„58 
page o 


26o With regard to paragraph (c) of the preamble, the United Arab Republic 
had often stressed the need to modify the Statute. It would therefore 
abstain from voting on that paragraph, and reserved the right to revert to 


that question during discussion on the general review of the Statute, 


27. Mr. MYSLIL (Czechoslovakia) wished to correct a misunderstanding 
which he had noted in the remarks of the Mexican delegate. The Czechoslovak 
amendment did not apply to the representation of Latin America and was not 
directed against that area. The socialist countries were faithful to their 
undertakings, as could be seen from the record of the elections of Latin 
American countries to the Board. 
28. His delegation considered it quite unacceptable to say that "any statutory 
amendment should not be detrimental to the existing pattern of area representation 
on the Board", even if that wording appeared only in the preamble to 
the draft resolution. As the Byelorussian delegate had pointed out, adoption 
of that wording would mean that neither by virtue of the present amendment 
nor in the light of any considerations which might arise in the future to 
justify modifying the composition of the Board should the pattern of representation 
of other regions on the Board be affected. That would amount to 
making any subsequent change within the Board impossible. 
29. Iven if the wording of paragraph (c) wore amended to read that "the 
present amendment of the Statute should not be detrimental to the existing 
pattern", his delegation still could not accept it, as it would be tantamount 
to legalizing the abuse by which Western Suropo held on to the floating seat 
which should be allocated to Africa and the Middle ^ast. Western Europe 
at present held six scats, which was quite enough. 
30. Several delegations, apart from those of the socialist countries, had . 
expressed the opinion that the present composition of the Board no longer 
corresponded to political reality and requested that it should be thoroughly 
revised. In the opinion of the Czechoslovak delegation, the creation of two 
new scats on the Board was only a first step in that direction. 
31. Moreover, the work of the Board might bo seriously jeopardized if the 
attempt of certain Western Powers to introduce into the Board the spokesman 
of a discredited regime, which survived only through the support of foreign 
troops and which represented no one, proved successful. The Czechoslovak 
delegation would resist that energetically. 

GC(V)/0E,58 
page 9 


32, Resolution GC(IV)/RES/85 referred exclusively to representation of the 


"Africa and the Middle East" area. His delegation therefore considered that 


the representation of other areas could not he considered under the terms of 


that resolution. The matter should be dealt with, however, when the 


Conference considered the question of the general review of the Statute. If 


the Conference was not of the same opinion, the Czechoslovak delegation was 


ready now to submit its own proposals concerning the equitable representation 


of other areas. 


33* Mr. LALL (India) pointed out that the responsibilities of the Board 
wore different from those of corresponding bodies in other organizations, its 
duty being to ensure continuity in the operation of the Agency. Its composition 
"/as therefore a highly significant factor so far as the success of the 
Agency was concerned, and particularly the work of the annual General Conference. 


34° The present composition of the Board was the result of lengthy negotia


tions which had taken place in Washington during the winter of 1955-56, a-nd 


the structure of the United Nations itself had served as a model. Then, 


however, the United Nations had had only 60 States Members, whereas now there 
were 100. As the United Nations grew, so the composition of the Board 


ceased to reflect the international situation. 


35• The Indian delegation, concerned about that state of affairs, had been 


led to send a note .to the Governments of certain friendly countries, indicating 
why it considered that it was necessary to revise the concepts that had guided 
the establishment of the Board. In view of the changes which had taken place 


in the political structure of the world, his delegation believed that the 
pattern of the Board must be considerably changed, and brought into line with 
what had taken place in the United Nations itself. 


36. The Indian delegation, like that of the United Arab Republic, felt that 
the draft resolution which the Board recommended for adoption was only one 
stop in the right direction. It would certainly vote for it, although the 
draft was not altogether in accordance with its own views. 
37• Bearing in mind the- importance of ensuring equitable area representation 
on the Board, the Indian delegation considered that paragraph (c) of the preamble 
was pointless. It tended to give the impression that the Conference Y/as to 



GC(V)/0E„58 
page 10 


some extent trying to perpetuate the present situation. Moreover, the 
amendment to the Statute would come into force only when duly accepted by 
Member States in accordance with their respective legislative procedures. 
The countries of Africa and the Middle East should immediately he assured of 
a more equitable representation on the Board, and the Conference should 
therefore allocate one of the floating seats to a new African State„ 


38. Mr. MARIMJCCI (Italy) expressed his delegation's appreciation of 
the spirit of equity reflected in the draft resolution put forward by the 
Board. As a large number of countries, mostly African, had recently become 
Members, a modification of the present composition of the Board seemed justified. 
His delegation hoped, however, that the interests and rights on the 
Board of countries from other areas would not be prejudiced. 
39. Italy supported the proposed amendment to Article VI.A.3 of the Statute. 
The statements vrtiich had been made showed the extent to which that amendment 
vra.s necessary. It would entrust greater responsibilities to certain 
countries, and enable them to participate more actively in the.solution of 
different problems - particularly technical assistance - which Italy regarded as 
being of great importance. 
40. Mr. "BL AMABI (Tunisia) paid tribute to the work done by the delegates 
of South Africa and Iraq with a view to settling the problem of the 
representation of the "Africa and the Middle Sast" area. He knew how difficult 
their task had been. He also wished to express his gratitude to all who 
had taken part in preparing the draft resolution now before the Conference. 
41. Mr. MoADAM CLARK (United Kingdom) said that his delegation supported 
the draft resolution, which recognized the increasingly important role which 
the new Members from Africa and the Middle East wore required to play in the 
Agency's activities, and which assured the Board of their co-operation and 
counsel. The draft resolution was reasonable and realistic in content, and 
should be acceptable to all. Any modification on the lines proposed by 
Czechoslovakia in its amendment could only create difficulties. His delegation 
would therefore vote in favor of the draft resolution and against the 
Czechoslovak amendment. 
42. Mr. BRE'7 (Ghana) agreed that a concession had been made. It had 
been admitted that in view of the changing situation in Africa and the Middle 
2ast, the growing number of nations gaining independence and the increasingly 

GC(V)/OR,58 
page 11 


important role played by Africa on the world scene, representation should be 


made more equitable by creating two new seats on the Board for Africa and 


the Middle'East. That indicated that facts had finally been recognized* 


45. It had been emphasized on several occasions that the Agency was an 
international organization. It was useless to state that fact - it must be 
proved by action. Some progress had been made in that direction, but only 
a preliminary step, for the delegation of Ghana considered that the representation 
of areas on the Board should not be such as to favor any particular 
part of the world. Ghana was aware of the existence of alliances, and 
realized that there was a tendency for countries to band together to support 
particular points of viow§ it hoped that that attitude would be abandoned in 
time. 
44• In view of its international character, the Agency need not adopt a 


fixed system once and for all. In the representation of areas, there must be 


some degree of flexibility 'to allow for developments in the international 


situation and avoid discouraging applications for admission by new States, 
which might have a preconceived idea that the Agency was controlled by a 


particular group. His delegation was in favor of the draft resolution 


submitted'by the Board, but would support the Czechoslovak amendment. 


45. Mr. AMAH (Ethiopia) said that his delegation unreservedly supported 
the amendment to the Statute proposed by the Board. However, that amendment 
would not take effect until it had been accepted by two-thirds of the Members, 
which would take at least two years. The Ethiopian delegation hoped that, 
meanwhile, at least one scat on the Board would be allocated to an African 
country since, as a result of what might be termed an historical accident, 
certain countries had become Members of the Board merely because they had once 
possessed, or still possessed, African colonies which produced raw materials. 
46. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the amendment submitted by the 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic (GC(v)/169) to the draft resolution in 
document GC(v)/151„ 
47 o In accordance with a request received by the President, a roll-call vote 
was taken. 


Cuba, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote 
first. 



GC(V)/OR.58 
page 12 


The result of the voto was as follows; 


In favors Cuba, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ethiopia, Ghana, 
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Poland, Romania, 
Senegal, Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia, 
Afghanistan, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Ceylon. 


Against; Denmark, Finland, France, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Greece, Iceland, Iran, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, 
Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, 
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
United States of America, Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia. 


Abstaining^ Holy Sec, Iraq., Lebanon, Turkey, United Arab Republic, 
Viet-N am, Burma. 


48. The Czechoslovak amendment was rejected by 31 votes to 20, with 7 
abstentions. 
49• Mr. ''ffiRSHOF (Canada), on a point of order, observed that under 


Rule 69 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference and Article 


XVIII.C(i) of the Statute, the Czechoslovak amendment, and also the draft 


resolution itself, required a two-thirds majority for approval. 


50. ' Mr. MITRA (India) said ho could not vote in favor of paragraph (c) 
of the preamble to the draft resolution. He therefore requested that that 
paragraph be put to the vote separately. 
51. Mr. r/ERSH0F (Canada) objected to the request for a separate vote. 
He would not use legal arguments, however, nor the argument that by rejecting 
the Czechoslovak amendment, the Conference had in effect approved paragraph (c). 
52. Nevertheless, he wished to point out that if the m.o.tion for division was 
carried, paragraph (c) would also require a two-thirds majority, under Rule 69 
of the Rules of Procedure. If, as was quite possible, it did not obtain that 
majority, paragraph (c) would be rejected. The draft resolution would then 

GC(V)/OR„58 
page 13 


bo put to the vote without paragraph (c) and would, in turn, require a two


thirds majority of the Members present and voting in order to he adopted. 


Insistence that paragraph (c) he put to the vote separately might produce a 


result contrary to the interests of the African Statess namely, rejection of 


the draft resolution proposed by the Board* 


55. Mr. MITRA (India), in defence of his motion for division, said that 
according to the Canadian delegate's argument, if paragraph (c) were deleted, 
the whole of the recommendation would be endangered,. That could only be 
regarded as a threat, and amounted to forcing the- Conference to retain 
paragraph (c), which many Member States - in particular the African States, 
which were most concerned in the mattor - did not want, 
54. Mr. "MYSLIL (Czechoslovakia) supported the motion for division. He 
would adduce only one argument? in the previous voting, 20 delegates had 
voted against retaining paragraph (c) and 7 had abstained^ hence it was 
obvious that paragraph (c) might not obtain a two-thirds majority. He was 
convinced that the opinion of the 27 States concerned should be taken into 
account, and could not be set at naught by procedural maneuvers. His delegation 
would vote against paragraph (c), but in favor of the remaining 
paragraphs, 
55. Mr. CARGO (United States of America) opposed the motion for division. 
It would be inadvisable for the Conference to vote on the draft resolution in 
parts| it had been carefully drawn up in order to produce a calculated and 
balanced text, of which paragraph (c) was an integral part, and it should 
therefore be voted on as a whole. 
56. The PRESIDENT said ho would put the Indian motion for division to 
the vote. 
57. Mr. MITRA (India) requested a roll-call vote, 
58. Mr. SOLE (South Africa).said that before the vote was taken, he 
would like to ask whether it was necessary for a preambular paragraph to be 
approved by a two-thirds majority, and whether Rule 69(b) of the Rules of 
Procedure was applicable in'the present case, 
59. Mr. MITRA (India), on a point of order, said that under Rules 73 
and 75 of the Rules of Procedure no speaker was allowed to take the floor. 

GC(V)/OR,58 
page 14 


60. The PRESIDENT put the motion for division to the vote. 
61. In accordance with the request by Mr. Mitra (India), a roll-call vote 
was taken, 
Guatemala, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 


The result of the vote was as follows; 


In favors Hungary, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Poland, Romania, 
Senegal, Tunisia? Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, 
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania, Bulgaria, Burma, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Ceylon, Cuba, 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Ethiopia, Ghana. 


Against; Holy See, Iceland, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Republic of Korea, Lebanon, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, 
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, 
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Venezuela, Viet-Nam, 
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
Chile, China, Colombia, Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, 
France, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, 


Abstaining; None. 


62. The motion for division was defeated by 42 votes to 22. 
63. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote on the draft 
resolution submitted by the Board concerning the composition of the Board of 
Governors (GC(V)/15l). 
64. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
65. Mr. MITRA (India) deeply regretted that pressure had been used to 
secure the rejection of the Czechoslovak amendment. Such methods were not 
calculated "to bring peace out of the existing discord", to quote the words 
3/ 


used by the delegate of the Holy See at the previous meeting.—' 

3/ GC(V)/0E.57, paragraph 96, 


GC(V)/OR058 
page 15 


66. Mr. TJRSHOF (Cana da) pointed out that when the draft resolution 
had been discussed by the Board it had received wide supports only one or 
two delegations had expressed reservations concerning paragraph (c). 
670 He saw no reason to apologize for having called the .Conference's 
attention to the consequences of rejecting that part of the text. On the 
contrary, ho felt he had shown the greatest concern for the interests of the 
countries of Africa and the Middle Last, which, as a result of the adoption 
of the amendment to the Statute, could expect to be better represented on 
the Board. 


68. Mr. McKNIGHT (Australia) welcomed the adoption of the draft 
resolution and pointed out that it had taken six months of consultations 
and a great deal of goodwill to formulate the final text. 
69. Mr. MOLOTOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
attitude of the Soviet delegation to the draft resolution had been explained 
by the Soviet delegate^. The Soviet delegation was in favor of adopting 
the draft resolution, which was intended to remedy an injustice. Nevertheless, 
it would have been bettor to take account of the legitimate wishes 
expressed in the Czechoslovak amendment. 
70. Mr. MYSLIL (Czechoslovakia) said that his delegation had asked 
for the- deletion of paragraph (c) of the preamble in the interests of the 
African and Middle East States and in order to allow them to improve their 
representation on the Board pending the entry into force of the new text. 
Unfortunately the "/cstcrn Perrors and the countries linked economically and 
militarily v/ith them had prevented the adoption of the Czechoslovak amendment. 
It was to be hoped that when the elections to the Board took place, the States 
concerned would change their attitude. 
APPOINTMENT 0? AN EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


71. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to proceed to item 25 of 
the agenda. He recalled that the term of office of the Agency's External 
Auditor, Mr. G. Hertcl, Auditor-General of the Federal Republic of Germany, 
4/ GC(V)/OR.57, paragraphs 55-63. 



GC(V)/OR.58 
page 16 


was due to expire that day-^. It would be in the Agency1 s intc-rest if 
Mr. Hertel could remain in office, which he was prepared to do. He therefore 
proposed that the General Conference should appoint the Auditor-General of 
the Federal Republic of Germany to audit the Agency's accounts for the years 
1961-63 inclusive. 


72. It was so decided. 
ELECTION 0? MEMBERS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSIONS COMMITTEE 


73• The PRESIDENT said he understood from the Secretariat that there 
was no need for the Conference to hold elections to the Agency's Staff 
Pensions Committee during its current session. 


THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1960 (GC(v)/1?7) 


74. Mr. BITTSNCOURT (Brazil), Rapporteur of, the Administrative and 
Legal Committee, presented the Committee's report on item 18 of the agenda 
(GC(V)/177). 
75° The draft resolution in paragraph 3 of the report was adopted unanimously. 


THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (GC(v)/178) 


76. Mr. BITTENCOURT (Brazil), Rapporteur of the Administrative and 
Legal Committee, presented the Committee's report on item 19 of the agenda 
(CC(V)/178). 
77. Mr. MAHMQUD (United Arab Republic) said he was firmly opposed to 
any relations between the Agency and the Commission for Technical Co-operation 
in Africa South of the Sahara (CTCA). That body had been set up by the 
colonialist Powers in order to divide the African continent. Africa was one 
and indivisible and the expression "South of the Sahara" did not correspond 
to any reality. 
78. Mr. M0L0T0V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that everyone 
was aware of the Soviet delegation's attitude in the matter. It would vote 
in favor of the draft resolution recommended by the Committee but was compelled 
to make two reservations. First of all it was inadmissible that the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) should bo authorized to send observers'to 
^/ See CC(ll)/OR.24, paragraph 4. 



GC(V)/OR„58 
page 17 


the regular sessions of the Conference, since that organization was also 


concerned with questions involving the military uses of atomic energy. 


Secondly, it was not at all necessary for the Agency to establish relations 


with CTCA. The independent countries of Africa did not think that it would 


serve the interest of African countries or international collaboration. The 


proposal was clearly one more attempt to bolster up the colonialist position 


in Africa. The Soviet delegation was against such attempts and considered 


that no grounds existed for supporting GTOA. 


79. " Mr. S^HULTB-MEERMAMT (Federal Republic of Germany), referring to 
EURATOM, appealed to the Conference's good sense. For four years EURATOM's 
achievements had shown considerable growth, and it could easily be seen by 
everybody that its activities were carried on in the open. Their entirely 
'peaceful character could not seriously be called in question. 
It was therefore 
difficult to see why certain delegations persisted in regularly disputing 
what that organization had achieved, and its contribution to the well-being 
of humanity. 


80. Mr. QUANSAH (Ghana) strongly protested against sending an invitation 
to CTCA. He had received instructions from his Government to make its 
position clear beyond all doubti Any program tending to divide the African 
continent must be considered unacceptable. The Sahara must be regarded as 
a bridge uniting the nor.th and south of Africa. 
81. CTCA had been set up by the colonialist Powers without consulting the 
African countries, and it was therefore natural that the latter should be very 
reluctant to take part in it. 
82. It must also be recognized that there yrore plenty of organizations with 
aims similar to those of CTCA, and the best solution would be for CTCA to 
be amalgamated with the others. 
83. Mr. MITRA (India) shared the views expressed by the delegates of 
Ghana and the United Arab Republic. In actual fact the Conference was 
confronted with a fait accompli, since the invitation to CTCA had already 
been sent out by the Board. It was to be hoped that in future bettor methods 
of collaboration would be established, which, as the delegate of the Holy See 
had said-/, would conduce to an atmosphere of hope and friendship rather than 
of fear and hatred. 
6/ GC(V)/OR.57, paragraph 97. 



GC(V)/OR„58 
page 18 


84. Precious time had been devoted to the problem of the representation of 
intergovernmental organizations. He thought it would be simpler to adopt 
the system of the United Nations Economic and Social Council, since the Agency 
too belonged to the United Nations family. Meanwhile, it must be hoped that 
in future more attention would be paid to the interests of the African and 
Middle East countries. 
85. Mr. "WEBSHOF (Canada) said he had himself been on the Board when 
the invitations to intergovernmental organizations had gone out. The 
assertion that the Conference had been confronted with a fait accompli was 
quite unwarranted, since the Board had taken that step only after receiving 
7/ 


formal authorization from the 1960 session of the Conference—'. The decision 
in question had been approved by a big majority of Members of the Board. 


86. Canada, for its part, was not directly interested in CTCA's activities, 
but he thought he could say that it was in the interests of African countries 
themselves that that organization should be represented in the Agency. 
87. Mr. MITRA (India) pointed out that no observer from CTCA was 
present at the current session of the Conference and therefore the decision 
to invite that organization could only be classified as a political decision. 
88. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) said he was not concerned with the 
legal arguments .put for?ra.rd by the delegate of Canada, but he wished to 
emphasize that CTCA Yvas an organization concerned with technical co-operation 
and one which kept as far as possible out of political controversy. It was 
doing work of great practical utility, and included 20 African States, 
collaborating with four European States. That collaboration had so far been 
carried out to the benefit of both sides. Ghana was perhaps thinking of 
withdrawing from CTCA but he hoped that it would reconsider its decision. 
In any case, the other African States would remain members of the Commission, 
whose headquarters wore in Africa, at Lagos, capital of Nigeria. 
89. In his opinion, the Board should bo authorized to send out invitations 
to CTCA as in the past. 
90. Mr. QUANSAH (Ghana) remarked that the delegate of the United 
Kingdom had inadvertently revealed that four European States were members of 
CTCA. That was precisely the point at issue. Technical co-operation took 
7/ GC(IV)/RES/69



GC(V)/OR.58 
page 19 


place in Africa independently .of that organization and Ghana was receiving 


assistance from the United Kingdom and other countries. Neither Ghana nor 


the other African States, however, were willing to accept the imposition of 


certain forms of assistance, which moreover would be limited to Africa south 


of the Sahara, and would exclude countries in the north. 


91. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that his 
delegation was also of the opinion that observers from GTCA and UURATOM should 
not be invited to the next regular session of the Conference. 
92. The discussion which had just taken place showed that it was the representatives 
of the Western Powers who wore insisting on an invitation being 
sent to CTCA. The African States were opposed to that invitation. Was 
that not the best indication that the organization concerned should not be 
invited to send observers to the next regular session of the Conference? 
95- As regards EURATOM, convincing arguments had been advanced in the 
Administrative and Legal Committee showing that EURATOM was concerned with the 
military uses of atomic energy. The delegate of the Federal Republic of 
Germany had been unable, either in the Committee or at the present meeting, to 
refute those arguments. His delegation therefore maintained once more that 
organizations such as EURATOM and CTCA should not be invited to the next 
regular session of the Conference, 


94. The draft resolution following paragraph 3 of the Committee's report 
(GC(V)/178) was adopted unanimously. 
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(V)/OR.59 
6 December 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF 'THE FIFTY -NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
onHeld a t th e Neue Hofburg, 
Thursday, 5 October 1961 , 
Vienna, 
a t 11 a.m. 
President: Mr.. QUIHILLALT (Argentina ) 
CONTENTS 
Item of th e 
agenda* 
13 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
20 The Agency's relations with other organisations 
in the United Nations family 
(b) Relationship agreements (continued from 
the 55th meeting) 
25 Establishment under the auspices of the Agency 
of an international insurance scheme for 
scientists 

Paragraphs 
1-23 


24 - 32 


33 - 41 


GC(V)/171. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(7)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5916 



GC(v)/OR.59 ', 
page 2 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THd BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(v)/160, 172) 

1. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to take up item 13 of 
the agenda - Election of Members to the Board of Governors - in connection 
with which* it had before it a report by the General Committee (GC(v)/172). 
In that report the Committee notified the Conference that, under Rule 83 of 
the Rules of Procedure, five Members had to be elected to the Board during 
the present session. The Committee further stated that elections were required 
in respect of three geographical areass Eastern Europe, South Asia, 
and the Par East, and drew attention to the fact that the elections should 
be conducted with due regard to equitable representation on the Board as a 
whole of the Members in the geographical areas specified in Rule 83. In 
that connection he drew attention to the list of Members already designated 
by the Board (GC(v)/160) or elected by the Conference, contained in paragraph 
3 of the Committee's report. Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure provided 
that the elections should be by secret ballot and that there should 
be no nominations. 
2. Mr. REGALA (Philippines) wished to know, before the Conference 
proceeded to the election, which countries belonged to the "Eastern Europe", 
"South Asia" and "Par East" aieas. 


3. Since Article VI.A.1 of the Statute did not give a list of the countries 
belonging to each of the areas enumerated therein, it was essential for the 
Conference to be informed on the subject. As far as he was concerned, four 
countries belonged to the "Par East" area, i.e. China, Korea, Japan and the 
Philippines. In that connection he drew delegates' attention to Rule 88 
of the Rules of Procedure, which stated? 
"In the separate elections in respect of geographical areas invalid 
votes shall also include votes cast for Members which are not in the 
geographical area in respect of which the election has taken place". 


He was asking for clarification on the point, because at previous sessions 
votes had been cast in favor of Thailand and Viet-lam for two different 
geographical areas, i.e. South Asia and the Par East, 


4. I-;r. PHUONG (Viet-JTam), speaking on a point of order, asked that 
in accordance with Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure elections should be by 
secret ballot and that there should be no nominations. In addition, he 
wished to state for the information of the delegate of the Philippines that 
Viet-^am had nevex been a candidate for election to the Board at previous 
sessions. 

'GC(V)/OR.59 
page 3 


5. Mr. KEGALA (Philippines) was afraid that there had been a misunderstanding. 
He had never intended to nominate candidates and he had asked for 
information as to the composition of each of the areas for which an election 
would take place, only for the sake of clarity. In any case the question had 
•already been raised in the Board, for the proposals made to the Board a year 
previously by South Africa-7 had given details of the number of Members be- , 
longing to each area. 
6. Mr. LITBA (India) considered that discussion of the composition of 
geographical areas was out of place and recalled that elections to the Board 
should be by secret ballot. He drew attention to the fact that no one had 
ever tried to analyse the composition of the'areas listed in Article VI.A.1 
of the Statute. Under the circumstances, Members must be guided in voting 
by their common sense, It was his opinion that Viet-Ham belonged to the 
"Par East" area but he saw no point in starting a discussion on the subject. 


7. The P nasi DEM1 stated in reply to the delegat-e of the Philippines that 
the Statute gave no information on the composition of the geographical areas 
listed in Article VI.A.1, The Conference on the Statute had taken no decision 
to allocate States to the different areas, neither had any organ of the Agency 
made a formal pronouncement on the subject. That being so, if it was the general 
opinion that a decision was necessary regarding the composition of the -frhree 
areas mentioned in the Committee's report (GC(v)/172), it .was for the Conference, 
and not the President, to take it. 
8. Mr. YU (China) said that he too would like an answer to the question 
raised by the delegate of the Philippines. It was in the interests of the four 
countries in the "Par East" p„r.a and of all States Members of the Agency that a 
clear reply should be given. In view of the provisions of Rule 88 of the 
Rules of Procedure, there was a risk of an invalid vote being cast unless one 
knew the composition of each of the three areas for which election was taking 
place. The method of voting gave delegates no information on the subject. 
However,( although the Statute gave no details, the number of countries belonging 
to the various geographical areas was stated in the South African proposals 
already mentioned and in the official record of the Board's meeting at 
2.1
which those proposals had been considered.-7 He recalled the genorally-held 


l/ GOV/644, paragraphs 18-19 ( Restricted distribution). 
2/ GOV/OR.251 (Restricted distribution). 



GC(V)/0S,59 
page 4 


view which had been expressed at previous sessions—' that each of the geographical 
areas listed in Article VI.A.1 of the Statute could he represented 
on the Board only by the State which had been accepted by the majority of 
Members of the area concerned. Simple logic demanded that no country could 
he classified in two areas at the same time. As regards the "Far Bast" area, 
it was self-evident that the countries in it were those most competent to determine 
how it was made up. It was the unanimous opinion of the countries 
of the area that it was composed of the following four States; China, Korea, 
Japan and the Philippines. 

9. The PRESIDENT stated that he abided by the reply which he had given 
to the delegate of the Philippines. 
10. At the invitation of the President, a member of the delegation of .Iran 
and a member of the delegation of Romania acted as tellers. 
11. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the 
"Eastern Europe" area. 
12. A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows% 

lumber of ballot papers% 66 
Invalid ballots; 20 
Number of valid ballots% 46 
Number of Members votings 46 
Required majority; 24 
Number of votes obtaineds 


Hungary 43 
Greece 2 
Romania 1 


13. Having obtained the required majority, Hungary was elected a Member 
of the Board of Governors, 
14. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from 
the "South Asia" area. 
3/ GC(l)/OR. 2, paragraph 3 and GC(l?)/OR.45, paragraph 22. 


GC(V)/0E.59 
page 5 


15. A vote was taken by secret ballot. 
The result of the vote was as follows3 
Number of ballot paperss 65 
Invalid ballot % 1 
Number of valid ballots; 64 
Number of Members voting- 64 
Required majority? 33 
Number of votes obtained; 

Pakistan 55 
Afghanistan 5 
Burma 1 
Cambodia 1 
China 1 
Viet-Nam 1 


16. Having obtained the required majority, Pakistan was elected a Member 
of- the Board of Governors., , 
17. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference t.Q .elect a Member from 
the "Far Bast" area. • . 
18. A vote was taken by secret ballot. > • 
The result of the vote was as followss 


Number of ballot paperss 6& 
Invalid ballotss 6 
.Number of valid ballots; 62 
Number of Members votings 62 


Required majority; 32 
Number of votes obtained; 


''Viet-Nam 36 
'"' ''China" 17 
Cambodia 9 


19. Having obtained the required majority, Viet-Nam was elected a Member 
of the" Board of- -Governors. -20. 
The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to proceed to fill the two 
other vacant seats on the Board of Governors. 

GC(V)/OR,59 
pago 6 


21. 
A vote was taken by secret ballot > 
The result of the vote was as follows; 
Number of ballot papers% 68 
Invalid ballotss 2 
Number of valid ballots; 66 
Number of Members votings • 66 
Required majoritys 34 
Number of votes obtained! 
Colombia 49 
Greece 40 
Ghana 26 
Cambodia 1 
Morocco 1 
New Zealand 1 
Tunisia 1 

^2. Having obtained the required majority, Colombia and Greece were ' 
sleeted Members of the Board of Governors. 


23. The PRESIDENT declared the elections completed and recalled that, 
under Article VI.D of the Statute, the Members just elected would hold office 
from the end of the fifth regular session of the Conference until the end of 
the seventh regular session. He congratulated the new Members on their 
election and thanked the tellers. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH OTHER ORGANIZATIONS IN THE UNITED NATIONS FAMILY 


(b) 
RELATIONSHIP AGREEMENTS (continued from the 55th meeting) 
24. Mr. BITTENCOURT (Brazil), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's reports on the proposed Relationship 
Agreement between the Agency and the Inter-governmental Maritime Consultative 
Organisation (iKCO) (GC(V)/179) a"d on the proposed Executing Agency Agreement 
between the Agency and the United Nations Special Fund (GC(v)/180). 
Relationship' Agreement between the Agency and the Inter-governmental Maritime 
Consultative Organization (IMCO) (GC(V)/153, 179) 


25. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution on the proposed 
•agreement between the Agency and IMCO (GC(v)/153, Annex), the adoption of 

GC(V)/OR.59 
page 7 


which had been recommended by the Administrative and Legal Committee in its 
report (GC('V)/179). 


26. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
27. The PRE SIDENT pointed out that the agreement with IMCO was the 
seventh relationship agreement concluded between the Agency and specialized 
agencies of the United Nations. He was.happy to see the bonds between the 
Agency and other members of the United Nations family becoming continuously 
closer, and that the Conference had approved the agreement with IMCO. 
28. fer. GROSCLAUPB (Observer for the Inter-governmental Maritime Consultative 
Organization), speaking at the. President's invitation, thanked the 
Conference for its unanimous approval of the relationship agreement between 
the Agency and IMCO. That instrument constituted formal sanction of the 
working arrangements maintained between the secretariats of the two organizations 
for more than two years past^ it expanded the scope of that collaboration 
by making the organizations themselves parties to it. The 
Convention by which IMCO was established, while recognizing the latter1s 
general competence in maritime matters, laid stress on safety at sea and the 
efficiency of navigation. Since its establishment in January 1959? IMCO 
had taken over the functions previously assigned to the Government of the 
United Kingdom, by the 1948 International Convention for the Safety of Life 
at Sea. . . 
29. More than 60 States had taken part, in May and June 1960, in the preparation 
of a new convention on the safety of human life at sea, which included 
a chapter on safety in connection with nuclear-propelled vessels. 
The relationship agreement with the Age.ncy had thus- been approved at a particularly 
favorable moment.' It would ensure even closer co-operation between 
the two organizations, and facilitate the pooling of their experience and of 
the means at their disposal for the fulfillment of the aims laid down in their 
respective constitutions. 
30. On behalf of the Secretary General of IMCO, he thanked the Director 
General and the Secretariat for the welcome they had always extended to IMCO 
representatives. 

GC(V)/OR„59 
page G 


Executing Agency Agreement between the Agency and the United Nations Special 
Fund (GC(V)/167, l8o), 


31. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution on the proposed 
Executing Agency Agreement between the Agency and the United Nations Special 
Fund (GC(v)/167, Annex), the adoption of which had been recommended by the 
Administrative and Legal Committee in its report (GC(v)/13o). 
32. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously, 
ESTABLISHMENT UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE AGENCY OF AN INTEIINATIONAL INSURANCE 
SCHEME FOR SCIENTISTS (GC(V)/18l) 


33, Mr. BITTENCOURT (Brazil), Rapporteur of the Administrative and 
Legal Committee, presented the Committee's report on the establishment of 
an international insurance scheme for scientists (GC(v)/18l). 


34, The PRESIDENT invited the delegate of Greece to speak to the 
draft resolution submitted by his country, which the Committee had recommended 
for- o,doption in its report. 


33, Mr. SPANIDES (Greece)> who said he was speaking for the first 


timo since the beginning of the session, congratulated the President on his 


election


36. Ho thanked the delegates of the Administrative and Legal Committee for 
having unanimously approved the draft resolution on the establishment of an 
international insurance scheme for scientists. He hoped that the survey 
which th3 Director General was to undertake and then submit to the Board 
would result in the formulation of an insurance scheme that would enable 
scientists to devote themselves exclusively to their work without any 
material worries regarding their future. 
37. Social insurance schemes varied from country to country. For many 
countries they were a problem of great importance, and numerous States Members 
of the Agoncy, -while very advanced in other fields, such as that of atomic 
energy, had not yet succeeded in solving it. For those countries, participates 
by their scientists in an international insurance scheme might even 
lenote the beginnings of security and constitute a great step forward. 


38. He would not repeat the arguments in favor of an international scheme 
of insurance for scientific workers put forward in the Administrative and 
Le^al Ccumittee.^' He wished to stress, however, that the adoption of such 
Aj See Document GC(v)/COM.2/OR.25, paragraphs 61-63. 


GC(V)/OR.59 
page 9 


a scheme would help to solve difficulties arising in connection with scientists 
in the smaller countries which it was the Agency's task to assist. He hoped 
that the resolution would lead to action being taken which would greatly 
benefit scientists and atomic energy in general, 


39. Finally, he thanked the delegates who had voted for Greece's election 
to the Board. He wished to assure those countries, and also those countries 
that had not supported its candidature, that Greece, acting in a dignified 
and impartial manner and with the greatest respect for the views of all, would 
watoh over the interests of Member States and do its utmost to promote the 
fulfillment of the tasks incumbent upon the Agency. 
40. The CHAIEMA1 put the draft resolution (GC(V)/18l) to the vote. 
41• The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(v)/OR.60 
7 December 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
onHeld a t the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
Thursday, 5 October 1961 , a t 3.35 p.m. 
President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina ) 
CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda* 
Paragraphs 
11 General debate and report of the Boardof Governors for 196O-61 
(continued from the 55th meeting) 
1 
17 The question of a general review of theprovisions of the Statute 
2-75 

GC(V)/171. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(v)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5920 



GC(v)/OR„60 
page 2 


UJfiNJSHAJj DEBATE~MD REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS 'FOE T9'60-61''(continued 
from the 55"th meeting) • • 

1. The PRESIDENT recalled that at the 55"fch meeting he had told the 
Conference that under item 11 of the agenda it had still to discuss the draft 
resolution in document GC(v)/175. The delegation which had submitted that 
draft resolution had now informed him that it did not insist that the draft 
resolution be discussed and voted on$ consequently there was no need to 
return to the item. 
THE QUESTION OF A GENERAL BEVIEW OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE STATUTE (GC(v)/182) 


2. The PRESIDENT stated that the item was on the agenda in compliance 
with Article XVIII.B'of the Statute. The relevant document was document 
GC(v)/182, which contained a draft resolution by six Member States. He 
asked the delegate of Iran to introduce the draft resolution, 
3° Mr. AZAD (Iran) recalled that the Statute stipulated that the question 
of a general review of the Statute be placed on the agenda of the "fifth""regular 
session of the Conference for a decision as to when such a review should take 
place. 


4o His Government thought it would be premature to undertake a general 
review as early as the sixth regular session, and considered that the whole 
question should be postponed for a further three years. 


5„ The Agency had been in existence for only four years and had had an 
operational program for only two years, so that it did not have sufficient 
experience to proceed to a full review at the moment. The draft resolution 
left the way open for amendments to parts of the Statute in accordance with 
the procedure laid down in the Statute. The Conference had had an example 
of such an amendment when the number of seats on the Board, had been increased 


2/ 


on the previous day.—' Another reason for postponing the review of the 


Statute was to enable the new Director General to familiarize himself with 

the provisions and implications of the Statute, so that he would be in a' 
better position to assess the question. 


l/ GC(V)/OR.55, paragraph 44. 
2/ GC(V)/OR„58, paragraph 64. 


GC(v)/OR.60 
page 3 


6, Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) said that his Government 


endorsed the views expressed by the delegate of Iran and would support the 


draft resolution* The draft resolution recognized the need of proceeding to 


a review of the Statute at an appropriate time, hut implied that it would be 


too early to undertake that task in 1962, 


7c Mr. MI TEA (India) said his Government supported the draft resolution, 


It was very much in favor of a review of the Statute being undertaken at an 


appropriate time, but considered that it would be too early to do it at the 


sixth regular session. It would be far better to wait until there was a 
better spirit of mutual help and understanding between Member States. 


8. The Agency was ostensibly a purely scientific organization, but it was 
generally recognized by now that such was not the case and that it was greatly 
influenced by non-scientific considerations. The United Nations, too, had 
decided not to proceed to a general review of its Charter in view of the international 
situation. The draft resolution would not prevent delegations or 
groups of delegations from asking for a review of certain parts of the Statute only 
the general review would be .postponed. His Government considered, indeed, 
that certain parts of the Statute needed immediate revision, especially 
Article VI. 
9. The head of his delegation had pointed out during the general debate that 
the world had undergone great changes since the birth of the Agency^ many new 
countries had joined the United Nations family and the pattern of membership 
had changed enormously. Those changes should be reflected in the structure 
of the Agency, and the composition of the Board should be changed to take them 
into account. He had the impression that the members of the Board had been 
unanimously in favor of increasing the representation of Africa and Asia on 
the Board, but when the opportunity to bring about such an increase had arisen, 
no action had been taken. The results of a vote in the Board could always 
be predicted in advance, and he thought that was a regrettable state of affairs. 


10. Ho satisfactory definition had been given of the areas referred to in 
Article VI of the Statute. That/ article also specified what categories of 
Member should be appointed to the Board, but it was clear that in making those 
3/ GC(V)/0E.55, paragraph 32. 



GC(V)/OR,60 
page 4 


appointments the Board often acted contrary to the provisions of Article III.B.l, 
which laid down that the Agency should carry out its activities in such a way 
as to "promote peace and international co-operation"„ The United Nations 


Security Council had condemned certain countries for acting contrary to the 


canons of international peace and co-operation, and those very same countries 
were automatically represented on the Board under Article VI„ . That was a 


serious anomaly in the Statute and it had already been discussed by the Board, 


llo He feared that little attention was paid to statements made at the 
Conference but he wanted to make it clear that feelings were being created and 
passions aroused which would one day recoil against those who had caused them. 


12. The Indian delegation supported the draft resolution unreservedly, and 
regarded it as a serious attempt to deal with the question of the review of 
the Agency's Statute. 
13. Mr. MELYAWPV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
question of a general review of the provisions of the Statute should be considered 
in the light of the Agency's operating experience and the changes that 
had taken place in the world situations 
14. What could one gather from the Agency's operating experience? At the 
present time the Agency's work consisted principally of the following activitiest 
provision of a certain amount of technical assistance to Member States? 
organization of various international scientific and technical meetings5 
publication of reference material and information on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy^ award of fellowships to nationals of Member States; research 
contracts? and the determination of various kinds of international standards 
for the safe use of atomic energy„ Such work was, of course, useful. 
15. But the Agency had been set up for other purposes as well. Its main 
task was to oo-operate in the wide use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 
The statement was often made that atomic energy was not economic. However, 
that was not the main reason for the hold-up in the peaceful .uses of atomic 
energy. The main reason was the armaments race, which was slowing down the 
development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy in the United States was being slowed down artificially. One 

GC(v)/OR„60 
page 5 


illustration was the sad story of the construction of the merchant ship 


"Savannah", which could easily have been completed by 1959 hut had still not 
been launched. 


16. The head of the Indian delegation had correctly stated that a hundred 
times as much was being spent on research into the military uses of atomic 
energy as on research into its peaceful uses.^ If that situation continued, 
one could hardly expect that atomic energy would become economic in the near 
future, or that the Agency's duty "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world" would 
soon bo fulfilled. The United States had made the wide use of atomic energy 
dependent on acceptance by receiving countries of the Agency's safeguards and 
control system. 
17• As he had stated in the general debate? the group of Western countries 
which controlled the Agency was preventing the establishment of genuine international 
co-operation. Using their numerical majority, those countries would 
not allow five socialist countries to participate in the Agency's work. As 


everyone would recall, even the draft resolution inviting observers from those 


socialist countries to attend the Conference had been rejected by means of 


the voting machine. If co-operation were really desired and actions were 
guided by the principles of peaceful co-existence and co-operation instead of 
by likes and dislikes, the question of admitting those socialist countries 
which were still not Members of the Agency could easily be settled, 


18. A new diktat had been imposed two days previously when the question had 
arisen of approving the Board's appointment to the post of Director General. 
Although Mr. Eklund's candidature had not been supported either by the 
socialist countries or by many Afro-Asian countries, the delegations of the 
United States and its allies had forced through Mr. Eklund's appointment. 
19. The Western representatives liked to claim "that they regarded the Agency 
as an important link between East and West. That was a lie.' If they really 
desired to co-operate and to maintain the Agency as a link between East and 
West, they would not have thrust Mr. Eklund into the post of Director General. 
They intended to aggravate conditions in the Agency and to break that link, 
and the responsibility fell on their shoulders. 
4/ GG'(V)/0E.58, paragraph 22. 



GC(V)'011.60 
page 6 


20, Turning to the question of a general review of the provisions of the 
Statute, he said that the Agency's operating experience clearly showed that 
in its present form the Statute gave a dominant position in the Agency to one 
group of States - the United States of America and countries hound to it by 
military and political treaties. That group acted against the interests of 
the two other groups of States — the socialist and the neutral countries. 
The situation would remain the same until the structure of the Agency's ruling 
bodies was radically changed. That structure should be rebuilt from top to 
bottom, beginning with the Board and ending with the Director General and the 
Secretariat, so that the three basic groups of countries were represented 
on an equal footing in all the Agency's organs, 


21„ Referring to the question of increasing the membership of the Board from 
23 to 25 Members, he drew attention to the present state of the Board. Was 
the representation of geographical areas a just one? The area of Worth 
America was represented in the Board by the United States and Canada, in other 


'words the representation was 100%* In all other areas representation was 
limited to from 14 to 50/6. That alone was an example of injustice. 


22. Gould certain countries appointed to the Board from particular areas 
really represent the interests of States in those areas? For instance, it 
was well known that the policy of racial discrimination and apartheid pursued 
by a certain country represented on the Board was a flagrant violation of human 
rights and fundamental liberties„ It had been repeatedly condemned by the 
United Nations General Assembly and Security Councils The General Assembly, 
in a resolution adopted at its fifteenth session, had condemned that country 
for violating the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. Despite serious warnings, the Government of that country continued to 
ignore United Nations decisions. Could that country really represent the 
countries of Africa and the Middle East? 
23. Belgium's place on the Board had now been taken by another colonial Power, 
despite the legal objections to its appointment that had been expressed in the 
Board. Under Article IV.B of the Statute, when a State was admitted to the 
Agency duo consideration must be given to "its ability and willingness to act 
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United 
Nations"? but if the State, being a Member of the Agency, violated a decision 

GC(v)/OR.60 
page 7 


of the United Nations and the Security Council, what was to he done? The 


Agency's Statute allowed it to he designated automatically for memhership of 


the Board. Was that right? 


24o What was the present political structure of the Board? Out of its 23 
members, 16 represented Western countries and their military and political 
allies. Three memhers of the Board represented the socialist countries, and 
four the non-aligned. With such a ratio on the Board, could the socialist 
and the neutral countries rely on their interests being given due consideration? 
Certainly not5 and in fact their interests were not being considered. 5br 
example, all would remember that at the fourth session of the Conference there 
had been differences of opinion about safeguards. Eaturally the views of 
receiving countries on that important matter affecting their interests differed 
from the views of countries insisting on safeguards. The United States, 
wishing at all costs to force through a system of safeguards, had put forward 
a draft resolution providing that the Board should take into account the views 
expressed in the Conference. Had the Board tried to consider the views of the 
different countries and find a generally acceptable solution? He must solemnly 
declare that no such effort had been made. The United States had started by 
proposing that a document concerning safeguards submitted earlier to the 
Conference be approved without change, and the Western majority in the Board 
had supported the proposal. Thus the document had been rubber-stamped, 


25, The present procedure of constituting the Board on the basis of geographi


cal areas and the level of development in the application of atomic energy 
which the various countries had attained had meant in practice that over two


thirds of the seats fell unfairly to the Western countries belonging to 
military and political pacts, which dictated to the others. Such an abuse 


of elementary democratic principles precluded normal international co-operation. 


26. Characteristically, when the Board had discussed the increased representation 
of the "Africa and the Middle East" area, the Governor from Argentina had 
proposed that the "Latin America" area be given more seats. If the 20 Latin 
American countries, with a total population of about 200 million, needed five 
seats in the Board to defend their interests, as asserted by the Governor from 
Argentina, why should the 14 socialist countries with a population of over 
1000 million - more than one-third of the world's population - have only three 
seats on the Board? 

GC(V)/0E„60 
page ft 


27„ Surely it would be more just to change the Board's membership in such, a 
way that the thr,ee groups of States were equally represented„ That was the 
only method of preventing one group from dominating the others, 


28, Through the arbitrary action of the Western countries, five socialist 
countries were at present not represented in the Agency, In addition, about 
26 newly independent States, or States shortly to acquire independence, were 
not represented. If they were counted, about 1000 trillion people would be 
represented by each of the three groups of States^ and it would be both 
reasonable .and fair for the throe to be equally represented on the Board, thus 
ensuring that no single group had a privileged position in- the Agency and that 
the activities of the Agency and the Board would ncc damage the interests of 
any one of them, 


29. Other factors in the Agency's structure vriiich enabled the Western 
countries to dominate its work were the Director General and the Secretariat 
under him<. Article VII of the Statute, providing for the appointment of one 
chief administrative officer, was unsatisfactory. His delegation therefore 
considered that that article should be reviewed so as to replace the Director 
General by a collective executive organ in which the three main groups of 
States would be represented on an equal footing and with equal rights, 
30„ What was the situation in the Secretariat? Out of 207 professional posts, 
120 in all were concentrated in the hands of the Western Powers. Of 53 
directorial and P,5 posts, 35 were held by nationals of the United States and 
its allies,- The 18 directorial posts had been assigned so as to give a 
preponderant majority, namely 12, to -the United States and the Western 
countries. The Philippines delegate had stated indignantly tha'c the allocation 
of posts in the Agency was even worse than in the United Nations, The 
result of that abnormal situation was that the staff, recruited mainly from 
one side, particularly at the higher levels, was iised to channel the Agency's 
work in important spheres in a way that suited the interests primarily of the 
United States and its allies. 


31. The question of whether a general review of the Statute should be undertaken 
at the sixth regular session in 1962 ought to be decided at the present 
session. The Soviet Union held that international events and experience in 
the Agency demonstrated that the provisions of the Statute concerning the 

GC(v)/OR,60 
page 9 


structure of the Agency's main organs were obsolete and no longer accorded 
with the present balance of power in the world. Accordingly the Statute 
should be reviewed so as to give equal rights and conditions for collaboration 
to all three groups of States. His delegation was convinced that the majority 
of Member States would soon agree to the necessity of a review with, that aim, 
and that its opinion would prevail. 


32. The joint draft resolution on a general review of the Statute was based 
on assumptions diametrically opposed to those underlying his Government's 
view, which he had explained. The purpose of the draft resolution was wholly 
unacceptable and legally indefensible. It proposed that the question of a 
general review of the Statute be put in cold storage for three years5 but 
the review procedure v/as laid down in the Statute itself, and no resolution 
purporting to change it could have any legal effect. 
33. .It was patently obvious that the joint draft resolution was at variance 
with the requirements of the Statute and would limit the rights of Member 
States. The draft resolution could not lawfully be discussed until 
Article XVIII had been amended. 
34• The object of the draft resolution was clear. The world situation was 
changing rapidly. Socialist countries were playing a more important part, 
and newly independent countries were developing. Those changes affected the 
Agency's work. The United States and its Western supporters were therefore 
frightened of any review of the Statute and were trying to maintain the 
status quo in the Agency. For those reasons his delegation would vote against 
the joint draft resolution, 


35* Mr. EL AEETABI (Tunisia) said that he found himself in a quandary over 
the six-Power draft resolution, which as it stood seemed to him superfluous. 
Moreover, paragraph 3 of the operative part nullified the effect of paragraph 1. 
If any hidden meaning underlay the proposals, he had failed to discern what 
it v/as. 


36. Mr. HOCHSTRASSER (Switzerland) confirmed that the purpose of the draft 
resolution was to avoid premature discussion of the question of a general review 
of the Statute. However, the word "premature" being open to differing interpretations, 
some flexibility had been introduced in.order that any action found 
necessary between now and the eighth regular session should not be ruled out. 

GC(V)/OR.60 


page 10 


37• If- "the proposal „to- deal with the matter at the eighth regular session 


did not meet with general approval, he was ready .to consider an amendment , . 


substituting the, seventh regular session. The main idea was to leave the 


incoming Director.General time to familiarize himself with the Agency and its 


work and to gather material gradually for the general review. Secondly, it 


had been thought desirable to postpone a review to give time for the existing 


world tension to relax. As a co-sponsor., Switzerland would vote .for the draft 


resolution, 


38. Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) remarked that;, since the time when the 
Agency's Statute had bean adopted, changes had occurred both in international 
life and scientific evolution; the number of States possessing the secrets of 
the atom was steadily growing. Those changes could not be ignored. They 
must be reflected in the Agency's structure and that could be achieved only 
through a general review of the Statute, 
39° The principle of universality in the Agency should take first place in the 
Statute, since it was an incontrovertible fact that today every State in the 
world was taking an active part in international life. That principle was 
closely linked with the principle of equitable representation - a contention 
that was supported by the fact that at its fourth regular session the Conference 
had deemed it necessary to recommend the Board to study the question of 
representation in its membership. The partial amendment that had been 
introduced into the Statute did not ensure full respect for that principle§ a 
more radical change was needed, 


40, The current composition of the Board did not properly reflect the three 


groups of countries represented in the Agency, Such an inequitable situation 


could not be allowed to continue and the three groups must be given equal 


representation on the Board, 


41, The spirit of co-operation and mutual understanding demanded that the 
Agency should give every State, whether a Member or not, the opportunity to take 
part in scientific conferences and symposia so that all alike might benefit 
from progress in nuclear science, ' 


.42. Obviously, those v/ere•not•the only problems calling for amendment of the 


Agency's Statute.• The question of the safeguards provisions attaching to 


technical assistance .also needed to-be taken up. The present safeguards system 



GC(v)/0H.60 
page 11 


was too strict and might hamper the Agency's basic work, It was contrary to 
the principle of the national sovereignty of the applicant countries, and those 
countries would not be prepared to accept the strict control demanded, 


43* He had by no means exhausted the instances in respect of which a change 
was called for in the Statute, but those he had mentioned were the main ones 
that militated against the development and effectiveness of the Agency, The 
Bulgarian delegation supported all the points made in that connection by the 


Soviet delegate, 


44- The Bulgarian delegation considered that the terms of the six-Power draft 


resolution were contrary to the Statute and would therefore vote against it. 


45. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) thought that the question of the general 
review of the Statute had been needlessly complicated by the many irrelevant , 
considerations that had been introduced into the discussion. All the 
Conference was being asked to do under the six-Power draft resolution was to 
decide in principle to defer a general review for several years. At the same 
time it was stipulated that the Board or the Conference could decide to 
undertake a review of individual provisions at an earlier date. 
46, The discussion had shown that amendments were likely to be submitted to 
Article VI of the Statute in particular, and the United Kingdom might submit 
proposals for the revision of Article XIV. An elaborate statement had been 
made of the grounds on which it was claimed that Article VI should be amended. 
But now was not the time to consider the question in substance and accordingly 
he would not pursue the matter very far. However} in view of the many 
assertions that had been made, it was perhaps desirable to try to put the issue 
into perspective. 


47• All would agree, he was sure, that the voting in the Conference had 
faithfully reflected the voting in the Board. In other words, from the standpoint 
of Conference decisions, the Board faithfully represented the balance of 
interests in the Conference. That being so, it could hardly be maintained 


that the balance of representation in the Board was wrong. 


48. Under the Statute, the Conference was the Agency's supreme organ of 
authority. Nevertheless, there seemed to be some unwillingness on the part 
of certain representatives at the current session to accept the decisions that 

GC(V)/OR;6O 
page 12 


had'been made,' ' Th. that respect', reference had beenmade to voting blocs of 
•on'e"'-kind or another-. ' Whether or not such voting blocs existed' was irrelevant, 
A refusal to-accept'the decisions of the Conference was in fact tantamount to 
denyingthe elementary principle of democracy, since the balance of votes in the 


Conference was surely, a reflection of the democratic method of controlling the 
Agency's activities. . . . . 


49. It had been 'contended that a change should be'made in the balance of •the 
Board for reasons that seemed unconnected with the relation between the ' ', •"; 
Conference "and •'the Board. , In one case,reference had been made to .the creation 
of 26-'independent-States that were not Members of the Agency, The decision 
whether or not to become Members of the Agency lay with those States themselves, 
and would no doubt depend on the degree of interest 'theytcok in atomic 
energy. If, on due reflection, many of them decided not to become Members 
of the Agency, the Conference could not take their existence into account'.' 
50. A second and quite distinct argument had been advanced, to the.effecth . . 
that the Board should be based on the existence within the Agency of three 
so-called blocs. He had no desire to go' into the misconceptions that underlay 
that highly simplified description of the world as it stood today. But he 
would emphasize the complete difference of principle between the two arguments; 
the assertion on the one hand that the Board should be based on regional 
representation and on the other that it should reflect the balance of the three 
blocs. Both principles had been advanced in the same statement, although 
logically they were quite incompatible, 
51. The composition of the Board was a delicate amalgam of the interests 
represented in the Agencys technical, donor and recipient. If the general 
desire was for the Agency to develop further as a technical body, able to 
provide services and assistance to Member States, it should be in the interests 
of all to ensure that the States able to provide that help should have a 
somewhat larger voice, at least in the Board, than the straightforward principle 
of equal representation would call for. In fact, however, it seemed that a 
different assumption as to the purposes of the Agency underlay the discussion. 
If what was y/anted was simply another political forum on the model of the 
United Nations, a different pattern of representation would follow. If, oh 
the other hand, the Agency was to remain a technical body with'competence-' in its 

GC(V)/OR„60 
page 15 


own sphere of work, the primary concern should be how best to ensure that it 
could perform its function and discharge its duties. In short5 the United 
Nations, as a political forum, had a part to play in deciding issues of major 
political importance, including disarmament, whereas the Agency was concerned 
solely with issues affecting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


52. Lastly, he expressed regret that in the course of the discussion - and 
not for the first time - motives had been attributed to certain countries, 
including his own, which as far as the United Kingdom was concerned had no 
existence in reality, He did not wish to comment on the misleading assertions 
or misrepresentations that had been made, beyond saying that they were almost 
entirely without foundation* Consultation and compromise were two terms that 
had frequently been used during the Conference, Consultation and compromise 
had to be a two-way process, and that process was not helped by frequent 
repetition of misleading descriptions of Member States, frequent 
misrepresentations or frequent scoring of debating points. He felt he might 
safely claim, on the basis of his lengthy experience of the Agency, that the 
Western side had tried hard to compromise on every possible occasion. 
Admittedly, compromise became difficult where there was a major clash of 
principle, but even in such cases the United Kingdom in particular had gone as 
far as possible, short of relinquishing its principles entirely, in attempting 
to meet opposing views. In the end;, the working of the Agency would depend 
on the willingness of all Members to consult together and compromise, 
Assertions that due consultation had not been undertaken on particular issues, 
although perhaps due to misunderstanding, were simply not accurate, But 
consultation presupposed, that the minds of those consulted were not closed, or 
that their positions were not immovable„ Lacking those pre-conditions, 
consultation and compromise had no meaning. 


53. In conclusion, he recapitulated the aims of the six-Power draft resolution 
and said that the United Kingdom would vote in its favor. 
54. Mr. EL AMABI (Tunisia) said that he would vote against the draft 
resolution because he considered that it would need considerable re-drafting. 
Paragraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the preamble should be deleted. 
Paragraph 1 of the operative part should be amended to conform with the 
procedure, laid down in the Statute. Paragraph 2 should request the Director 

GC(V)/0E".60 
page 3 4 ' 


General to place the question on the provisional agenda of the next regular 
session of the Conference, Paragraph 5 should he deleted. Such re-drafting 
would preserve the right of the Conference to consider the question of a general 
review of the Statute in any year it wished. 


55- Mr. RA.CVAIAC (Czechoslovakia) said that the stipulation in 
Article XVIII„-B of the Statute that the question of the review of its provisions 
should be raised five years after the establishment of the Agency was a sound 
one, It was already-clear that many of the provisions needed amending. The 
world situation had greatly changed since the Statute had been drawn up, and in 
any case many of its provisions had been adopted against the wishes of certain 
Member States„ 


o 

560 To illustrate his contention, he would point out that the composition of 
the Board no longer reflected world forces. Article VI therefore needed 
revision. Article XII on safeguards had been drawn up when it had been thought 
that the Agency would become a major distributor of fissionable materials5 . but 
the United States had used that article to put through a control and 
inspection system which would hamper atomic energy development and to which 
the developing countries strongly objected. More generally, the Board had 
been given too great authority, including that of the power to appoint the 
Director General, 


570 For those and many other reasons, a review of the Statute was essential 
and urgent. The Czechoslovak delegation would therefore vote against the draft 
resolution, 


580 Mr. MITRA (India) said that he. had taken some part in the drafting 
of paragraph 3 of the operative part of the draft resolution, in the hope that 
that paragraph would make it possible for Article VI of the Statute to be 
amended. Many delegations, including his own, felt strongly that the 
composition of the Board, which was governed by that article, required extensive 
revision. 


59. He could not think, on the other hand, that the -atmosphere in the Agency 
was at present propitious for a review of the Statute as a whole, 
60. Ho wished- to refer briefly to certain statements which he felt had been, 
in part at least, directed against his own delegation, and to certain comments 
which had been made. It had been said that it was wrong to talk about 

GC(v)/OR.60 
page 15 


"voting machines". He remained convinced, however, that less than due weight 
was being given to the opinions of a large number of delegations, including his 
own. For example, the Conference had not been prepared to appoint-even one 
African representative to the Board, It had been said that a somewhat larger 
voice in the councils of the Agency should he given to those who supplied 
technical assistance than to those who received it. However, many nations, 
including his own, were both providers and recipients of technical assistance. 
It had been said that the composition of the Board was a technical and not a 
political matter. But there were political considerations which guided the 
Conference in making decisions regarding Article VI.A.2, 


61. Mr. BORISEVICH (Bye lorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
Agency's Statute had been drafted before sufficient experience of international 
co-operation in atomic energy had been acquired. The authors of the Statute 
had been fully awaro of that fact, and. had provided in Article XVIII.B for its 
general review at the sixth session of the Conference, He asked why, despite 
that perfectly clear provision, certain countries insisted that the Agency's 
Statute should not be reviewed at the said sixth session. There could be only 
one answers the United States and its allies liked to have undivided control 
of the Agency, which was to a great extent consolidated by the present Statute. 
From their point of view it was better not to review the Statute at allj or at 
least to postpone the review for three years. 
62. Events had proved that a number of the Statute's provisions were 
unsatisfactory. To take only one example, the composition of the Board was 
now altogether unsuitable. The matter had been discussed at length at previous 
meetings, and his delegation had clearly stated that the Board's structure 
must be exhaustively reconsidered so as to bring it into line with the radical 
changes that had taken place in the world. The structure of the Secretariat 
also called for considerable modification. The provision in Article VII of the 
Statute that the Secretariat should be. headed by a single administrator elected 
by simple majority enabled the Western countries to push their candidates for 
the important post of Director General. That was demonstrated by the fact 
that a few days previously Mr. Eklund's nomination had been forced through in the 
face of considerable opposition. 

ac(v)/oa.6o, 


page 16 


63, His delegation denied completely that the Agency had not gained enough 
experience to review the Statute, Quite enough .had happened to prove that 
one group of States was dictating to the Agency and that ..that practice must 
be stopped^ 


64. Clear proof of that fact was furnished by the six-Power draft resolution 
proposing that a .general review of the Statute he'postponed until-the eighthregular 
session of the Conference, despite the explicit procedure laid down in 
the Statute, which had been mentioned by the delegates of the Soviet Union and 
Tunisia. The draft resolution was too arbitrary, and it might well he asked 
why its authors had chosen the eighth sessions thoy might just as well have 
proposed postponement until the tenth, thirteenth or any other session, 
65. The draft resolution was wholly unacceptable because it sought .to tie the 
hands of Member States and to -preserve the abnormal situation which had arisen 
in the Agency. Its authors had not made the slightest effort to justify it 
properly, and had simply stated that the Agency had been in operation less than 
five years. The Statute did not specify how long the Agency should have been 
in operation, but clearly laid down the session at which the review should take 
place. The argument of the authors of the draft Resolution that the new 
Director General would need three years to study the Statute could not be taken 
seriously. It might well be asked what sort of a man would need three years 
to study the Statute. And just when could he be expected to apply it? 
66* The Byelorussian delegation opposed the draft resolution. •• 

67'. Mr.- BAUM (Yugoslavia), while not favoring an immediate review of the 
Statute as a whole, thought that amendments to Article VI were essential. The 
criteria for choosing the membership of the Board were quite out of date. The 
number of elected members should be increased. He could not support the draft 
resolution because it did not give sufficient scope for an amendment to 
Article VI. 


68. Mr. BREW (Ghana) could not see that paragraph 3 of "the operative 
part of the draft resolution had much pqint when read in conjunction with 
Article XVIII.B of the Statute. Surely the eventual general review of the 
provisions of the Statute would in any case be bound to concentrate on certain 
individual provisions. 

GC(v)/OR,60 
page 17 


69. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia), on a point of order, said that the 
vrord "thereafter" in the last sentence of Article XVIII.B clearly meant "at 
any subsequent session". That being so, paragraph 1 of the operative part 
of the draft resolution was in conflict with Article XVIII.B and must be 
considered as an amendment to it. But Rule 101 of the Conference's Rules 
of Procedure laid down certain conditions to govern the submission of such 
amendments, which had not been complied with in the present case. Paragraph 1 
was therefore out of order. 
70. The PRESIDENT took it that the delegate of Czechoslovakia meant to 
imply that the draft resolution was contrary to the spirit of the Statute. 
The Conference would have to decide that point by adopting or rejecting the 
draft resolution, which ho would therefore put to the vote, 
71. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia), on a point of order, said he had 
understood the President to say that paragraph 1 of the draft resolution was 
an amendment to the Statute. In that case, Article XVIII.C applied and a 
two-thirds majority would be required. 
72. Mr. EL ANNABI (Tunisia) agreed that the draft resolution appeared 
to be an amendment to the Statute. He thought that the re-drafting of it 
which he had proposed in his previous speech would get over the difficulty. 
73. Mr. AMMOUN (Lebanon) pointed out that the procedure for adopting an 
amendment to the Statute included consideration of observations submitted by 
the Board. He did not, however, think it was the intention of the drafters 
of the resolution to amend the Statute. He supported the re-drafting 
suggested by the delegate of Tunisia. 
74. The PRESIDENT said that the draft resolution had not been submitted 
as an amendment to the Statute. He could not himself say whether it was one 
or not. 
75- Mr. WERSHOF (Canada) considered that the draft resolution was not an 
amendment to the Statute. He thought, furthermore, that there had been some 
misunderstanding about the significance of paragraph 1 of its operative part. 
There could be no doubt that Article XVIII.B of the Statute permitted the 
question of a general review of the Statute to be put on the agenda of the 



GC(V)/OR.6o 
page 18 


Conference in any year. The draft resolution merely said that that question 
should be put on the agenda of the eighth regular session,. The effect of 
the re-drafting proposed by the delegate of Tunisia appeared to he that the 
question should be put on the agenda of the sixth session of the Conference 
rather than of the eighth session* 


The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(V)/OR.6l 
7 December 1961 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 
ENGLISH 


FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 6 October 1961, at 11 a.m. 
President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
Credentials of delegates to the fifth regular 
session 
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 
79 
21 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 
for 1962 80 94 


* GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(v)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5924 



GC(V)/OR.61 
page 2 


CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(v)/189) 
1. The PRESIDENT called upon the Chairman of the Credentials Committee 
to present the Committee's report (GC(v)/189). 
2. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia), Chairman of the Credentials Committee, 
said that the Committee had held two meetings, on 27 September and 
5 October 1961. Its report was quite clear and needed no explanation. 
3„ Mr. URANOVICZ (Hungary) noted from the report that the Committee was 
again recommending the Conference to adopt the United States delegation's 
proposal on the representation of China. The Committee also asked the 
Conference tc approve its report, 


4. The Hungarian delegation strongly protested against the occupation of 
China's seat by persons representing no one but themselves and a discredited 
clique of impostors who had been thrown out of China by the Chinese people. 
The only legitimate government entitled to send representatives of the great 
Chinese nation to international conferences was the Central People's Government 
of the People's Republic of China. 
5. The Hungarian delegation 'maintained that there was only one China, the 
People's Republic of China, and that it was wholly intolerable that the 
Chinese people should continue to be deprived of its right to participate in 
international life on a basis of equality with other nations. The representation 
of the Chinese People's Republic could not be regarded as a matter of 
political bargaining. The Hungarian delegation would therefore vote against 
draft resolution I submitted with the Credentials Committee's report, 
6. Paragraph 1J5 of the report referred to a motion introduced by the United 
States delegate that the Committee take no decision regarding the credentials 
submitted on behalf of the representatives of Hungary. That motion showed the 
extent to which the United States could be swayed by imperialistic political 
considerations! it was contrary to good sense, was a flagrant breach of 
Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure, and had no legal basis. The Hungarian • 
delegation's credentials fully satisfied the requirements of Rule 27, and had 
been issued by a Government with which the United States maintained diplomatic 
relations. 

GC(v)/OR.6l 
page 3 


7. The only explanation of the motion presented by the United States delegation 
with regard to the credentials of the Hungarian delegation was that the 
United States refused to abandon its cold-war policy and come down to reality. 
The Hungarian Government protested against the United States' attitude? and 
deeply regretted that some members of the Credentials Committee still supported 
United States interference in the internal affairs of a Member State. Attempts 
of that kind were doomed to failure. 
8. It was an undeniable fact that the Hungarian People's Eepublic had taken 
part in the Agency's work from the beginning. The election of Hungary to the 
Board of Governors-^ proved that 43 Member States recognized the part it had 
played in that work, and the Hungarian delegation thanked them. 
9. For the reasons he had given, the Hungarian delegation would vote against 
the two draft resolutions submitted with the report, which were manifestations 
of a policy that gravely endangered the very existence of the Agency. 
10. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) considered it 
necessary to make the following statement of principle in connection with the 
report of the Credentials Committee: 
,1In accordance with the declarations it made at the international 
conference on the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
the Czechoslovak delegation has stated at previous sessions of the 
General Conference that the Czechoslovak Government does not recognize 
any signature on the Statute on behalf of China other than that of the 
representatives of the People's Republic of China, On the same 
grounds, the Czechoslovak Government does not recognize any credentials 
issued on behalf of China other than credentials issued by the only 
legitimate Government of China, which is the Central People's 
Government of the People's Republic of China." 


11. In that connection the Czechoslovak delegation protested once again against 
the policy of discrimination pursued by certain Western Powers, which prevented 
the People's Republic of China from becoming a Member of the Agency. That 
abnormal situation was detrimental to the Agency, to its activities and to 
international co,-oporation in the field of atomic energy. 
12. The seat that belonged to China was being usurped by private persons who 
had nothing in common with China's 65O million people. Their presence at the 
Conference was possible only because Taiwan was occupied by armed forces of the 
United States. Moreover, the results of the elections to the Board clearly 
reflected the real international situation, which United States policy would 
not recognize. 
1/ GC(V)/OR.59, paragraph 13. 



GC(V)/OR. 61 
page 4 


13. The motion which had been presented by the United States delegation and • 
adopted by the Committee, and was mentioned in paragraph 1J of its report, 
relating to the credentials of the representatives of the Hungarian People's 
Republic, was an attempt to undermine the authority of the people and Government 
of the Hungarian People's Republic. The Committee's decision could not he 
accepted, because the credentials' of the Hungarian delegation had been issued, 
by the legally elected Government of Hungary, in' accordance with the constitution 
of the country. The attitude of the delegations which had supported the 
United States motion was all the more surprising because they represented-
States which maintained diplomatic relations with Hungary. 
14. The motion was, in fact, a manifestation of the cold war which certainly 
did not contribute to improving relations between States, but could do nothing 
to disturb the international position of the Hungarian People's Republic. The 
election of Hungary to the Board by 43 votes confirmed that the decision of 
the Credentials Committee was unfounded. It was relevant to recall that in 
April 1961 the representative of the Hungarian-People's Republic had been 
elected vice-chairman of an international conference held in Hew York, which 
had adopted a multilateral convention on narcotic drugs*! the representative 
of the Hungarian People's Republic had been elected a member of the drafting 
committee of the United Nations Conference on Diplomatic Intercourse and 
Immunities held in March and April 19615 and a few days previously the 
Hungarian representative had been elected rapporteur of the Sixth (Legal) 
Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, 
15. The Czechoslovak delegation accepted the credentials of the delegation 
of the Hungarian People's Republic, and requested the Conference to approve 
them. 
16. The Czechoslovak delegation would vote against the Credentials Committee's 
report, 
17. Mr. MITRA (India) regretted that the Credentials Committee's report 
contained a number of errors. 
18. In the opinion of the Indian delegation, the legitimate Government of 
Hungary was the Government of the Hungarian People's Republic. He hoped the 
legitimacy of that Government, would not be questioned again at each of the 
forthcoming meetings of the Board. 

GC(v)/OR,6l 
page 5 


19. With regard to paragraph 5 of the report, he said that India had always 
regarded the Government of the People's Republic of China as the legitimate 
Government of China. 
20. The Indian delegation would vote against draft resolution I submitted by 
the Credentials Committee, which was illegal and not in conformity with the 
precedent created by the United Nations General Assembly at its current session, 
21. Mr. CARGO (United States of America) said that his delegation would 
vote in favor of the two resolutions reproduced in paragraph 18 of the 
Credentials Committee's report. 
22o The United States delegation would refrain from replying to the allegations 
made by certain delegates, in order to avoid any political discussion which 
might prevent the Conference from concentrating on the important mission of the 
Agency. 


23„ The views of the United States on the representation of China and the 


credentials of the Hungarian delegation had repeatedly been made clear and 
would he made clear again in the political organs of the United Nations. In 


submitting its draft resolution I? the Credentials Committee had simply conformed 
to the practice followed at previous sessions and by other organizations 
of the United Nations family. 


24. As the question of the representation of China was under consideration 
at the current session of the United Nations General Assembly, it did not 
seem fitting that a member of the United Nations family should change the 
procedure it had always followed, until the General Assembly had reached a 
decision on the subject. 
25. Furthermore, the action taken by the Credentials Committee on the question 
of the Hungarian delegation conformed to the practice followed by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations at its last five regular sessions, at its third 
special session and at its recent special session, 
26. The United States delegation hoped that the Conference would approve the 
report of the Credentials Committee, 
27. Mr. 3XEMITRIU (R omama ) ob served that the systematic opposition of 
the United States and a certain number of other Powers prevented the People's 
Republic of China from being represented in the Agency. The Romanian 

GC(V)/QR.61 
page 6 


delegation must protest against such an attitude, which debarred a Great Power 
from participating in the Agency's activities and, by the operation of an 
automatic majority, arbitrarily enabled a puppet Government to usurp the seat 
of the People's Republic of China, which was playing an increasingly important 
part in .international life. 


28. It was inconceivable that the Agency should continue to ignore the 
existence of a country whose population represented a quarter of mankind, and 
which was in a position to make a valuable contribution to scientific progress. 
The Romanian delegation maintained that only the Government of the People's 
Republic of China was entitled to represent the Chinese people at the Conference. 
29. He also protested against the Credentials Committee's recommendation concerning 
the credentials submitted on behalf of the Hungarian delegates. 
30. The Romanian delegation would vote against the draft resolutions recommended 
by the Committee. 
31. Mr. EMBLYAWOY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) vehemently 
protested against the recognition of the credentials of Chiang Kai-skek adherents 
who claimed to represent China at the Conference, whereas in fact they 
represented nobody but a group of reactionaries who had been driven out of 
China in defeat. That clique had nothing in cojnrnon with the Chinese people. 
32.' The right to represent China at the Agency belonged solely to the delegates 
appointed by the Government of the People's Republic of China. At the present 
time, no international problem could bo solved without taking the views and 
interests of that Republic into account. The absence of the great Chinese 
State was prejudicial to the Agency's essential activities. China's 
authority on the international scene was continually increasing. It had 
established diplomatic relations with 40 States, and its commercial and 
cultural exchanges were world-wide. Except for the United States, the 
principal capitalist countries were trading with China? the Chinese people's 
co-operation with the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America was constantly 
developing. 

33. At the present time, representatives of the People's Republic of China 
were taking part in the negotiations concerning Laos which were^ in progress 
at Geneva. The sixteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly, 

0C(V)/QR.61 
page 7 


currently in progress, had broken the opposition of those who, for the last 
ten years, had blocked consideration of the question of recognizing that 
country's rights in the United Nations. That vital question was now on the 
agenda, and the Soviet delegation was convinced that all who wished to 
strengthen peace and co-operation between States wore in favor of recognizing 
the' rightful place of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations. 


34• The attitude of the United States delegation, which was endeavoring at 
the present session to maintain the existing intolerable situation and again 
to impose the adherents of Chiang Kai-shek on the Agency as legitimate 
"representatives" of China, showed once more that the United States was pursuing 
a cold-war policy and thus creating an atmosphere in the Agency which made 
co-operation impossible. By approving the United States motion that no proposal 
to exclude Chiang Kai-shek1s adherents from the Conference should he 
examined, the majority of the Credentials Committee's members had given their 
support to that bankrupt policy. The presence at the Conference of outsiders 
who claimed to represent China only impaired the Conference's authority, 
and their participation in the voting made it doubtful whether the decisions 
taken were legally valid. 


35' The Soviet delegation did not recognize the validity of the credentials 
of Chiang Kai-shek's representatives and would therefore vote against the draft 
resolution on the subject submitted by the Committee, It drew the attention 
of the Conference to the gra^o responsibility which must be borne by the 
Chiang Kai-shek clique, 


36. It deeply regretted that the Conference had once again had imposed on it 
the so-called problem of the Hungarian delegation's credentials. The action 
of the United States delegation in raising that question could be described 
only as a deliberate act of provocation, which reflected a desire to create 
an atmosphere of tension in the Conference. 
37. The Hungarian People's Republic was a Member of the Agency and discharged 
the obligations undertaken by it under the Statute by co-operating, in the 
Agency, with other States in the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 
On the previous day the Conference had elected Hungary to the Board by the 
largo majority of 43 votes, thus confirming the validity of the Hungarian 
delegation' s credentials.

GO (V)/OR. 61 
page 8 


38. Those credentials were in orders • they were in conformity with the 
Constitution of the Hungerian People's Republic and with the Rules of 
Procedure of.the General Conference. They had been submitted by the legitimate 
Government of Hungary, which maintained diplomatic relations with most 
States represented in the Agency.. Any attempt to question those credentials 
was an act of unwarrantable interference in the internal affairs of a Member 
State, 
39• The Soviet delegation protested against the decision regarding the 
Hungarian delegation's credentials which the Credentials Committee had taken 
under pressure from the United States. It urged that there should be a 


separate vote on the two draft resolutions which the Credentials Committee 
had submitted for adoption, and requested a roll-call vote on draft reso


lution I, 


4O0 Mr. FLEURE (Yugoslavia) said that only the Government of the People's 
Republic of China was entitled to represent the Chinese people at the Conference. 


41. He regretted that the validity of the Hungarian delegation's credentials 
had been disputed. Rio delegation considered that those credentials were in 
full conformity with the provisions of Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure . 
42. He would vote against the recommendations of the Credentials Committee, 
43 • Mr. ZHEUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
representatives of many countries, met together to consider extremely important 


and urgent questions; had once again been obliged, to suit the convenience of 


the United States, to abandon their essential work in order to hold a kind of 


spiritualist seance. The United States delegation proposed to admit, as the 


genuine representatives of China, people who were, so to speak, ghosts be


longing to the Chiang Kai-chek clique conjured up from the grave to which they 
had been consigned thirteen years previously, following'the glorious victory 


of the people's revolution in China, It might well be asked how much longer 


such fair-ground sp.,vitualisb shows with conjuring up of phantoms would con


tinue. Was it net time bo put an end to that caricature of history, reality 


and common sense? 


44• 1^ the United States persisted in refusing to recognize the People's 
Ropublic of China, it would eventually find itself isolated. There was adverse 
criticism of that erroneous policy even in the United States itself: 



GC(v)/OR.6l 
page 9 


Professor Nathaniel Peffer of Columbia University had urged that the United 
States should not make itself look foolish in the eyes of the world and irritate 
its friends still further by persisting in its attitude towards China. The 
fact should be faced that there was in the world only one China, in which 
650 million persons, who had entrusted their legitimate Government in Peking, 
the capital of the country, with a noble undertaking, were trying to build a 
new society. 


45• Some people claimed that the matter of the representation of China should 
first be solved in the United Nations. He asked them whether it was admissible 
in our age that an international organization as important as the Agency should 
bury its head^ in the sand and seek refuge in purely formal considerations and 
procedural subterfuges in order to convince people that political problems of 
the greatest importance, such as the representation of China, were outside its 
competence. 


46. The Agency, which was based on the noble ideals of universality and impartiality, 
should take decisions that were uncompromisingly logical and in 
keeping with its principles. It should demonstrate its loyalty to those 
ideals and unanimously reject the inadmissible recommendation made by a majority 
of the Committee, under pressure by the United States, regarding the bogus 
credentials of the Chiang Kai-shek clique. 
47* The Ukrainian delegation regretted that the Conference was obliged to 
consider the question of the' credentials submitted by the lawful representatives 
of the People's Republic of Hungary. It was obvious to any unbiased person 
that there could be no question of disputing the validity of those credentials, 
and his delegation strongly objected to the matter's being raised. 


48. Mr. SHIM (Republic of Korea) approved the report of the Credentials 
Committee and regretted that some delegates had seen fit to raise political 
questions, whereas the Conference should concern itself solely with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
49• The Credentials Committee had rightly recognized as valid the credentials 
presented by the lawful Government of China. The Government of the People's 
Republic of China was oppressing the Chinese people and had been guilty of 



GC(v)/OR.6l 
page 10 


aggression in Korea, Tibet and Laos. In that connection, he wished to remind 
the Conference that a resolution of the United Nations in 1951 had recognized 
that Communist China had been an aggressor. 


50, He sincerely hoped that the Conference would adopt the report of the 
Credentials Committee without spending further time on political discussions 
of matters which would be considered at the present session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations. The delegation of Korea would vote, in favor 
of the Credentials Committee's report. 


51, Mr. MELLER-CONRAD (Poland) said that he would not return to the legal 
aspects of the Credentials Committee's report, which eminent jurists had 
already covered. He would limit himself to its political aspect. 


52, ,The People's Republic of China occupied an extremely important place in 
the world, if only because of the size of its population. Furthermore, its 
potential with regard to the utilization of atomic energy was enormous and the 
Agency needed the collaboration of such a great Power in order to extend its, 
activitios. The delegate of the United States had urged the Conference not 


to discuss political questions, on the pretext that the Agency should occupy 


itself exclusively with the uses of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. He 
wondered how one could reasonably undertake to explore that new field of 
activity and at the same time refuse to admit to the Agency a country whose 


collaboration was indispensable for the achievement of that aim. 


55. At a meeting of Foreign Ministers in 'Berlin, Mr. Foster Dulles had told the 
Soviet representative that he did not know-of any country called the People's 
Republic of China, Shortly after that, the whole world had had to admit that 
that country existed. At the present session of the Conference, that same 
country was being refused admission to the organization responsible for promoting 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy? but very shortly the People's 
Republic of China would have to be recognized as one of the world's great 
atomic Powers, Each year the same outworn arguments wore put forward because 
of a refusal to face facts. 
54. With regard to the credentials of the Hungarian delegation, the United 
States delegate had said that for several years the United Nations General 
Assembly had taken no decision on the validity of the credentials presented 

GC(v)/OR.6l 
page 11 


by the representatives of that country. Statements of that kind served only 


to keep the cold war alivo. The Polish delegation could not accept the 


decision of the Credentials Committee on that subject, and would therefore 


vote against the Committee's report. 


55t Mr. HADI (Indonesia) stated that the Government of the People's 
Republic of China was the only lawful government of China. For that reason 
it was impossible to recognize the validity of the credentials presented by 
the delegates of the Government of Taiwan. The Indonesian delegation would 
consequently vote against draft resolution I, which the Credentials Committee 
recommended for adoption. As to the report of that committee, his delegation 
approved it, with the reservation that, in its opinion, the credentials 
presented by the Hungarian delegation were in conformity with Rule 27 of the 
Rules .of Procedure. In support of that contention, he reminded the 
Conference that it had elected Hungary to the Board. Furthermore, the 
attitude taken by the United States delegation was all the less understandable 
in that the Government which the Hungarian delegation represented was recognized 
by the United States, 


56. Mr. PAZE (Albania) protested on behalf of his delegation against 
the fact that the lawful scat of the People's Republic of China continued to 
bo held unlawfully by the representatives of the bankrupt Chiang Kai-shek 
clique, v/hich was in the service of American imperialism. It was entirely 
unjust that 65O million Chinese should not be represented at the Conference. 
57. Despite the efforts of many peace-loving countries to settle the problem 
of Chinese representation, no progress had so far been made in that direction 
because of the hostile attitude of the United States and of other Western 
countries tov/ards the People's Republic of China. It was high time to put 
an end to that abnormal situation which was preventing the Agency from 
carrying out its statutory functions, 
58, The People's Republic of China was a great world Power and played an 
important role in international affairs. It maintained diplomatic relations 
with more than J>0 countries and commercial and cultural relations with a 

still larger number of States. Wo international problem could be settled 
without its participation. All international problems which, up to the 



GC(v)/OR.6l 
page 12 


present, had been discussed in collaboration with, the People's Republic of 


China had been satisfactorily settled? that showed the constructive attitude 
adopted by its Government. Conversely, those problems from the discussion 


of which China had been excluded were still 'awaiting solution. 


59. The policy followed by the People's Republic of China was one of peace 
and sincere co-operation with all countries, based on the principles of 
equality, non-intcrferenco, mutual respect between peoples and peaceful 
coexistence. That policy mot with the full support of all peace-loving 
peoples. To deny the great role of the People's Republic of China in the 
settlement of certain international problems was to shut one's eyes to reality 
in order to justify the presence of delegates who, in point of fact, represented 
no one but themselves. 
60. By militarily occupying the island of Taiwan and continuing to defend 
the representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek clique in international organizations, 
the United States was simply undermining the bases of international cooperation. 
All its slanders against the People's Republic of China, -aimed 
at preventing it from occupying its rightful place in the Agency and in other 
international organizations, were groundless, tendentious and contrary to the 
principles set out in Article II of the Statute, according to which the Agency 
should seek to enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and, 
prosperity throughout the world.. Whether the United States wanted it or not, 
the People's Republic of China was a great world Power which was continuing 
to assort its authority and to make progress. That fact could bo ignored 
only by those blindly obedient to Washington's orders, 
61o The reason why the United States disdained the assistance of a quarter of 


the human race in a field so important for mankind was that it did not really 
wish to promote co-operation between all coimtries. That attitude represented 
a' challenge to the Agency's Statute and to the spirit of international collaboration? 
moreover, it conflicted with the United States delegate's statement 
regarding the alleged desire of his Government to place atomic energy at 


the service of peace


62. The Albanian people and its Government had always supported sincere 
efforts by peace-loving peoples to promote international collaboration. Hence, 
the attempts of the United States and a number of Western countries to keep 

GC(v)/OR.6l 
page 13 


the People's Republic of China out of the Agency could only arouse the 
indignation of those peoples. The presence of a delegation that represented 
nobody harmed the Agency's interests, and ho protested energetically against 
the anomalous situation. He earnestly requested the Conference to evict the 
representatives of Chiang Kai-shek without delay, and to invite a delegation 
from the People's Republic of China to take part in its work. 


63, Mr. BORISEVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) regretted 
that in four years the Agency had not succeeded, for reasons which everyone 
knew, in reaching an equitable solution to the problem of representation of 


the People's Republic of China. For the last four years the place of China 
had been unlawfully occupied by the Chiang Kai-shek clique, which had no 


connection with China and represented only itself. 


64. T'he Byelorussian delegation had already stated on many occasions and 
still continued to urge that only the delegates of the People's Republic of 
China wore entitled to occupy China's place. Preventing the People's Republic 
of China from taking part in the work of the Agency not only dealt a severe 
blow to the latter's prestige but also appreciably reduced its usefulness in 
promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. During recent years the 
People's Republic of China had achieved considerable success in all spheres 
of activity, including nuclear science and technology. Chinese scientists 
were enthusiastically participating in the work of the Dubna Joint Institute 
for Nuclear Research, work which was directed to peaceful ends. 
65. The Government of the People's Republic of China was striving incessantly 
to establish a zone of peace in Asia and a denuclearized zone in the Pacific. 
The peaceful policy followed by that country was entirely in accordance with 
the Agency's principles and purposes, and was finding more and more support 
among Member States. The admission to the Agency of a delegation from the 
People's Republic of China would appreciably improve the international 
climate, help the Agency to discharge its responsibilities, and provide a solid 
base for effective international co-operation. 
66, Not for the first time was the Byelorussian delegation a witness to the 
shameful farce of v/hich the People's Republic of Hungary was victim. The 
validity of the Hungarian delegation's credentials could no more be called in 
question than could those of other countries, including the United States, 


GC(V)'/OR,61 
page 14 


67. Mr. YU (China) wished to reply to the flood of defamatory and 
inaccurate statements Toy the delegates from Communist countries and their 
satellites - statements that could serve only to contaminate the peaceful 
atmosphere of the Conference - with a few sincere, quiet vrords calculated tocreate 
a true understanding among men and nations, which had to choose between 
survival and annihilation. To every member of every delegation he would say 
that5 if there were any one single nation able to serve the Agency's high aims, 
it was the country ho represented, and that, if there were a regime that should 
not bo heard at the Conference, it was the puppet regime of the so-called 
People's Republic of China, That statement vras neither too categorical nor 
too sweeping if the word peace were accorded all the importance attached to it 
by Article II of the Statute. If that word were to be replaced by the v/ord 
war, his country would be the first to withdraw from the Agency and give place 
to the puppet regime of which ho had just spoken. 
68. It was a well-known fact that the head of the communist gang in Peking 
wished to eliminate capitalism by war, and that his plan to solve the population 
problem in continental China was to destroy a quarter of the Chinese pooplo. 
Without recourse to atomic energy, the puppet communist regime had already 
liquidated 20 million people since its occupation of that part of China. , The 
horror and devastation that that regime would spread throughout the world, 
wore it in possession of sufficiently dangerous atomic weapons, could easily 
bo imagined. That being so, was it an exaggeration to maintain that the 
puppet regime of Peking was the least qualified candidate for membership of an 
Agency whoso aims were exclusively peaceful? 
69. The Republic of China had inherited a tradition of 40 centuries of peace, 
and that experience was its most valuable contribution to the Agency and to 
humanity at large for the promotion of prosperity and the fight against war. 
It was in the twentieth century that the West had discovered the secret of 
splitting the atom, and had hastened to use its knowledge for the manufacture 
of weapons of war. The world hoped, in spite of everything, to find some 
moans .of saving mankind from complete annihilation, but at the same time continued 
tests aimed at producing more powerful atomic bombs. People talked 
about disarmament, but the fact that it was necessary first to disarm the 
hearts of men was not recognized. ^ The Chinese people had discovered the 

GC(V)/QR.61 
page 15 


secret of splitting the molecule and invented gunpowder more than eighteen 
centuries before, but had used the discovery to make fireworks and rockets for 
purposes of amusement. The ancient Chinese had seen the danger of encouraging 
the production of means of destruction without any spiritual sanctions which 
could prevent their misuse. In other words, the Chinese delegation was 
firmly convinced that moral progress must keep pace with material progress. 
The Chinese people had disarmed before arming, A nation which throughout its 
history had so well understood the meaning of the word "peace" should be the 
last to leave the Agency if the Agency's objectives remained peaceful, 


70. He hoped that the delegates to the Conference would heed his message, for 
he was convinced that any unfortunate decision regarding the representation of 
his country in any international organization would mark a further step towards 
the break-up of that organization and the annihilation of mankind, which must 
be avoided at all costs. 
71. Mr. DOBREV (Bulgaria) said that his delegation strongly protested 
against the draft resolution recommending the Conference not to consider, at 
its fifth regular session, any proposals to exclude the delegate of the 
Chiang Kai-shek clique. 
72. The delegates of South Korea and of the Chiang Kai-shek clique had claimed 
that such a proposal was a propaganda maneuver. What kind of propaganda could 
it bo, when 65O million Chinese wore not represented in the Agency? It could 
no longer bo denied that the great People's Republic of China really existed. 
The Chinese people had completed the great socialist revolution and China had 
become a roally powerful State. The lawful government of China had been 
recognized by all the socialist countries, a largo number of Asian and African 
countries, and even by Great Britain. The former Commander-in-Chief of the 
British armies, Field-Marshal Montgomery, had recently stated that there was 
no China but'~the People's Republic of China. " The. People's Republic of • 
Bulgaria.maintained relations only with the People's Republic of China and 
recognized only the government of that Republic. 


75. At every session since the Agency had been set ,up, the Conference had ~"" 
gone through the same farce in order to avoid recognizing the--People's 
Republic of China, because the greatest capitalist Power in the world was 
seeking to seize foreign territories, establishing bases on the CKihe-se 

GC(V)/OR.61 
page 16 


territory of Taiwan and pursuing a dictatorial policy in the Agency for purely 
political and selfish purposes, thus paralyzing its activities. For those 
reasons,- the Bulgarian delegation strongly protested against the recognition 


of the credentials of the Chiang Kai-shek clique and would vote against the 


draft resolution before the Conference. 


74. With regard to the credentials of the Hungarian delegation ho wonderod 
whether any roasonahle man could contest the validity of the credentials issued 
hy the Government of the Hungarian People's Republic. The previous day, 
Hungary had been elected to the Board hy a majority of the Members of the 
Agency, It enjoyed the confidence of the countries of Eastern Europe, which 
had asked it to state their views on current problems confronting the Agency. 
Why was the United States delegation proposing, against the wishes of the 
majority of Members, that the validity of the Hungarian delegation's credentials 
should not he recognized? There could be no doubt about the answer to that 
questions the United States was attempting, by a policy of cold war, to sap 
the foundations of co-operation between all the nations' of the world. 
75. The PRESIDENT put to the vote draft resolution I submitted by the 
Credentials Committee. 
76. At the request of Mr. Emelyanov (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) 
a roll-call vote was taken. 
The Republic of Korea, having been dravm by lot by the President, was 
called upon to vote first. 


The result of the vote was as follows; 


In favors Republic of Korea, Lebanon, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, 


Few Zealand, Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, 


South Africa, Spain, Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom of 


Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, 


Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, 


Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, 


Prance, Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Guatemala, 


Haiti, Holy See, Iran, Italy, Japan, 



QQ (-v)/<2R. 61 

page 17 


Againstt Morocco, Norway, Poland, Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Tunisia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, 
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania, Bulgaria, Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Ceylon, Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic, Denmark, Ethiopia, Finland, Ghana, Hungary, 
India, Indonesia, Iraq. 

Abstaining; Pakistan, Iceland, Israel, 


77. Draft resolution I was adopted by 37 votes to 25, with 3 abstentions. 
78. The PRESIDENT put to the vote draft resolution II submitted by the 
Credentials Committee. 
79* Draft resolution II was adopted by 44 votes to 12, with 8 abstentions. 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1962 (GC(v)/163, 183, 187) 


80. The PRESIDENT invited the Rapporteur of the Committee for Pledges 
of Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund to introduce the Committee's 
reports (GC(v)/183, 187). 
81. Mr. POLACZEK (Austria), Rapporteur of the Committee for Pledges of 
Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund, drew the attention of the 
Conference to the draft resolution recommended for adoption by the Committee 
concerning increased voluntary contributions to the General Fund (GC(v)/18j5). 
82. He had pleasure in announcing that the total contributions pledged for 
1962, as of 4 October 1961, amounted to fl 066 945* Since that date, the 
Government of Pakistan had announced that it would contribute the equivalent 
of $6000 in Pakistan rupees. 
83. On behalf of the Committee, he recommended the Conference to approve the 
draft resolution on voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 1962 
(GC(v)/187), in which it would express its appreciation to those Member States 
which had pledged contributions and urge all other. Member States to contribute 
to the maximum extent compatible with their resources, 
84- Mr. FLORES (Mexico) announced that his Government would contribute 
to the General Fund for 1962 the sum of $8500, which represented an increase 
of 13.33$ over its contribution for 1961. 



GC(V)/OR,6l 
page 18 


85. Mr. KRISTENSEH (Denmark) stressed the importance of voluntary contributions 
for the Agency's budget. Over the years there had been a very 
modest increase in the target fixed for those contributions, and it was 
therefore quite reasonable for the Conference to ask Member States who were 
able to do so to contribute amounts which bore at least the same ratio to the 
target for each year as did their assessed contributions to the regular budget, 
86. Denmark had applied that principle since 1959? and would continue to do 
so in 1962, as the Danish delegate had announced at the meeting of the Committee, 
Ho was glad that the other Scandinavian countries were also applying the 
principle. He therefore supported the Committee's draft resolution, and 
sincerely hoped that the Committee's recommendations would meet with incroasing( 
understanding on the part of Member States. 
87. Mr. EMELYAHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
Soviet Union attached groat importance to the Agency's work in connection with 
technical assistance to the developing countries. That was one of the responsibilities 
of the Agency, which was called upon to accelerate and increase the 
contribution of atomic energy to the peace and prosperity of the whole world. 
88. His delegation had carefully studied the draft resolution sponsored by 
Brazil and South Africa, calling for an increase in voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund (GC(v)/16j5). His delegation considered that the draft 
ran counter to the spirit of the Statute, as it proposed to transform the 
voluntary contributions of Member States into compulsory ones. That was 
clearly indicated in operative paragraph 2, which was a flagrant violation of 
the vory principle of voluntary contributions. The Agency should adopt the 
practice of the United Nations, whose activities in the field of technical 
assistance to the developing countries accorded with that principle. The 
draft resolution sponsored by Brazil and South Africa was at variance with 
that practice, 
89. The explanation given was that the Agency's resources were inadequate, 
but that was far from true. It was common knowledge that the Soviet Union 
had put at the disposal of the Agency 70 fellowships, 50 of which were tenable 
for a period of five to six years, for training experts at universities and 

GC(y)/OR.6l 
page 19 


colleges in the USSR, and 20 fellowships for giving scientists and experts 


from the underdeveloped countries advanced training, for periods of from 


three to six months, at scientific research institutes of the USSR. The 


Soviet Union's contribution under that program was equivalent to 


1 170 000 rubles, or $1 300 000. The Soviet Union had also put the ser


vices of JO experts at the Agency's disposal free of charge. It was common 

knowledge, too, that the Soviet Union had made an additional voluntary con


tribution of 50 000 rubles in 1959. That sum would have enabled States 


Members of the Agency to obtain equipment, instruments and apparatus from the 


Soviet Union. But as the Soviet delegation had repeatedly pointed out, 


certain circles had put numerous obstacles in the way of making use of those 


offers. 


90, At the beginning of 1960 the Soviet Union had sent a qualified expert to 


Vienna on a special mission to negotiate with the Agency. During those 


negotiations the USSR had stated its willingness to supply certain apparatus 


and equipment for use in the atomic industry and in scientific establishments, 


The items in question consisted of standard radioisotope laboratory equipment, 
radiation measuring instruments for geological research, equipment for medical 
radiation laboratories, and so on. But the Soviet Union's proposals had met 
with opposition from the Secretariat. 


91. At the same time the Soviet Union had stated that the apparatus and equipment 
would be supplied to the Agency at world market prices. The Secretariat 
and the Director General had had to admit that, in many cases, the, price of 
the Soviet equipment was not only competitive with world market prices, but 
lower than that quoted by Western countries for similar equipment. The 
question therefore arose why the Secretariat had not accepted the Soviet proposal 
to supply that equipment to the countries concerned. The Soviet Union 
had twice stated that it was prepared to meet Afghanistan's request for complete 
equipment for the Nuclear Physics Faculty of Kabul University. It had 
also been ready to comply with the United Arab Republic's request for equipment 
for medical establishments. One example of the ill will shown by the senior 
officials of the Agency with regard to making use of the Soviet Union's 
voluntary contributions was to be found in the intolerable and inexplicable 

GC(V)/OR.61 
page 20 


delays within the Secretariat in connection with obtaining a mass spectrometer 
for the Agency's Laboratory, That apparatus had been supplied by the Soviet 
Union as a voluntary contribution, i.e. free of charge, yet the Secretariat 
was nevertheless spending an unconscionable time collecting funds to pay for 
something which was being given freel Had ever such nonsense been heard? 


92. For its part, the Soviet Union had done everything in its power to assist 
the Secretariat in using its voluntary contribution. From the time that it 
had offered the contribution, it had made proposals to the Secretariat regarding 
the supply of equipment and apparatus the total value of which had 
been more than double that of the contribution. If the Secretariat had 
really wanted to uso the Soviet contribution and to supply Soviet equipment 
to developing countries, the amount of the contribution would have been used 
up long since. 
9J5. The policy of the Soviet Union with regard to technical assistance to 
developing countries was well known: the Soviet Union gave such assistance 
and would continue to give it. 


94* For the reasons already stated, the Soviet delegation could not approve 
the proposal of Brazil and South Africa, which in effect transformed voluntary 
contributions into compulsory ones. 


The meeting rose at 1.3 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(v)/OR.62 

8 December 1961 

GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference ENGLISH 

FIFTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 6 October 1961, at 3.30 p.m. 


President: Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 
21 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 
for 1962 (continued from the 6lst meeting) 1 - 15 
17 The question of a general review of the 
provisions of the Statute (continued from the 
60th meeting) 16-21 
22 Appointment of the Director General (continued 


from the 57th meeting) 22 - 40 
14 The Agency's program and budget for 1962 41 - 61 
15 Scale of Members' contributions for 1962 62 - 63 
16 Studios of nuclear power costs 64 - 65 
26 Closing of the session 66-79 


* GC(V)/171. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(V)/INF/42/Rev.3. 


61-5928 



GC(V)/OR.62 
page 2 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1962 (GC(v)/163 and Corr.1, 
I83, I87) (continued from the 61st meeting) 


1. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that, at the previous meeting, the delegate 
of the Soviet Union had expressed disappointment at the delay in taking 
advantage of his Government's generous offer relating to the supply of Soviet 
technical equipment-/. There had been a regrettable delay, but he could assure 
the Conference that it had not been caused deliberately by the Director General 
or the Secretariat. Since, it was neither appropriate nor timely to give a 
detailed explanation of the efforts made to reach a solution of the problem-, 
he had decided to issue an information document, setting forth the exchange of 
views, consultations and communications between the Secretariat and the Soviet 
Union, which would be circulated to all. Member States as soon as possible, 
2. Mr. WERSHOF (Canada) said that the Conference, when considering the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(V)/183, should bear in mind the 
peculiar financial structure of the Agency. The regular budget was financed 
by assessed contributions from all Member States on a percentage basis. A 
lorge part of the Agency's useful work, however, particularly the provision of 
technical assistance and fellowships, was financed from the operational budget, 
which amounted to a little more than US $2 million for 1962. In order to 
secure funds for the operational budget, the Agency tried to obtain voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund. About one-third of the operational budget 
was allocated to Type I fellowships financed by the Agency, about one-third 
to technical assistance, and about one-third to laboratories. Unfortunately 
it had not been possible to obtain sufficient funds by means of voluntary 
contributions during the last few years to permit the Agency to carry out those 
activities to the full extent. That was an unsatisfactory state of affairs 
from the Agency's point of view, and particularly from that of the developing 
countries, which, quite rightly, looked to the Agency for technical assistance 
and fellowships. 
•3, The type of contributions which, could be made to the General Fund was 
laid down in the Rules Regarding the Acceptance of Voluntary Contributions of 
Money to the Agency-', which had be'en approved by the Conference on 
1 October 1959. Contributions of money to the General Fund were not, however, 
1/ GC(V)/OR.61, paragraphs 89-92. 
2/ INFCIRC/13, section II. 



GC(v)/OR.62 
page 3 


the only type of assistance which Member States could give the Agency. They 
could also, under a different set of rules**7 , offer the Agency services;, 
equipment or facilities. Also some countries had offered Type II fellowships 
and the services of experts, which was quite different from a voluntary 
contribution of money to the General Fund, A clear distinction should be 
made between such offers and a contribution of money to the General Fund, 
which in turn was used to finance the operational budget. 


4. Countries which attached restrictions to the way in which money contributed 
to the General Fund should be used created very serious difficulties for 
the Board and the Secretariat in employing that money to finance the operational 
budget. Not only had such restrictions been imposed by the Soviet Union? 
but on two occasions Western Governmonts had wished to impose similar restrictions. 
In speaking of restrictions, he was not referring to the fact that 
some contributions were made in local currency. It would be better of course 
if contributions could be made in a currency which was convertible and readily 
usable by the Agency, although he understood that that was not always possible § 
but by restrictions he meant, for example, a limitation of use to a certain 
specified part of the operational budget, 
5. So far it had rarely been possible to attain more than half the target 
for voluntary contributions to the operational budget. The draft resolution 
under discussion would not be legally binding, since such contributions were 
voluntary. His Government considered that the draft resolution might encourage 
some Governments to increase the amount of their voluntary contributions of 
money to the General Fund, and hoped that countries requesting technical 
assistance would vote in favor of it. 
6. "With regard to the Soviet delegate's statement just referred to by the 
Director General, he pointed out that the Rules Regarding the Acceptance of 
Voluntary Contributions of Money to the Agency required the Director General 
to report to the Board whenever he had difficulty in making use of the money 
contributed. That provided the Board with an opportunity to consider the 
difficulties in detail. His Government did not agree that the Board or the 
Secretariat had been reluctant to uso the money contributed to the General Fund 
_3_/ Rules to Govern the Acceptance of Gifts of Services, Equipment and 
Facilities (lNFCIRO/13, section I). 



GC(v)/OR.62 


or.ga 4 

by the Soviet Union in 1959- The difficulty had arisen from the restrictions 


that had been imposed regarding the use to which that money was to be put. 
He was sure that the information document .to be issued by the Director General 
would make it quite cloar that the Board and the Secretariat had in no way 
been responsible for the delay in making use of the Soviet contribution. 


7' Mr. QUANSAH (Ghana) said that, in the report of the Committee for 
Pledges of Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund, Ghana did not'appear 
in the list of Member States which had pledged voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund because his delegation had not consulted its Government on the 
point before coming to the Conference, His Government undertook, however, to 


contribute to the General Fund, and the nature of the contribution would be 


communicated to the Director General in due course. 


8. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) said that a solution of the financial 
problem confronting the Agoncy' ?ra.s essential if it was to perform its work 
satisfactorily. It was therefore difficult to understand the opposition to 
the. draft resolution contained in document GC(v)/183. The Agency was the only 
United Nations organization of a technical character which relied upon voluntary 
contributions in order to carry out its technical assistance activities. 
9. If a State offering a voluntary contribution were permitted to specify 
the country which was to benefit from that offer, it would reduce the Agency 
to the role of a broker and undermine the whole concept of multilateral 
assistance. The existence of the Agency would then be pointless. He thought 
it was in the interests of the less-developed countries that technical 
assistance provided in a multilateral form should become far larger than 
assistance provided bilaterally. 
10. If planning were undertaken without a knowledge of the resources available 
to the Agency, if the resources were confined to a particular type of assistance, 
or if the offers of contributions were earmarked for a particular 
receiving State, the whole purpose of planning would be defeated. 
11. It had been contended that there should be a fundamental change in the 
composition of the Board. It seemed that there was a desire to wield power 
through membership of the Board, but a distinct reluctance to accept the 
financial implications of membership. In order to ensure that the Board 
should be able to determine policy, its Members and all the Members of the 
Agency must be willing to accept their individual and collective responsibilities 
in financial matters. 

GC(v)/OR,62 
page 5 


12. His delegation supported the draft resolution in question. 
13. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(v)/183. 
14. The draft resolution was adopted by 29 votes to 10, with 18 abstentions. 
15. 'The draft resolution contained in document GC(v)/187 was adopted unanimously. 
THE QUESTION OF A GENERAL REVIEW OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE STATUTE (GC(V)/182, 


188/Rev.l) (continued from the 60th meeting) 


16. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to consider .the draft 
resolutions contained in documents GC(v)/182 and 188/Rev.l. He drew attention 
to the fact that, whereas five States had jointly submitted the first text of 
the latter draft, the revised text was also co-sponsored by Australia and the 
United Arab Republic. 
!7. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) said that the basic object of 
the United States in co-sponsoring the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(v)/182 was to obviate the necessity for a general review of the Statute at 
the sixth regular session of the Conference, There had apparently been some 


misunderstanding regarding that draft resolution, and his delegation considered 
that the new draft resolution contained in document GC(v)/188/Rev.l would 


remove that misunderstanding, and would, therefore, support it. It wished to 


withdraw the draft resolution contained in document GC(v)/182, 


18. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) said his delegation 
had pleasure in co-sponsoring the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(v)/188/Rev.l, which was in conformity with the Agency's Statute and the 
Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. The resolution noted "that in 
the course of the discussion on the question of a general review of the 
provisions of the Statute no formal proposal for its realization was submitted 
for decision by the General Conference". That did not invalidate the 
criticism expressed by his delegation, and certain other delegations, of the 
obsolete provisions of the Statute and the manner in which some delegations 
interpreted the Statute. The draft resolution would, in accordance with the 
Statute, enable; any Member State to propose that the question of a general 
review of the Statute be discussed at a future session of the Conference. 



GC(v)/OR.62 
page 6 


19. Mr. McKNIGHT (Australia) said he had pleasure in co-sponsoring the 
draft resolution. Although the Conference had agreed that there should be 
no general review of the Statute at the sixth regular session of the Conference, 
it had not agreed on the manner in which that conclusion could ho expressed. 
The draft resolution reflected the fact that nobody was in favor of holding 
a Conference on the Statute in October 1$62. The. preamble referred to the 
whole of-Article XVIII of the Statute in order to meet the statutory requirement 
that the question of a review of the Statute should be discussed at the 
present session of the Conference;, and also because Article XVIII made 
provision for any Member State to propose any amendment of the Statute at any 
time. Any defects which might exist in the Statute could be considered by 
adopting the procedure laid down in the Statute, which had been followed when 
the question of the representation of the "Africa and the Middle East" area 
had boon considered. Another reason for referring in the preamble to 
Article XVIII, and to the Rules of Procedure, was to make it clear that it 
was .the right of any Member State to request the inclusion of items in the 
agenda of the Conference at any time5 such items, of course, might relate to 
a revision of the Statute, . • • 
20. Mr. DAGUERRE (Senegal) said his delegation accepted the changes and 
additions proposed ^y the delegations of Australia and Czechoslovakia and 
embodied in the revised version of the draft resolution. 
21, The draft -resolution contained in document GC(v)/188/Rev.l was adopted 


unanimously. 


APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL (continued from the 57th meeting) 


22, The PRESIDENT recalled that the appointment of Mr. Eklund to the 


post of Director General of the Agency had been made by the Board and approved 
4/ 


by the Conference-' . Under Regulation 1.12 of the Provisional Staff 
Regulations-*^, Mr. Eklund was required to take the oath of office at a public 
meeting of the Conference. Mr. Eklund was present for that purpose, but any 
delegates who had statements to make regarding the taking of the oath by the 
Director General Designate should do so beforehand. 


4/ See documents GC(v)/165, paragraph 2 and GC(v)/RES/91. 
5_/ INFCTRC/6 and Add,l. 



GC(V)/OR.62 
page 7 


23. Mr. SMBLYMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said he wished 
to state the attitude of the socialist countries towards the appointment of 
Mr. Eklund as Director General. The Agency had "J6 Member States, differing 
in their social and political structure and level of economic development. 
Some of them were advanced in the use of atomic energy5. some were taking 
their first steps in that direction. The Agency's work could never bear fruit, 
nor could it perform its duties, unless all its Members were fully equal and 
their interests were justly considered. That fundamental requirement, upon 
which the success of the Agency's work depended, had been trodden brutally 
underfoot by the Vfcstern group of States. 
24. The dictatorial policy of the United States had been clearly manifested 
in the appointment of Mr. Eklund as Director General. Although 2 3 Member 
States representing two large groups of-States - all the socialist countries 
and a majority of the countries of Asia and Africa - had opposed his appointment, 
the United States and its allies had ridden roughshod over the elementary 
rules of co-operation between equal States and used their mechanical majority 
to force through the appointment of their own candidate to the post of Director 
General. Thus a henchman of the Western group of States occupied that post 
for the second time. Mr. Ekiund's accoptance of the appointment against the 
will of many countries, representing the majority of the world's population, 
proved that he had become a tool of the Western countries' policy, and 
determined -what attitude to him should be adopted. 
25. The Director General could fulfill his functions with success only if 
ho was supported by all three groups of States? the socialist, the neutral 
and the Western. The voting at Mr. Ekiund's appointment showed that he did 
not enjoy that support. The United States, in foisting its chosen candidate 
upon the Agency against the will of the socialist and the neutral States, had 
shown that it had lost all sense of proportion and reality. It disregarded 
the radical changes that had taken place in the world. A decision suiting the 
Western group could not be forcibly imposed on the socialist countries and 
on the Soviet Union, ?/hich led the way in scientific progress and the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. The'United States and its followers had assumed a 
grave responsibility for the unfavorable consequences which would accrue to 
the Agency from the appointment they had compelled it to make. That appointment 
could not promote the development of truly international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and the Soviet Government would draw 
from it the necessary inferences. 

GC(V)/OR.62 
page 8 


26. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) greatly regretted the statement 
which had just been madef the United States did not accept those views. He 
would not reply however, because ho did not consider it appropriate to do so. 
For his part he could state that the United States remained devoted to the 
high purposes of the Agency, which sought to promote the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy for the increasing benefit of mankind. As the Conference 
proceeded to the induction of the new Director General, Mr. Eklund was entitled 
to know that he had the full support of the United States and of the great 
majority of the Members represented in the Conference. He wished also to 
assure Mr. Eklund that the United States would do its best to heal such wounds 
as existed and would co-operate with him and other delegations in making the 
Agency an effective instrument for improving the lot of man. 
27. The PRESIDENT invited Fir. Eklund to take the oath of office prescribed 
by Regulation 1.11 of the Provisional Staff Regulations. 
28. Mr. EKLUTO (Director General Designate) took the oath in the following 
terms s 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience 


the functions entrusted to me as Director General of the International 


Atomic Energy Agency, to discharge these functions and to regulate my 


conduct with the interests of the Agency only in vie?/, and not to seek 


or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from 


any Government or other authority external to the Agency." 


29. Ho then thanked the Board and the Conference for the confidence they had 
shown in him in appointing him Director General. He realized he was undertaking 
a great responsibility and would try to justify the confidence shown 
in him. In accepting the appointment, his sole motive had been a sincere 
desire to promote the objectives of the Agency, Although certain Member 
States had not supported his appointment, he had accepted it because he knew 
he had been appointed in full accordance with the Statute of the Agency and 
had received a large majority of votes. He felt confident that all Member 
States would work together in order to further the Agency's objectives, and 
he would do his utmost to co-operate with all Members of the Agency to enable 
it to achieve its purposes throughout the world. He was glad to know that in 
his task he would be supported by an excellent Secretariat, which had been 
set up largely through the skill of the present Director General. 

GC(V)/OR,62 
page 9 


30. Sooner or later the stocks of conventional energy would run out, and a 
lot still remained to bo done to develop atomic energy to the point where it 
could take over. Both money and talent would he necessary. The developing 
countries could provide talent for education and research and development 
work in science and. technology? and the Agency should be able to give 
considerable assistance. 
31. He pointed out that the development costs involved in producing competitive 
power reactors were very high, as could be seen from a study of different 
national programs, and the financial means available to the Agency were not 
groat. Its role in developing competitive reactors would probably have to 
become much less ambitious, unless finances were increased. He praised the 
important work done by the Agency in the dissemination and free exchange of 
scientific knowledge, and felt sure that such work would lead to a better 
understanding between different countries. . 
32. He was starting his work at the Agency with an open mind and would welcome 
constructive suggestions that might prosper its work. He counted on the 
collaboration of the developing countries in the work of the Agency and said 
he would pay particular attention to the question of equitable distribution 
of posts in the Secretariat. The Agency depended on the collaboration of all 
Member States, and he on his side intended to collaborate with them, -rocogniging 
that they.had equal rights and equal duties. 


33. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish)% "With this ceremony, the' 
Director General-elect of the Agency has now taken the oath of office. The 
fifth regular session of the Conference has complied with the final 
statutory requirement for ensuring that the Agency will have the necessary 
leadership and guidance during the next four years. For the first four years 
of its existence the Agency has had as its leader Mr. Sterling Cole who, for 
the last time in his capacity of Director General, is present at this final 
meeting of the present session. • The first years in the life of any institution 
are decisive for its future development, and the Agency is no exception to 
this rule. I am firmly convinced that the'International Atomic Energy Agency 
enjoys a position of great prestige throughout the world. This position has 
not been attained without effort or without overcoming serious difficulties. 
I am equally convinced that credit for these achievements belongs largely to 

GC(V)/OR.62 


page 10 


Mr. Cole, who for four years has worked effectively and tirelessly as the 
head of the organization. He has brought together an outstanding team of 


scientific and administrative personnel in which we can take pride. 


34. "He has also shown absolute impartiality in conducting the business of 
the Agency and has shown no favoritism towards any nation or region of the 
world. He has always taken account of all points of view and has done everything 
in his power to promote the Agency as a scientific rather than a 
political organization. He has always shown particular interest in the lessdeveloped 
countries, and under his guidance the efforts of the Agency have been 
increasingly directed towards assisting those countries to achieve a better 
standard of living through the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
35• "Mr. Cole, I believe that I can speak on behalf of the Conference as 
a whole in taking this opportunity of expressing to you our sincere gratitude 
for your dedication to the Agency during the past four years. We express our 
warmest wishes that you - and also your distinguished consort, who has always 
been of such assistance to you throughout your difficult task - may enjoy all 
success in your future activities." (Applause). 


36. The DIRECTOR GENERAL; "Mr. President, Members of the Conference, 
it is with great reluctance that I seek to impose upon your time for just a 
moment, knowing full well the weeks of arduous toil and discussion you have 
already had. I had not entirely expected that this would form a part of this 
afternoon's program, in fact I had sought from the President that he should 
not do what his genial and generous personality eventually prompted him to do. 
The warmth of his remarks which wore supported by your own generous applause 
prompts me to take this rostrum. 
37. "It seems but a moment ago since I took the oath of this high office 
down in the Konzerthaus whore the first General Conference was held, and many 
of you will remember that occasion. Even though it was but yesterday, fourlong 
arduous years have passed - years devoted to a determination to do all 
possible for the success of this organization and a measure of achievement in 
the accomplishment of its great goal. Whatever may have been said of credit 
to me is deserved fully by that fine cadre of scientific and administrative 
staff which surrounds me. Without their support, their advice and their 
enco-uragcment, wo could not have accomplished as much as we have during that 
time, I feel I am entitled to some degree of pride for credit in the • 

GC(v)/OR.62 
page 11 


construction of a bridge of accommodation between the East and the West and I 
now want publicly to acknowledge that on the basis of my own experience in this 
office the accommodation between mo and the West and between mc and the East 
has been of the highest order and also the harmony, the good feeling between 
staff members from the so-called East and West has been of the highest order. 


38, "Saying good-bye is never an easy task, especially to persons who have 
come to bo regarded as friends - not official friends, but personal friends. 
During this period I have visited over thirty Member States of the Agency for 
the purpose of arousing their interest in and their support of the Agency and 
in that course, and in the course of the meetings of the Board of Governors 
and the General Conference, those personal friendships have developed. With 
regret I bid them farewell and also with the hope that our paths may again 
cross some place. 


39. "It is not easy to depart from the scene of the most active part of one's 
entire lifetime, particularly when that scone is set in a city such as Vienna. 
The officials of Austria, the officials of Vienna have been most co-operative 
with me officially, most hospitable, cordial with me personally, and I hope 
that the representatives of Austria may convey to the President and the 
Chancellor, to the Mayor of Vienna, my gratitude for their confidence, their 
cordiality and their hospitality. Also to leave Vienna, which in itself has 
the charm of complete tranquillity so sorely needed in our effort to achieve 
a degree of peace among nations is a difficult thing. It was most fortunate 
when the decision was made to locate the Headquarters of the Agency in this 
city, because of its tranquil, peaceful atmosphere, 
40. "[During this time I have had a high degree of support from all Member 
Governments^ to leave now with the atmosphere such as has developed is a 
pain of the highest order to mc. The success, the accomplishment of the purposes 
of this organization has been included as a part of my daily prayer. I seek 
for my successor, who has a very difficult task ahead to rebuild and to 
reconstruct the_ degree of harmony which has previously existed - I seek for 
him most earnestly a support, a confidence, a co-operation no less sincere, 
no less complete than was given to me throughout my service. I have been 
grateful for the opportunity of filling this high office5 I have been 
constantly aware of the injunction imposed by the oath. As I have previously 
said in my more official statement, I wish for the Agency nothing but the 
very best of success and accomplishment in bringing some order out of this 
chaotic world and some semblance of comfort and happiness to its people." 

GC(v)/OR,62 


page 12 


(On the conclusion of his statement, the Director General received a 
standing ovation from the General Conference). 


THE AGENCY'S PROGRAM M I BUDGET FOR 1962 (GC(v)/186). 


41. Mr. PERBRA (Ceylon), Rapport cur of the Program, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's report on the Agency's program 
and budget for 1962 (GC(v)/186). 
42. The PRESIDENT said the Conference would now have to vote on the 
draft resolutions contained in the Annexes to the Committee's report. In 
Annex I there were two draft resolutions, the first on Budgetary Appropriations 
for 1962, the second on the Use of the Working Capital Fund in 1962. The 
first of those draft resolutions was divided into two partst part A, dealing 
with the administrative expenses of the Agency in 1962, and part B, dealing 
with the operational funds. He suggested that the Conference vote on parts 
A and B separately and then on the draft resolution as a whole. 
43* Mr. THOMAS (Australia) said he wished to record the attitude of his 
Government regarding the draft resolutions contained in Annexes I to VI. He 
wished to make it clear that his Government's acceptance of the Committee's 
report and the Annexes thereto was subject to the views expressed by the 
Australian delegation in the Committee. In particular, he wished to draw 
attention to the views of the Australian delegation regarding the proposals 
dealt with in the draft resolutions reproduced in Annexes II and IV—' . 


44. Mr. LESZCZYNSKI (Poland) requested, under Rule 75 of the Rules of 
Procedure, that a separate vote be taken on paragraph 4 of part B of the 
first draft resolution in Annex I, which had been the subject of an amendment 
proposed by Czechoslovakia in the Committee—' . 
45. The PRESIDENT put to the vote part A of the first draft resolution 
contained in Annex I to the Committee's report. 
46. There were 38 votes in favor and 8 against, with 2 abstentions. Part A 
of the first draft resolution was adopted, having obtained the required twothirds 
majority. 
47. The PRESIDENT put to the vote paragraph 4 of part B of the first 
draft resolution. 
6/ See document GC(v)/COM.1/OR.40, paragraphs 12-14 and 95. 
jj GC(v)/COM.1/59s see also document GC(V)/COM.1/OR.39, paragraphs 5-21. 


GC(V)/OR.62 
page 13 


48. There were 59 votos in favor and 12 against, with 5 abstentions. The 
paragraph was approved, having obtained the required two-thirds majority. 
49. The PRESIDENT put to the vote part B of the first draft resolution. 
50. There were 48 votes in favor and none against, with 4 abstentions. Part B 
of the first draft resolution was adopted, having obtained the required twothirds 
majority. 
51. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the first draft resolution in Annex I 
(Budgetary appropriations for 1962) as a whole. 
52. There were 41 votes in favor and none against, with 13 abstentions. 
The first draft resolution was adopted, having obtained the required twothirds 
majority. 
53• The PRESIDENT put to the vote the second draft resolution in Annex I 
(Use of the Working Capital Fund in 1962). 


54. There were 41 votes in favor and 8 against, with 4 abstentions. The 
second draft resolution was adopted, having obtained the required two-thirds 
majority. 
55• The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolutions in Annexes II 
to VI. 


56• The draft resolutions in Annoxos II and III (A long-term program for the 
activities of the Agency; International co-operation in the utilization of 
research reactors) were adopted unanimously. 


57- The draft resolution in Annex 17 (The establishment of an international 
center for theoretical physics) was adopted by 55 votes to none, with 18 
abstentions. 


58. The draft resolution in Annox V ('The functions of the Agency's laboratory) 
was adopted unanimously, 
59• The PRESIDENT said he had been asked by the original sponsors of 
the draft resolution set out in Annex VI, which had been approved unanimously 
by the Committee, to ask the Conference whether it would agree to repair an 
inadvertent omission from the texb of paragraph (b) of the preamble, by 
inserting the words "preliminary assistance and" after the word "Agency's". 



GC(v)/OR.62 
page 14 


60. The draft resolution in -Annex VI (international co-operation for developing 
nuclear power projects), -as amended, was adopted unanimously. 
61. Mr. MITRA (India) wished it to he recorded that his delegation had 
abstained in the voting on almost all the draft resolutions annexed to the 
-Committee's report. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS1 CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1962 (GC(v)/184) 


62. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference's attention to the draft 
resolution set out in the report of the Program, Technical and Budget Committee 
(GC(v)/184). The recommended scale of contributions for 1962 was based on the 
membership of the Agency as of 31 August 1961, 
63. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
STUDIES OF NUCLEAR POWER COSTS (GC(v)/185) 


64. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference's attention to the draft 
resolution on studies of nuclear power costs, sot out in the report of the 
Program, Technical and Budget Comm ittoe (GG(V)/185). 
65. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


66. Mr. PERERA (Ceylon), speaking on behalf of the delegations from the 
British Commonwealth countries, thanked the President for the admirable way in 
which he had discharged his onerous duties. He also thanked the Secretariat 
for providing the technical services without which the work of the Conference 
could not have gone on-, Lastly, ho added a special word of gratitude to the 
retiring Director General for the skill, tact and effective way in which he 
had led the Agency in the first four years of its life, 
67. Mr. FLORES (Mexico), on behalf of the delegations from the Latin 
American countries, joined in congratulating the President on the ability and 
skill with which he had directed the discussions, and in expressing gratitude 
to the retiring Director General for all he had attempted and accomplished over 
the past four years. He also thanked all the members of the Secretariat who 
had contributed to the success of the session. 

GC(V)/OR.62 
page 15 


68. Mr. do ERICB (Spain), speaking on behalf of the delegations from 
Western Europe, first expressed their gratitude to the Austrian Government 
and people for their cordial, and generous hospitality to the Conference. The 
President deserved the warmest congratulations for the efficient manner in 
which he had guided the discussions which, at times, had been difficult. Ho 
also thanked the Chairmen and other officers of the two Main Committees for 
their substantial contribution to the work of the session, and the members of 
the Secretariat, whose work behind the scones was so essential. 
69. Lastly, he thanked the retiring Director General, \>vho, despite having 
had to start from scratch in setting up the Agency's administrative machinery, 
had found time for the friendly contacts so conducive to the smeeth running 
of the Agency's affairs. The incoming Director General could, he was sure, 
count on the same collaboration that had been shown to Mr. Cole and he would 
wish him the greatest success in his task. It was his earnest hope that the 
Agency would continue its work of promoting peace and understanding throughout 
the world, 
70. Mr. SMYTH (United Stat es of America) expressed his delegation's 
appreciation for the inspiring leadership the President had given to the 
session, the more so as at times the meetings had not been without difficulty. 
He thanked all members of the Secretariat for the efficiency and goodwill they 
had shown in their work, 
71. The familiar and reassuring figure of the Director General would not be 
appearing in his accustomed place at forthcoming sessions. He would reiterate 
his delegation's warmest thanks for the devoted services Mr. Cole had given 
to the Agency and for his invaluable efforts to promote the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 
72. Mr. WADJAKOV (Bulgaria), speaking on behalf of the Soviet Union, the 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Albania and his own country, thanked 
the President for the efforts ho had made in bringing the work of the Conference 
to a successful conclusion, and for the impartiality he had displayed. Differences 
of opinion had emerged during the discussions and it had not been possible 
to achieve unanimity on a number of important issues, duo to lack of goodwill 
on the part of some delegations. The President, for his part, had exercised 
restraint and tact in his efforts to reconcile opposing opinions. 

GC(V)/OR,62 


page 16 


73. The PRESIDENT said ho would have liked to be able to say that the 
discussions had been characterized throughout'by a spirit of understanding 
and collaboration, but unfortunately that had not been so. Differences of 
view that were difficult to reconcile had emerged. He would like to thank 
those delegates who, in spite of the differences that had arisen, had enabled 
the discussions to be carried through to a conclusion in an atmosphere of 
mutual respect. 
74. He wished-particularly to thank the Secretariat for its indefatigable 
efforts during the session. He again expressed gratitude to the Austrian 
Government and the Vienna municipal authorities for their co-operation and 
generous hospitality, and thanked the Chairmen of the two Main Committees and 
the representatives of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental 
organizations and the observers for non-governmental organizations 
for their contribution to the work. Ho likewise offered his thanks to the 
representatives of the Press and other information media who had kept the 
public informed of the progress of the work. 
75• At the opening of the session, ho had spoken of the faith the developing 


countries had in the Agency and the hopes they placed in its'future. The 


developing countries needed all the aid thoy could get5 and the more advanced 


countries could not lightly set aside their responsibility to collaborate in 


supplying that aid. But it was no longer merely a question of co-operation 
in matters of research, important though that might be. If agreement could 
not be reached in a technical body like the Agency, there was obviously little 
hope.of achieving common accord in the political sphere. Yet failure was a 
luxury that mankind could not afford, since survival itself was at stake. 


76.. Man's achievements through the centuries were a matter of pride for every 
human being, irrespective of race or creed, and the opening up of space 


offered magnificent prospects for the generations to come. Ho would therefore 
urge Membor States most earnestly to avoid opening a breach in one of the exist


ing means of communication that had boon found between the opposing camps in 


the world, namely the Agency itself, with all the possibilities it presented 


for the eventual achievement of mutual understanding. In the future, details 


should be relegated to the secondary place they merited and endeavors should 



GOV/OR.62 
p-€o 17 


be focused on seeking ways and means of bringing about that greatly desired 
end. He thanked the delegates for the help he had received in carrying out 
his duties and for the response he trusted his appeal would elicit. 


7?. In accordance with Eule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 


78t All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


79. The PRESIDENT then declared closed the fifth regular session of 
the General Conference. 
The meeting rose at 5.55 P.m. 



