International Atomic Energy Agency GC(VI)/OR.63 
6 December 1962 
General Conference 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, l8 September 1962, at 10 50 a.m. 
Temporary President: Mr. QHIHILLALT (Argentina) 
President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
1 Opening of the session 1 -6 
2 Election of the President 7 . 14 
5 Credentials of delegates to 
the sixth regular session 
(a) Appointment of the 
Credentials Committee 
15 - 16 
4 Election of the Vice-President: 17 - 20 
5 Appointment of the GeneralCommittee 
21 • 24 
7 Statement by the DirectorGeneral 
25 - 58 

GC(VI)/190. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
(GC(VI)/INF/56/Rev. 2. 


62-5664 



GC(VI)/OR,63 
page 2


OPENING OF THE SESSION " ' . 


lT ' 'The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared open the sixth regular session of 
the General Conference, 


2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
Conference to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation, 
5. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed.the delegates of Member States,the 
observers from other States, and the representatives of the United Nations, the 
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and non-governmental 
organizations. He thanked the Federal Chancellor of Austria, the members of 
the Austrian Government and senior Austrian officials who were graciouslyattending 
the meeting. He also welcomed the representatives of the Press and 
other information media, 
5. He reminded the Conference that in his closing speech at the conclusion of 
the lively discussions at the fifth regular session he had said that 


"If agreement could not be reached in a technical body like the Agency, 
there was obviously little hope of achieving common accord in the 
political sphere„ Yet failure was a luxury that mankind could not 
afford, since survival itself was at stake," 


"Man's achievements through the centuries were a matter of pride 


for every human being, irrespective of race or creed, and the opening


up of space offered magnificent prospects for the generations to come," 


He had therefore urged 


"Member States most earnestly to avoid opening a breach in one of the 

the existing means of communication that had been found between the 


opposing camps in the world, namely the Agency itself, with all the 


possibilities it presented for the.eventual achievement of mutual 


understanding," 


He added that 


"In the future, details should be relegated to the secondary place they 
merited and endeavours should be focused on seeking ways and means of 
bringing about that greatly desired end,"2/ 


6. He was glad to note that during the past year the atmosphere in which the 
Agency worked had changed appreciably, thanks to the efforts all Member States 
had made to facilitate the task of the Secretariat, He hoped in particular 
that the atmosphere of goodwill and co-operation which had prevailed in the 
l/ GC(V)/OR,62, paras, 75 and 76, 



GC(VI)/OR.63 
page 3 


Board would extend to the meetings of the General Conference^ He therefore 
renewed his appeal to the delegates of Member States, for he was convinced of 


their keen desire to serve the common causee 


ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


7„ Sir Roger MAKINS (United Kingdom) proposed Mr. Eaffour (Ghana) for 
the office of President of the Conference. ISr, Baffour was an engineer and a 
Doctor of Science who had occupied important posts in the Government of his 

country? he was also Yice-Chancellor of the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science 
and Technology in Kumasi and was eminent in scientific and university circles in 
Ghana. His administrative experience, university training and scientific 
background thus made him an ideal candidate for the office of President. 
Mr. Baffour? who would be the first delegate of an African country to occupy that 
office, would certainly do so with competence and dignity, 


8. Mr. NAKICENOVIC (Yugoslavia) warmly supported'the proposal'made by the 
delegate of the United Kingdom.-—-He-f'Ou'nd—ad/ditioaal satisfaction, in the fact 
that Mr. Baffour representee, a country that was firmly attached to the cause of 
"non-alignment" and wanted to reinforce and develop the Agency's activities. 
9. Mr. Baffour (Ghana) was elected, by acclamation, President of the 
General Conference for its sixth regular session, 
10. Mr. 'Baffour (Ghana) took the Chair. 
11. The PRESIDENT thanked delegetes for the honour they had done to his 
country and to him, and paid' a tribute to the qualities shown by his predecessor. 
Much had already'been said of the important.part which the Agency could play in 
promoting the development and increasing the well-being of humanity as a whole. 
It had often been said, too, that international organizations did not perhaps 
devote all the necessary energy to that task, and in that connection he would 
like to recount a short fable illustrating the responsibility which the Agency 
had assumed. 
12. A farmer had a large estate that he wished to farm. In order.to prevent 
destructive birds from devouring his crops, he placed scarecrows about the land. 
Carried away by enthusiasm, he strained his ingenuity to make them look terrifying 
and succeeded so well that in the end he was afraid of them himself and no 
longer dared to go into his fields. 

GC(VI)/OR„63 
page 4 


13. Throughout the world people were looking with hope to the Agency, believing 
it wouia find effective ways of disseminating scientific knowledge and the 
results of research on atomic energy and that all Member States would co-operate 
and proceed with confidence and speed. 
14. He accepted with gratitude the high responsibility entrusted to him and 
would do his utmost to serve the best interests of the Agency and of mankind, 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


(a) APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 
15. The PRESIDENT proposed that a Credentials Committee should be appointed 
in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, and should consist of 
representatives of the following Statess Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria, 
El Salvador, Iraq., Lebanon, Philippines, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and 
United States of America, .' 
16., The proposal was adopted unanimously. 


The meeting was suspended at 11.20 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. 


ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 


17. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the eight Vice-President:. , 
18. Mr. B00NWAAT,(Burma) nominated the Delegates of the following States? . 
Austria, Canada, Chile, India, Japan, Thailand, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
19. Mr. MBLLER-CONRAD (Poland) seconded those nominations, 
20. The delegate's nominated were declared elected to the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


21. The PRESIDENT pointed out'that under Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure 
the General Conference was required to elect four additional members to the 
General Committee. He invited delegates to submit nominations. 
22. Mr. WALDHEIM (Austria) nominated the following States? France, 
Mexico, United States of America and Yugoslavia. 
2J. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan) seconded those nominations. 


24. The States nominated were declared elected to the General Committee and the 
Committee itself duly appointed in compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 

GC(VI)/OR.63 
page 5 


STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


25. The DIRECTOR GENERAL congratulated the President on his election and 
expressed the conviction that under his able leadership the work of the sixth 
regular session would he carried out in a most satisfactory manner. 
26. In presenting his first report to the General Conference he' wished to start 
by drawing the attention of delegates to the rapid development of science and 
technology, particularly during the last 12 months. On 2 December, it would 
he 20 years since the first reactor was put into operation; now there were 
about 300 reactors in the world* He also recalled the remarkable results 
obtained with the very large particle accelerators, in particular the discovery 
of new elementary particles. The achievement of an understanding of the very 
complex problems of high energy physics would probably become a milestone in the 
history of physics. Low energy physics had also progressed in its attempts to 
explore the nucleus by using particles with very precisely defined energies. 
Such studies contributed to man's understanding of the physical phenomena behind 
fission, fusion and the formation of new elements in the stars. 
27. Solid state physics, which had made rapid progress too, was finding 
important applications in the development of fuel elements for nuclear reactors5 
it also pointed towards the possibilities of new methods for the direct 
conversion of heat into electricity, not to mention its role in the development 
of the optical maser. 
28. In life sciences, the discoveries relating to the macromolecules which carry 
hereditary characteristics ?rere opening up new vistas, while the study of life 
processes in living organisms by means of -radioactive substances was already in 
an advanced state, 
29. Achievements in the field of automatic computers were striking and in a 
civilization becoming increasingly complex those machines would play a part of' 
growing importance in the near future. 
30. Finally, recent progress in the exploration of space was most impressive, 
particularly the Vostok III and IV flights and the Mariner II flight to distant 
celestial bodies.• 
31. To look more specifically at'the field of atomic energy, it would be 
noticed that during the last year cautious optimism had emerged about the future 

GC(VI)/OR„63 
page 6 

role of nuclear power as compared with conventional power. There were 
indications that the burn-up obtained in nuclear power stations and their load 
factor and lifetime might he greater,than previously anticipated, so that nuclear 
power might become competitive sooner than had been expected. On the other 
hand it was now known for certain that conventional fossil-fuel reserves were 
much larger than had been believed, which gave a certain leeway until the time 


came when the use of those valuable resources would have to be restricted to 
purposes other than mere burning. Conventional power stations had also shown 
remarkable technical development which promised to reduce capital and operating 
costs. 


32. Thus the target for competitive nuclear power was mobile, which was no doubt 
to the advantage of the consumer, but also complicated long-term planning in the 
atomic energy field. 
33. The delay in atomic energy programmes almost everywhere might be said to be 
the fundamental reason for.the lack of interest in using the Agency as a broker 
for nuclear fuel. There was also another very important factors the safeguards 
system designed to prevent diversion to military rises, Huclear power stations, 
which were becoming more and more widespread, would have a.- total power of 
about 9000 megawatts (electrical) by 1965? 15 000 megawatts (electrical) by 1970? 
and so on. By the end of the current decade considerable quantities of 
fissionable material would thus be produced outside the countries which were at 
present leading in the development and use of nuclear power. If, he repeated, 
if Member States wished to have a- safeguards system applied to reactors serving 
peaceful purposes, that system must be developed.and applied to nuclear 
installations from the present time on, when the number of installations was 
still small and the growth rate slow. The authors of the Agency's Statute had 
intended the safeguards system to be international in character. The 
disquieting factor was that existing bilateral agreements bypassed that important 
function of the Agency. Delegates were presumably aware of that situation and 
of its consequences for the Agency. 
34. In principle, it was difficult to understand v/hy a recipient country should 
consider safeguards.applied under bilateral agreement less onerous and more 
acceptable than those of a multilateral nature applied by an international 
organization of which it was a Member State. 

GC(VI)/OR.63 
page 7 


35. The transfer to the Agency of responsibility for administering the 
United States-Belgium bilateral agreement regarding fuel for the reactor in the 
2/ 


Congo—J and the possible application of Agency safeguards to South African sales 
of source material to Japan were a most welcome departure in that respect, 

36. In selecting the topics for his statement he had tried to take the 
criticism and remarks made at the last uession of the General Conference into 
account„ So as not again to let a year go by before replying to the comments 
made by delegates, he vrould address them again at the end of the present debate, 
37. He stressed the importance of the long-term planning already under way, 
which would require a considerable effort by the Secretariat and generous 
assistance from Member" States if the General Conference were to be able to 
consider the new five-year plan at its seventh session. It was his firm belief 
that the Agency would profit so much from early implementation of that plan that 
no effort should be spared in order to reach that objective, 
38. Moreover, the five-year plan might provide a sound basis for organizational 
changes In the Secretariat. 
39. The new plan should be related to the aims and plan approved by the United 
Nations for the Development Decade,. It was in that context that the Agency's, 
role in the development of power could reach its full significance. The supply 
of electric power was a matter of the utmost importance for States in process of 
industrialization and it was essential for their economies to avoid waste, 
particularly in the initial stage of development. In making a power survey it 
was necessary for all aspects of energy, both conventional and nuclear, to be 
considered simultaneously. It was with that in mind that he had included an 
expert on conventional power as well as one on nuclear power In the preliminary 
assistance mission sent to African countries in May of the current year. He 
believed that that practice should be followed wherever the question of power 
vra.s under consideration, 
40. Certain changes had been made during the past year in an attempt to improve 
and speedi up implementation of the technical assistance and fellowship programmes 
which were at present one of the Agency's major activities. Applications for 
fellowships could now be made all the year round, and in some cases long-term 
2/ See document INFCIRC/37, 



GC(VI)/OR„65 


page 8 


fellowships of Type I could he awarded. Wew procedures had been worked out to 


speed up the implementation of projects, including the delivery of equipment. 
The difficulties in finding experts were considerable, however, and might still 
cause delays. In the Secretariat, ar> interdepartmental committee had been se-t 
up to handle technical assistance questions in the same way as research contracts 
were being handled by a research contracts qommittee which had proved very 
useful, 


41. Other simplifications, in addition to those mentioned, were possible without 
prejudging the results of the long-term planning operation, 
42, A special effort had been made in the award and placing of research contracts 
and it was expected that by the end of the year more than ^>0j(> of the total funds 
available would have been spent on research contracts in less industrialized' 
Member States, as compared with 25^ in 1959. 

43. I"fc had been stimulating to observe the interest in establishing regional 
centres in different parts of the world.. He was a believer in the usefulness 
of such centres, but thought that they should be organized on a temporary basis 
from the very beginning and that the-need for them, and the scientific scope of 
their programmes, .should be reviewed after, say, five years. The participating 
Member States might, in those years, have made such progress that they could 
henceforth themselves organize such activities as the centre had undertaken. 
The regional effort could then be aimed at more advanced and more expensive projects 
which could 'only be launched by joint efforts, 


44. The establishment of a centre for theoretical physics under the Agency's 
auspices was under discussion, 'The Agency had recently.taken part in two 
courses, one on high-energy physics in Italy and the other on low-energy physics 
in Czechoslovakia, and valuable experience had been gained from them. It would 
be-desirable to have" the Conference's guidance with regard to the Agency's 
1 

further activities in the field of theoretical physics, 


45- There was reason for satisfaction at the Agency's selection as Executing 
Agency for the Special Fund agricultural project in Yugoslavia, 


46, The regional approach to training problems seemed to be a promising one. 
Delegations were doubtless aware of what the Economic and Social Council of 


the United Nations was doing to further education'and vocational training, in 



GC(VI)/OR.63 
page 9. 


particular with the co-operation of the regional economic commissions of the 
United Nations." The Agency should integrate its own with the other regional 
programmes so that full use would he made of existing facilities in variousareas, 
e.g. a.programme of training African students could no doubt he undertaken 
at the Triga reactor in Lovanium with the co-operation of all the bodies . 
concerned, including the Economic Commission for Africa, 


47- The Agency had also,an important role to play in connection with the 
training of young people, especially from developing countries, in the national 
scientific establishments or institutes of its- Member States. The Secretariat 
had studied the possibility of using the Agency's. Laboratory and the Austrian 
establishment at Seibersdorf for training purposes. The Austrian authorities 
had been most co-operative and it seemed likely that a. number of Agency fellows 
might be received at the Austrian establishment while a number of more junior 
students might be accepted for the kind- of extensive training, lasting several 
years, at both establishments which- experience had shown to be- especially 
useful. Agency staff might be assigned for the purpose to the Austrian 
establishment as instructors, which should have a stimulating effect on them as... 
well*, 


48. As for the important question of employment after return home, reports frpm 
fellows indicated that they had not in all cases been given positions in which 
they could use their specialized training in the best interests of their own 
countries.. Sepcific suggestions in that regard would be very welcome. 
49. Special attention was drawn- to, radioisotope- research,at the Laboratory on 
fertilizer uptake by rice - a supplementary investigation, on a laboratory.scale, 
to the large-scale ric'e .project being carried out in eight different, countries.. 
It was hoped to obtain data that would permit.improved fertilizer -utilization, in 
rice-growing - ah obviously' profitable development. -• 
50. Reference must also be made to the laboratory set up in Monaco under an . . 
agreement between the Agency, the Government of the Principality 'and the' 
Oceanographic Institute, which at present covered the years 1961-63- The main 
object was to study the movement of water and marine organisms, and the 
distribution and redistribution of radioactive materials in marine organisms 
from phytoplankton to fish. ' The scientific work had started and the laboratory 
would have access to unique facilities such as a manned high-sea buoy; its 

GC(VI)/OR.63 
page 10' 


work would enrich existing knowledge of marine biology, throw light on the 
problem of waste disposal into the sea and make it possible to establish practices 
which would meet future needs. 


51. The programmes of scientific meetings and publications were by now well 
established, and would be adapted to the present and future needs of Member 
States. Welcome progress had been made in speeding up the publication of the 
proceedings of the scientific meetings held by the Agency. 
52. He would next turn to a question which he kne?/ was of interest to all 
delegations, namely that of staffing. In that respect there was an obvious 
contradictions while the Secretariat was under continuous pressure from 
Member States to fill every vacancy it was simultaneously under instructions to 
practise the strictest economy. At present not enough funds were being voted 
to cover all the posts authorized. Certain reductions would be made in 1963 i-n 
the General Service staff engaged on administrative work, but that would not 
affect the technical work. Further economies in the Professional category might 
also be possible, and he would present his proposals in that respect in the 
budget for 1964. ' . 
53- Member States must naturally be prepared to scale down accordingly their 
expectations.concerning the appointment of their nationals to the Secretariat. 


54. There was some difficulty in applying the clause in the Statute about 
securing "employees of the highest standards of efficiency, technical competence 
and integrity" and at the same time following the recommendation that "due regard 
should be paid to the contributions of Members of the Agency" and to "geographical1 
distribution. Wide geographical distribution was the surest guarantee of the 
international character of the Secretariat, but the principle could not be 
properly applied unless' all. Member States, advanced and less advanced, were 
prepared to place at the disposal of the Agency candidates of the .highest 
available calibre. That was particularly important just now when directorships 
were open in Divisions having very highly qualified senior scientists. Delegates 
would agree that the appointment as Director of a man not equal to subordinates 
in matters of competence could not fail to have a detrimental effect on the work 
of the unit concerned. 


55. There was also the question of correct proportions as between short-term 
and long-term appointments. 

GC(VI)/OR.63 
page 11 


56<, The present trend whereby every vacancy in the senior ranks was filled by 
someone of the same nationality was bound to be detrimental to the true interests 
of the Agency and must be corrected, 


57o There must also be greater respect for the concept of an international 


civil service. The affairs of the Agency could be conducted properly only if 
all members of the staff were conscious of their responsibilities as truly 


international civil servants, 


58, There was a contrast between the rapid and relentless advance of science 
and technology and the cumbersome and slow operation of the Agency, It was 


encouraging; however, to find that many Member States were interested in finding 
ways and means of transforming bhe Agency into a more efficient organization. 
The Agency was a technical organization, but it was also evident that even 


technical matters dealt with on a world-wide scale could not be isolated from 
political considerations. He hoped, however, that such considerations, though 
unavoidable, would not be allowed to obstruct or impede the work of the Agency, 


The meeting rose at 12,10 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VI)/OR.64 
6 December 1962 


GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 


SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 19 September 1962, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


8 Adoption of the agenda and allocation of 


items for initial discussion 1-2 


-9 Closing date of the session 3-4 


- Statement by the representative of the United 
Nations 5 ~ 17 
10 General debate and report of the Board of 


Governors for 1961-62 18-93 


Statements by the delegates ofs 


South Africa 18 - 28 
Netherlands 29 - 37 
United Kingdom 38 - 57 
Afghanistan 58 - 63 
Australia 64 - 73 
Belgium 74 - 80 
Switzerland 8l - 90 
Burma 91 ~ 93 


* GC(VI)/207. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(VI)/INF/56/Rev. 2. 


62-5668 



GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 2 


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(VI)/206) 


1. The PRESIDENT proposed that the General Conference should accept the 
recommendations made by the General Committee on the agenda and the allocation 
of items for initial discussion. 
2. The recommendations of the General Committee were accepted. 
CLOSING DATE CF THE' SESSION 


3. The PRESIDENT announced that the General Committee had recommended 
that 26 September 1962 should be provisionally set as the closing date for 
the session. 
4. The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted. 
STATEMENT BY THJS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE UNITSD NATIONS 


5. The PRESIDENT welcomed Mr. Ralph Bunche, the representative of the 
United Nations, and invited him to address the Conference. 
6. Mr. BUNCHE_ (Representative of the United Nations) said that it was 
a great pleasure for him to speak once again to the,General Conference of an 
Agency in whose origins the United Nations had had such active interest. 
The United Nations had followed the development of the Agency's programmes 
and activities with keen appreciation and realized that the full success of 
its work depended heavily on world political affairs and, in particular, on 
the solution of the problems of disarmament and the discontinuance of nuclear 
tests. Nevertheless, earnest co-operation among States in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy and in other areas of science was possible even now and could 
contribute to the improvement of the international situation. 
7. In view of the technological and economic difficulties which had been 
encountered in the development of nuclear power, the Agency had moved in other 
directions, such as the training of scientists, the exchange of technical 
information, the encouragement of research and the establishment of health and 
safety regulations. 
8. That change in the direction of its activities had not, however, diminished 
the scope for a co-operativo relationship between the Agency and the United 

GC{VT)/OR.64 
page 3 


Nations. On the contrary, co-operation had steadily increased in recent years. 
It might he recalled that some work on atomic questions had been undertaken 
before the birth of the Agency5 the United Nations, in particular, had 
organized two conferences on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. In that 
connection he regretted that, despite the recommendation of the Scientific 
Advisory Committee in favour of holding a third conference of that kind, no 
such item had yet been placed on the agenda for the seventeenth session of the 
United Nations General Assembly. The United Nations was, however, organizing 
a conference on the application of science to underdeveloped areas which was to 
be held in Geneva early in 1963* 


9. It could he noted with satisfaction that the Agency had successfully carried 
out numerous activities in close co-operation with other organizations of the 
United Nations family, thus avoiding any duplication or overlapping. 
10. While it was true that the hopes of an imminent contribution of nuclear 
energy to the development of power-starved nations had been somewhat disappointed, 
some progress had nevertheless been achieved in that respect. It 
seemed probable that nuclear power might soon become economical in areas where 
grid systems already existed and where nuclear power plants could be employed 
as base load stations, as well as in areas where the cost of conventional fuel 
and hydroelectric power was high. 
11. The past ten years had also witnessed a rapid development in conventional 
power technology and- an' increasing attention to new sources of energy. That 
had contributed to a climate of competition which had obliged the nuclear power 
industry to concern itself seriously with economics as well as physics. In view 
of the results already achieved, it could now be stated that nuclear power was 
destined to play an increasingly significant part in the world and, above all, 
that it would banish forever any fear of exhausting the world's, energy-producing 
resources. 
12. In power planning, all sources of energy must be considered simultaneously. 
Thus, the ultimate decision on the use of nuclear power was a matter of common 
concern for both the Agency and the United Nations. In that connection he 
welcomed the Director General's decision to include an expert on conventional 
power in the missions which the Agency was sending to developing countries. 
Co-operation was the rule between the Agency and the United Nations3 although. 

GC(VT)/QR.64 
page 4 


in the past, it could at times have been better, there were no differences 
between the two bodies concerning the evaluation of nuclear power in the 
context of power planning, and that co-operation was sure to grow ever closer 
as projects multiplied. 

13. In view of the importance of the question of priorities, it was encouraging 
to note that the Director General and the Board were formulating a comprehensive 
long-term programme which coincided most appropriately with plans for the 
United Nations Development Decade. From the point of view of the United 
Nations, the question of nuclear power was the Agency's main concern, and its 
study should lead to a natural collaboration with the well-established United 
Nations work on natural resources and industrial development. The programme 
for the application of radioisotopes in developing nations was equally 
important. The Agency survey of the industrial application of radioisotopes 
formed a natural link with the United Nations industrial development programme, 
particularly the work of the new Industrial Development Centre, The Agency's 
programme was particularly strong in fellowships and training' courses, both 
national and regional, and that was an area in which the United Mations was 
also making a great effort, especially to assist the newly independent 
countries. The United Nations looked forward to the further development of 
Agency programmes, and to ever closer ties between the two organizations. 
Indeed, their collaboration was increasing ^very year, as was shown by the 
recent appointment of the Agency as Executing Agency for the Special Fund 
agricultural project in Yugoslavia. It was expected that further studies on 
energy sources and power production would be carried out jointly by the Agency 
and the United Nations. 
14. He was glad to note that the Agency was engaging in practical research 
in its own Laboratory at Seibersdorf and collaborating actively in the work of 
the Oceanographic Institute at Monaco15. 
In concluding, he wished to offer a special word of appreciation to the 
hew Director General. He recalled that the great success of the United Nations 
Second International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Bnergy had been 
very largely due to Mr. Sklund's brilliant and undefatigable efforts. He wished 
him the greatest success and assured him that he could count upon earnest 

GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 5 


co-operation from the United Nations. The United Nations Secretariat had, 
indeed, already engaged in consultations with the Director General on ways in 
which the two organizations could give one another mutual support. 


16. Recalling his own long experience as an international civil servant, he 
whole-heartedly endorsed thy Director General's remarks on the need for 
respect for the concept of an international civil service. He knew that it 
was-possible to have an international civil service whose staff were objective, 
fair-minded and unresponsive to any national interest5 but he knew also that 
if the truly international character of the civil service was undermined in any 
international-body, the deterioration and ultimate ruin of that body were 
certain. 
17. Finally he wished to say that while the United Nations did not minimize 
the dangers of the international situation, it nevertheless considered that 
constructive action could be taken in many directions. There was no reason 
to despair of achieving that international climate of trust and calm in which 
alone the constructive activities of the Agency and like bodies could thrive. 
The Agency had a vital service to render to the world and he was confident 
that it would perform its "task with increasing effectiveness. The United 
Nations had confidence in the Agency and in its future. 
GENERAL D3BA.TE AND REPORT OF THS BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 196I-62 
(GC(VI)/195, 204) 


18. Mr. SOLIJ (South Africa) said he wished to emphasize once again the 
need to resist the undue intrusion of politics into the affairs of what should 
be a technical agency. That required constant vigilance and a gift for 
promoting conciliation and understanding, especially on the part of the Chairman 
of the Board of Governors. Notwithstanding the improvement in the atmosphere 
of the Board, a great deal still remained to be done with respect to the 
operation of the Secretariat, in order to ensure that scientific rather than 
political criteria received paramount consideration. Determined efforts were 
required to prevent,the polarization of Secretariat attitudes around the rival 
American and Soviet sources of attraction. He was confident that the Director 
General would have the support of most delegates in anything he could do to 
counter that tendency and to resist the pressures on both himself and his 

GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 6 


i 

Secretariat, Article VII.F of the Statute required every Member State to 
respect the international character of the responsibilities of the Director 
General and the staff, and not to seek to influence them in the discharge ,pf 
their duties, The Director General should set the pattern in that matter by 
not hesitating to make public, to the extent that might be necessary, any 
pressures that were brought to bear on him., 


19. As to the streamlining of the Secretariat, he believed that its structure 
should be simplified and made more flexible, and that a more determined effort 
should be made to attract the best scientific minds5 in other words, the 
Director General should aim at a smaller but better paid scientific staff. Ho 
was a firm believer in the nued for controlled expansion of operational 
activities, but not of the Secretariat as such, for it was already too large. 
In particular, there must be an improvement in the quality of the scientific 
staff, on which the prestige of the Agency depended. 
20. There was also a need to streamline the procedures of the General Conference 
in the interests of greater efficiency. The premises underlying the 
proposal put forward by his delegation^' (it concerned the introduction of 
biennial programming) had already been endorsed by the majority of the Board 
and by the Director General, and he hoped that the General Conference would 
also approve them. 
21. His delegation was in broad agreement with the proposals and priorities 
made with regard to the long-term programme but, in view of the somewhat 
disheartening findings of the panel on nuclear power, wished to emphasize its 
view that the inability to advance in that respect as rapidly as had been 
hoped should not deflect the Agency from its work on nuclear power - the very 
reason for its existence. He wished to make that point because there had 
recently been some talk about the need to diversify the Agency's activities 
in order better to justify its expenditure. It had even been suggested that 
the Agency should become an international authority on conventional power. 
His delegation would not welcome any dilution of the Agency's nuclear power 
activities. It was precisely in that respect that the Agency's technical 
staff was singularly weak, so far having not a single nuclear engineer of 
1/ GC(VI)/INF/55. 



GC(VI)/OR,64 
page 7' 

international repute. He did not wish to see the Agency itself engaging in., 
nuclear power operations, but it should have a valuable role as a nuclear 
power consultant. 


22. As to financing - fundamental to any future planning - South Africa' had 
for many years been arguing the need to improve the situation. The financial 
problems of the United Nations had clearly shown how crippling could be the 
effect of deliberately vague compromise formulae. The United Kingdom proposal 
2/ 


to amend Article AlV of the Statute—' suggested not only abolishing the 
operational budget but also tying the Agency's system of assessment to the 
principles applied by the United Nations in apportioning what was described 
as its "regular budget". But the United Nations now had to decide afresh what 


constituted a regular budget in the light of the International Court's opinion 
on the subject of the expenses of the United Nations Emergency Force and the 
United Nations operation in the Congo. It would be unwise for the General 
Conference to recommend the adoption of a statutory amendment on such a complex 
issue before knowing what decision the General Assembly would take. He was 
therefore glad that the United Kingdom had decided not to press its amendment 
to a vote. 


23. He appealed once more to all economically developed Lember States to make 
pledges to the General Fund on a percentage basis in line with their percentage 
assessments for the regular budget, and hoped that those developed States 
which had supported the United Kingdom amendment would duly honour the 
principles thoy had espoused. He appealed to all developing States, also to 
make at least a token contribution to the Fund. 
24. The financial problem was of course crucial to the Agency's role as a 
purveyor of technical assistance, but greater discrimination was needed in the 
allocation of such assistance. The projects undertaken had in many instances 
had all too little impact on a country's development, and it might be necessary 
to have the results critically assessed by outside consultants. 
25. The Agency should aim at acting as a catalyst in the establishment of 
direct links between atomic energy centres and institutions in the more 
advanced countries and newly burgeoning projects in the less developed countries. 
2/ GC(VI)/205. 



GC(VI)/OR.64 


page 8 


Such links of course implied direct bilateral aid rather than multilateral 


assistances hut the likelihood of political objections would be considerably 


less than in the case of direct aid from one Government to another, Further


more, assistance of that nature was cheaper and easier to administer, and 


would probably be more effective in the long run than aid given by an inter


national organization on a multilateral basis. The Seibersdorf Reactor 
Centre, for example, had opened its doors to Agency-sponsored students - a 


development which the Agency should pursue elsewhere. 


26. With regard to the next conference on the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy, he recalled the financial and other difficulties facing the United 
Nations5 unless the latter took a decision in the near future, the General 
Conference should consider the possibility of the Agency itself organizing the 
conference and authorize the Board to provide accordingly in the 1964 budget. 
The Agency's more limited funds would clearly make it necessary to restrict 
the scope of the conference, but a smaller conference might achieve even more 
constructive results than an enormous one; The advice of the Scientific 
Advisory Committee would of course be essential, but if the conference was to 
be held in 1964? authorization should now be given to the Board and the 
Director General to proceed with the preparatory work - always on the assumption 
.' of course that the General Assembly did not at its seventeenth session decide 
to arrange the conference itself. 


27* Safeguards were unlikely to be discussed in any detail during the current 
session^ their future would no doubt depend largely on decisions due to be 
taken within a few months in Washington. For its part, South Africa had made a 
modest contribution to the system by arranging that sales of South African 
uranium to Japan should come under Agency safeguards. 


28. The extensive series of nuclear tests that had taken place since the 
previous session had once again underlined the challenge to mankind which atomic 
energy represented. Delegates could best express their concern by stressing 
their confidence that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy would ultimately 
displace the construction and accumulation of atomic weapons as the primary 
objective of national and international policy. 
29. Mr. lliSCHAUZIER (Netherlands) considered that the different sectors 
of the proposed programme were well balanced and reflected a further consolidation 
of activities. As compared with 3962, the proposals for 1963 provided 

GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 9 


for a modest, although not unimportant expansion. The Director General had 
indicated that, after a preparatory period, he would make suggestions concerning 
the future activities of the Agency. The Motherlands Government would 
give careful consideration to any such suggestions. 


30. So far as the future was concerned, it was proposed to introduce longterm 
planning, While noting with approval the work that the Director General 
and the Board had already done in that respect - which moreover should he most 
vigorously pursued - the Hetherlands delegation felt that the General Conference 
must not lose sight of the need for sound programming and hudgeting in the 
shorter term;; for practical reasons it might be well to introduce biennial 
budgeting as well as programming. In certain specialized agencies of the 
United Nations, e.g. the Pood and Agriculture Organisation (PAO) and the 
United Kations 'jducational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNSSCO) that 
system had proved of real value. 
31. If the Conference wished to adopt biennial budgeting in addition to 
biennial programming, an amendment of the Statute would be necessary, but that 
should present no difficulties. A two-year cycle could be fitted into a longterm 
programme of, say, six years, in which case the General Conference would 
meet every othur year. That offered curtain advantages, particularly financial. 
His delegation would be willing to join with others in submitting a draft 
resolution on the whole series of questions, i.e. rygular sessions of the 
General Conference every two years, biennial programming and biennial budgeting, 
32. The amendment to the Statute proposed by the United Kingdom would, if 
accepted, provide a better basis for the operational activities than now 
existed and therefore had his full support. 
33. Another amendment, relating to an increase in the number of seats on the 
Board in the interests of African Members of the Agency, had been approved at 
the preceding session but had not yet come into forco-4/. Should it not take 
effect before the elections to be held later in the session, two African States 
could be chosen during those elections and so take their rightful places on the 
Board as soon as the amendment did in fact become effective. There appeared to 
be no formal obstacle to that procedure.f it was merely what common sense 
required. 
3/ GC(v)/RES/92 . ' 



GC(VI)/ORo64 . 
page 10 


34- His Government had doubts as to the real nood for an international contra 
for theoretical physics at present, However, even if those doubts were not 
shared by all delegations, was the Agency the obvious organization to found 
such a centre? His Government thought not, for- the simple reason that, even 
though the theoretical aspects of nuclear physics might be a part of theoretical 
physics, the latter, taken as a whole, comprised a great deal more and went far 
beyond the province of the Agency. If a centre was wanted, the obvious body 
to start it was UK3SC0, which was concerned with science in the broadest sense. 
The International Council of Scientific Unions (iCSU) could advise on the noed 
for the centre and perhaps later assist UN'JSCO in establishing it. 


35* His delegation thoroughly approved the Agency's work in connection with 
technical assistance, exchange and training, and scientific research;t the 
Netherlands Government had offered three Type-II fellowships for 1962 to 
enable Agency-sponsored candidates to study in the Netherlands and hoped to 
act as host in September 19&3 to a symposium on exponential and critical 
experiments. 


36. On the subject of nuclear power, the ustablishmonb of a nuclear power 
station was under consideration in the Netherlands, and- a decision regarding 
the final design for one of limited size was expected shsrtly. The Agency's 
studies on nuclear power costing had been realistic and had clearly shown the 
effect of radioactive waste disposal on aggregate costs. M least for the 
time being, the Agency should not undertake studies connected with, the 
developm.^ri of new types of reactors but concentrate on the further development 
of existing types which might be, or had actually proved to be, economic. 
37. Hti expressed the hope that during the present session all parties would 
make a sincere effort to achieve the best possible results under orevailir.g 
circumstances, to the greater benefit of the Agency and of the peoples which 
looked to it for help, 
38. Sir Roger MAKIKS (United Kingdom) said he would restrict his remarks 
to the consideration cf two of the most important items on the agenda, namely, 
long-term planning and the proposed United Kingdom amendment to Article ivIV 
of the Statute, 
39. The Agency's long-term programme was to come into operation during the 
United Nations Development Decade, which aimed at creating conditions in which 

GC(VI)/0E.64 
page 11 


the national incomes of developing countries would be increasing by 5$ a year 
by I97O9 it would allow the Agency to play its proper role in helping its 
Member States to attain that objective, in co-ordination with the other 
organizations of the United lations. 


40. Planning experience in the United Kingdom and elsewhere had shown that it 
was often necessary to alter plans to meet changing circumstances or cope with 
new situations. Flexibility was particularly important in the plans of an 
organization like the Agency, which was dealing with a new technology. 
41. The Agency's programme would naturally have to cover the three main 
aspects of its work: regulatory activities5 conferences and the distribution 
of information^ the provision of technical assistance, V/hile much of the 
ground work for the regulatory codes had already been done, they would need to 
be reviewed and supplemented at fairly regular intervals, A long-term 
programme of scientific meetings would help to avoid having too many meetings 
in any one year, and each subject would receive attention in a sequence and on 
a scale depending on the progress made with it. Revisions of the regulatory 
codes and issues of the admirable review series could be timed in relation to 
the relevant scientific meeting. Priorities and objectives in the provision 
of technical assistance should be closely related to the naeds and wishes of 
Member States, and geared moreover to their national plans| the reports of 
the various missions sent to such countries contained valuable information on 
that point. 
42. To use its limited resources to the best advantage the Agency should 
concentrate - as the ad hoc group on co-ordination set up by the Economic and 
bocial Council of the United Nations (SCOSOC) had recommended - on those areas 
where the need for action was especially great and the opportunities for 
achieving results particularly promising. The drafters of the plan must of 
course-apply a critical judgement of their own to what the Member States proposed. 
43. He could quite understand that many Member States wanted to have their 
own nuclear power programmes as soon as possible. However, United Kingdom 
experience showed that a nuclear power programme required a really massive 
effort. The capital cost of the first ten civil nuclear power stations in 
the United Kingdom would be over £500 million. In 196I, the United Kingdom 

OC(.yi)/OE,64 
page 12 


Atomic Energy Authority had devoted some £25 million to all forms of reactor 
development and employed some 1750 fully qualified scientists and engineers. 
That would no doubt help to establish nuclear power on a sound economic basis 
in the United Kingdom and provide experience that would also be profitable to 
many other Member States. While, in certain cases, special circumstances in a 
less developed country might make nuclear power an economic proposition in the 
fairly near future, it was none the loss true that in general the Agency following 
the report submitted by the Board-" - should concentrate on helping 
Member States to prepare the way for atomic energy by, for example, undertaking 
economic assessments, advising on problems of safety and training the necessary 
staff. 


44. On the other hand, the Agency could immediately help almost every developing 
Member State in applying radioisotope techniques in medicine, agriculture 
and industry^ the survey of savings resulting from the use of radioisotopes in 
industry should provide valuable information. The Director General had 
suggested that the Agency should particularly encourage the use of radioisotopes 
during the United Nations Development Decade. The United Nations and the 
specialized agencies might well have to concentrate on solving the urgent 
problems of food and health facing many Member States, and those States might 
feel that the Agency should avoid making unduly heavy demands on the limited 
resources that would be available for the Development Decade. 
45- However, although some of the specialized agencies had a legitimate 
interest in certain branches of nuclear energy, the particular responsibilities 
of the Agency ought to be recognized and effective co-ordination assured. The 
declaration just made by the representative of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations was particularly reassuring in that regard. 


46. On the subject of the United Kingdom contribution to the work of the 
Agency, he reca.lled that, in addition to its financial contributions, the 
United Kingdom had during the preceding year provided the services of experts 
without charge for short technical assistance missions and paid their travelling 
expenses. The same would be done in 1963. Twelve places for Agency fellows 
had been offered at the radioisotope laboratory at Wantage and six more would 
soon be offered. It had also decided to offer Agency fellows facilities for 
studying the experience acquired in the construction, commissioning and building 
4/ GC(vi)/i95. 



GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 13 


of Brad well nuclear power station. Of 813 papers presented at Agencyscientific 
meetings in 1961* 94 had come from the United Kingdom. 


47- Referring to the proposed United Kingdom amendment to the Statute, he 
said it was usually considered an essential condition of effective planning 
that the authors of the plan should know approximately what funds would be 
available to carry it out. With the Agency, that was unfortunately not true 
at the moment., The Operational Budget was financed largely by the voluntary 
contributions of Member States. Those had fallen consistently short of the 
targets set annually by the Board and the Conference. 


48. The facts, although well known, were worth repeating. In 1959> only $1.2 
million had been contributed against a target of $1.5 million. In i960, the 
target had remained at $1.5 million, but voluntary contributions had fallen 
to $1 million. In 196I the target had gone up to $1.8 million but contributions 
had not exceeded the 1959 level. In 1962 the target had been increased 
to $2 million but, despite a strong appeal from the General Conference the 
preceding year5^ only 17 out of 77 Member States had paid their full share, and 
contributions had risen by only $100 000. It was sad that so much time was 
spent in preparing a programme and budget that was most unlikely to be carried 
out in full. 
49. When the Statute had been adopted in 1956, it had been thought that the 
Operational Budget would reflect the financial side of the Agency's-work as a 
broker in the supply of nuclear equipment and fissionable materials. However, 
its activities had not developed in that way, while the technical assistance 
work had developed to an extent which doubtless no one had foreseen. There was 
reason to rejoice in that, but it also meant that the relevant provisions of 
the Statute, adopted with quite a different aim in mind, should be reconsidered. 
50. The United Kingdom had therefore introduced an amendment to the Statute 
with a view to establishing a single budget, to be financed by the assessed 
contributions of Member States. 
51. In taking that initiative, the United Kingdom felt to -some extent responsible 
for the existing state of affairs. For In 1956 it had pressed, for reasons 
which seemed good at the-time, for separate regular and operational budgets. 
5/ GC(V)/R3S/101. 



GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 14 


52. He believed that an amendment on the lines proposed would, if adopted, 
enable the Agency to undertake effective long-term planning and to develop 
the work which had been so well begun despite.the many difficulties caused by 
uncertain and inadequate funds. 
53. Throe main arguments had been advanced against the amendment. The first 
was that 'expenditure would get out of hand. It certainly could. But to judge 
by the record of the past six years, the Agency had on the whole shown a 
keen sense of responsibility in applying the provisions of the Statute undor 
the various rules of procedure relating to finance. It seemed, mcrever, that 
if the whole programme were financed from assessed contributions, Member States 
would be still more likely to weigh carefully the value of the programme 
against the cost, 
54. Secondly, it had been suggested that the amendment would impose a severe 
burden on the less developed Member States which received technical assistance. 
He did not think that was really true. To begin with, the scale of contributions 
was already weighted according to the Member's ability to pay and there 
were special reductions in the caso of countries with a low per capita income. 
Indeed, if the proposed amendment had been in force in 1962, each of the Member 
States entitled to receive technical assistance under the Expanded Programme 
of Technical Assistance (EPTA) would on average have had to pay an extra $3000, 
but on the other hand would have received $17 000 more in technical assistance 
from the Agency. It might, however, be possible to arrange for the less 
developed countries to pay part of their contribution to a single budget in 
their own currencies. 


55. Thirdly, it had been said that finance by assessed contributions would 
be contrary to the principles of technical assistance. It was certainly_true 
that the main technical assistance programmes of the United Nations were 
financed by voluntary contributions. It was good that the Agency should draw 
upon those sources and it should continue to do so. That did not mean, however, 
that the Agency should have its own voluntary fund, as was the case at the 
moment5 that was certainly not the usual practice in other agencies. The 
Agency should manage its affairs in the way that was best for its own interests 
and those of Member States. 

GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 15' 


56. His delegation therefore considered that the proposed change was in the 
immediate and the long-term-interests of the Agency. Although a large number 
of delegations were, in principle, in favour of the change, there were a 
number of doubts and hesitations. He therefore proposed that the General 
Conference have a "second reading debate" right away, on the general merits of 
the proposal, and that the Board examine in detail the amendment and any other 
relevant suggestion and report its conclusions to the next session of the 
General Conference. He intended to introduce a draft resolution to that effect, 
57* The United Kingdom did hot at all underestimate the importance of other 
aspects of the Agency's work to which he had not specifically referred. Ho 
.had. chosen, to speak on items on the agenda which appeared to be of greatest 


importance for the Agency's future. He was confident that constructive effort 


on the part of all Member States would enable the Agency to play its proper 


part in ,the United Nations Development Decade. 


58. Mr. KAKAB (Afghanistan) stated that Afghanistan had already begun to 
take action on its decision to embark on the development of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes. He appreciated the assistance.which the.Agency had given 
but hoped for even more. For example, the equipment which Afghanistan had 
received to set up its nuclear physics laboratory was inadequate and more was 
badly needed. Equipment to a valuo^of 130 000 was soon to be delivered by the 
Agency under the 1961-62 JUPTA programme, and the Agency had recently indicated 
that it would also be able, under its regular programme for 19&3? 'fco supply 
the additional equipment requested. The advice of the nuclear physics expert 
provided had been extremely valuable'! the expert's mission had now been 
extended and it was hoped that his help would be available for some years. 
59* Afghanistan hoped to set up radioisotope research laboratories for work in 
agriculture, medicine, industry, and so forth. Thanks to the Agency expert, 
a medical radioisotope project - supported by some eminent doctors - already 
existed. It might be necessary to ask the Agency for additional equipment for 
the laboratories in question and, if so, he hoped the Agency would be able to 
grant the request. 


60. The radiocaesium equipment requested .from the,Agency for use in diagnosis 
and treatment would be of immense service since some doctors had.been trained 
abroad in its use. He therefore hoped the Agency could supply it soon. 

GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 16 


61. Representatives of Afghanistan had participated in Agency conferences, 
symposia and courses in various countries, e.g. the regional training course 
held in Athens on the medical application of. radioisotopes. His country 
hoped to send representatives to the course, in Turkey, on the agricultural 
applications of radioisotopes, and to participate in other similar meetings. 
Afghanistan would be glad,to act as host to some such Agency meeting. 
62. He was glad that four Agency fellowships had been awarded to Afghan 
candidates under the 1962 programme. 
63. He hoped to see fulfilled the hopes of the non-aligned countries for a 
treaty on nuclear disarmament and the banning of nuclear tests so that, under 
the Agency's guidance, atomic energy would in future be used solely for peaceful- 
purposes. 
64. ' Mr. McKHIGHT (Australia) said he would refer to only two questions: 
the importance of the Agency's regulatory functions and the need to curtail 
meetings of the General Conference. 
65- His delegation had said at the fourth regular session that the Agency 


should take steps to facilitate the free movement of nuclear materials, from 
raw materials such as uranium oxide concentrates to carefully packed fissionable 
materials. ' As atomic energy developed and more and more reactors came 
into operation, over-growing numbers of fuel elements - new or irradiated were 
being transported over the world's trade routes. But their movement was 
hindered in many ways. 


66. In view of its geographical position, Australia was particularly interested 
in seeing the Agency draw up an international convention to regulate, and thereby 
encourage, world trade in nuclear materials. Australia had a choice of four 
sea routes linking it with .Europe. Along each of them were the ports of 
several countries, all Members of the Agency and all, as matters now stood, 
enforcing their own regulations, conditions or criteria regarding the use of 
ports by ships transporting nuclear materials. That problem was being 
encountered more and more frequently by many Member States. 
67. All Member States were committed, under Article II of the Statute, "to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world". They should therefore, by common agreement. 

GC(VI)/0E.64 
page 17 


establish regulations to govern the transport of nuclear materials. His 
Government noted with satisfaction that the Agency planned to organize a 
diplomatic conference on the subject in 1963- It would take an active part in 
the conference, and hoped that the outcome would he a convention that could 
be quickly ratified by all Member States. 


68. Pending the adoption and ratification of that convention, which would 
represent a great step forward, ho appealed to Member States to view with 
sympathy the problems of their fellow Members in connection with transport and 
also in connection with civil liability for nuclear damage, about which 
little had yet been done to standardize regulations. 
69. He must nest refer to the need for the General Conference to impose 
certain limitations on itself in the interests of economy and efficiency. 
As many delegations had repeatedly pointed out, the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy had not followed the lines expected when the Agency had been set up. 
In particular, reactors had not assumed the role in the production of power 
expected of them. Many countries had, like Australia, set up atomic energy 
commissions so as to provide, 'as part of the national administration, scientists 
who could advise on the desirability of introducing nuclear power, then 
expected to come into widespread use within four or five years. To make use 
of the skills in question in the meantime, several countries had begun research 
on reactor technology - research which had brought to light many more difficulties 
than had been foreseen eight or ten years previously^ on the whole, 
the power programme had dropped behind. Australia had made some progress in 
the technology of materials, but still had a lot to do before the hightemperature 
gas-cooled reactor could be thought of as entirely satisfactory, 


70. As a result of those holdups, the use of resources - especially financial had 
to be very carefully considered, nationally and internationally. The 
coming year's study on Agency long-term planning would corroborate the validity 
of the suggestion he was going to put forward. 
71. It was all the more necessary, when resources were limited, to cut down . 
on administrative expenditure. That had always been a fundamental principle 
in the Agency, but he nevertheless feared that its administrative machinery 
was unduly heavy. At the fourth regular session the delegate from the 

GC( Vl)/OR.64 
page 18 


Netherlands had suggested that the Conference meet only every second year—' , 
a suggestion that had been taken up again by the Governor from Pakistan during 
the June meetings of the Board. While the Statute might legally preclude such 
a decision, it nevertheless appeared possible for the Conference to curtail its 
meetings to the greatest extent compatible with adequate discussion,. He in no 
way wished to paralyse debate in the Conference, but was convinced that it 
would now be possible to reduce the length of General Conference sessions, 
every second year, to one week. 


72. 'It'was clear that the Agency programme was becoming stabilized and that 
new items requiring decisions were less numerous than during the Agency's 
first yearso It was worth noting, in that connection, that the first four 
Boards had held 100, 70, 56 and 48 meetings, respectively^ the fifth Board 
had met only 28 times,. Thus it should not be impossible for the General 
Conference also to assist in reducing administrative expenditure by shortening 
its sessions. A first step in that direction had already been taken, as it had 
been decided to fix Wednesday, 26 September 19&2,as the provisional closing 
date for the present session. The suggestion therefore was that the General 
Conference meet for two weeks one year and only one week the following year, 
and that what might be called the "long" sessions and the "shorty sessions 
should continue to alternate. If, as he greatly hoped, biennial programmes 
were introduced, the Agency's programme would have to be examined only every 
two years and it would be quite easy to agree that the general debate should 
take place only once in two years. The "short" sessions would handle statutory 
business such as the adoption of resolutions on appropriations, examination 
of the Board's report, the election of Board Members, and so on, although 
obviously they would also have to deal with a few important matters. A similar 
practice had been followed by other international organizations which, after 
meeting frequently at the outset, had decided to hold their general conferences 
every two years and have biannual meetings of their executive bodies. 
73- He did not wish to put forward a formal proposal, but merely a suggestion 
which, he hoped, would be given serious consideration by all Member States 
during the following two years. 


6/ GC(IV)/0E.39, para. 68. 



GC(VI)/OR„64 
Dago 19 


74. Mr. CRRERA (Belgium) expressed his Government's satisfaction with, 
the Agency's part in the voluntary transfer by Belgium, to the Congo, of the 
uranium contained in the TRICO reactor of Lovanium University in Leopoldvallc 
The Agency's co-operation had made it possible to make a gift to the Congo of 
the uranium in the TRICO reactor that Belgium had purchased from the United 
States in 19583 an(i conclude an agreement for the supply of additional uranium 
by the United States and an agreement between the Agency and the Congo relating 
to Agency assistance in connection with the TSICO research reactor. 
75. Belgium had also been glad to welcome to Brussels the special session of 
the Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Law. held under the joint auspices of the 
Agency and the Belgian Government, which had resulted in the adoption of a 
draft convention on liability of operators of nuclear ships. 
76. In general, the Agency's regulatory and legal work had the full attention 
and support of the Belgian Government, which considered that atomic programmes 
could be properly developed in JUember States only after carefully thought-out 
legislation to govern atomic activities on sea and land had been established. 
Belgium was working on a reactor for ship propulsion called vULCAIN - a waterpressurized 
reactor incorporating the principle of variable moderation, based 
on changes in the neutron spectrum obtained by varying the moderating 
properties of a mixture of heavy and light water. 
77* On 16 May 1962, the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority and a Belgian 
research and development syndicate had signed an agreement at Brussels 
providing for the execution, over a period of several years, of a joint 
programme to determine whether the VULCAIN system was economically viable. 
The programme was in three parts; the first related, exclusively to the 
theoretical and experimental study of the neutronics of the reactor^ the 
second was concerned with the technological study of certain parts of the 
reactor and the nuclear installation, and the relevant tests5 the third part 
would consist of power tests on a VULCAIN-type core in an existing installation, 
to determine its operating characteristics and performance. If the project 
proved to be economic, the reactor could be used to equip 20 megawatt landbased 
nuclear power plants, and in that form it would be particularly useful 
to developing countries whose need for small and medium power nuclear 
generators had often been demonstrated by the Agency. 



GC(VI)/OR„64 
page 20 


78. As to the Agency's scientific work, it was, of course, difficult to 
define its exact field of activity in advance, but it seemed that, given its 
Statute and staff, the Agency should he able to help in promoting the natural 
sciences connected with atomic energy. The Agency should have priority in 
the study of international scientific questions relating to the nuclear 
sector, all duplication being carefully avoided79- 
In his opinion, the Agency, in collaboration with the other competent 
organizations of the United Nations family, could be an innovator in the 
teaching of nuclea-r science. Since the problem of training was becoming 
increasingly acute and there was a laok of teachers, the Agency should promote 
and encourage instruction in nuclear techniques by audio-visual methods. The 
films to be shown in educational establishments or transmitted by television 
would bt; produced with the assistance of the most eminent scientists for each 
subject and of university professors and secondary school teachers, who should 
compare their views and decide what subjects and concepts were essential for 
training future leaders in nuclear w.ork. Such films would be particularly 
valuable to developing countries, which would no longer be absolutely obliged 
to send their nationals abroad to study certain subjects? the subjects in 
question could be taught in their own countries, in their own languages and 
at the same scientific level as in the western countries. Furthermore, 
industries which gavr their staff vocational training could use some parts of 


the films, and they could be shewn at evening classes for young people with 
scientific and technical aptitudes who had been deprived.of a formal education 
by economic or other circumstances. The use of extracts from such films in 
ordinary television programmes would serve to arouse interest in a scientific 


career. 


80. Those might be bold suggestions, but they certainly deserved consideration 
at a time when strictly traditional methods were no longer able to meet 
constantly increasing needs. 
81. Mr, HUMBERT (Switzerland) observed that during the past year, under 
the enlightened leadership of its Director General, the Agency had completed a 
varied programme, in which Switzerland had participated insofar as its resources 
allowed. Although its main activities had been somewhat different from those 
originally envisaged, the Agency had done constructive work in atomic energy a 
field in which international collaboration had proved necessary - and 

GC(vl)/0fi.64 
page 21 


Switzerland had benefited from that work in many ways. Nevertheless, 
co-ordination with the programmes of other organizations could be improved, 
especially in view of the tremendous tasks that remained to be accomplished 
(particularly in the provision of assistance to developing countries)% having 
regard to the shortage of funds and personnel, administrative staff should be 
reduced to a minimum. 

82. The Swiss delegation had noted with satisfaction that the administrative 
staff was to be reduced, and that it was proposed to draw up long-term 
programmes which should make some rationalization possible. As the programmes 
included in the Operational Budget were already partly financed from KP'PA 
funds (insofar as they related to technical assistance to developing countries), 
it seemed desirable that funds allocated for such assistance should be 
1 


centralized and that the financing of technical assistance should be entirely 
taken over by ilPTA. Once that -co-ordination existed the Swiss delegation 
would be willing to consider the extent to which its contribution to EPTA 
could be adjusted to the new situation. It considered, moreover, that 
Operational Budget activities unrelated to technical assistance should be 
financed by Member States in the same way as the Regular Budget. 


83. With a view to devoting the major part of the Agency's resources to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, the Swiss delegation would welcome a substantial 
reduction of expenditure in respect of the General Conference and the 
Board, If, for instance, some restriction could be imposed on political 
discussions - which in fact wore merely a repetition of opinions expressed in 
the United Nations - it would certainly be possible to reduce the length of 
the meetings of those two bodies and the expenses incurred. Another step in 
the same direction would be to give the Director General wider powers. For 
the Board's agenda clearly showed that a large part of that body's time was 
spent on matters which could easily be settled by the Secretariat on the basis 
of general directives. In addition to being costly and wasting valuable time, 
the complication of comparatively simple questions by administrative formalities 
discouraged those who ought to have recourse to the Agency's services, with 
the result that full advantage was not taken of what it had to offer. He 
hoped that the Board would study that problem and expedite the Agency's work 
by delegating part of its responsibilities. 



GC(VI)/OR„64 


page 22 


84. Bext he wished to comment briefly on the Agency's activities during the 
past year and on the proposed programme for 1963. 
85" By granting fellowships and organizing courses and symposia, the Agency 
had enabled a considerable number of research workers and technicians to 
widen their knowledge of various branches-of atomic science. The Swiss 
delegation was glad to be able to say that many Swiss nationals had benefited 
from those activities. It suggested, however, that in order to keep a bettor 
check on the value of the fellowship programmes, the Agency should continue 
to follow the careers of' follows engaged in long-term studies and obtain 
reports on them when appropriate. 


86. All research workers in theoretical physics were very interested in the 
efforts that were being made to establish an international centre for nuclear 
physics, .and Swiss scientists had welcomed the Agency's decision to organize a 
summer course. The favourable comments of those taking part showed that the 
course had achieved its purpose, but other experiments of that kind seemed 
necessary before more far-reaching decisions were taken. 
87.- The Agency had also organized a number of symposia, and the Swiss delegation 
hoped the Secretariat would continue to collaborate with scientific 
bodies in order to avoid holding meotings on the same subject at too short an 
interval. With regard to the uses of atomic energy in general, the Agency had 
addressed and would certainly continue to address inquiries to Member States. 
Replies often took a considerable time to complete, and such questionnaires 
should be as few as possible. 


88. The construction, on an international basis, of power reactors for 
demonstration purposes had been suggested with a view to accelerating the 
development of peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Swiss delegation agreed 
with the Director General that the Agency should not undertake such projects5 
their execution raised many problems, particularly for small countries like 
Switzerland which had limited manpower and financial resources and consequently 
could not collaborate actively. 
89* He expressed his satisfaction with the Agency's work on radioisotopes, 
particularly that done at the Seibersdorf Laboratory, which was giving 
excellent assistance to developing countries -'a matter in which Switzerland 
was specially interested. 



GC(VI)/OR.64 
page 23 


90. In shortj the Swiss Government had no doubts about the usefulness of the 
Agency and was grateful for Its collaboration during the past year. To the 
best of its ability Switzerland would continue to work with the competent 
organs of the Agency, Ho was awaiting his Government's instructions concerning 
Switzerland's voluntary contribution to the General Fund for 1963 and would 
revert to that question later. 
91. Mr. BOOWAAT (Burma) said ho did not intend to make a detailed 
criticism of the Board's report but assured the General Conference that his 
Government and the Institute of Applied Research of the Union of Burma had 
always followed the Agency's activities with great interest - particularly 
those relating to the uses of radioisotopes in agriculture and medicine, 
92. He recalled the importance for Burma of the production and export of rice, 
on which depended the development and industrialization of the country and the 
improvement of the standard of living of its inhabitants! rice was, moreover, 
a basic food for the constantly increasing population of Asia. An improvement 
in rice-grov/ing, through the use of more economical and efficient methods, 
would mark the advent of a new era, not only for millions of Burmese farmers, 
but also for all the under-nourished populations of neighbouring countries. 
Those millions of human beings obviously took little interest in highly 
refined or spectacular methods. but they were impatiently awaiting the day 
when the use of radioisotope would make fertilizers more efficient, improve 
the quality of the seed and increase crop yields. He therefore expressed the 
hope that the Agency's efforts to improve the lot of under-nourished peoples 
would be crowned with success, 
93. He thanked the Agency and its Member States for the technical assistance 
given to Burma in the form of expert services, equipment and fellowships. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(VI)/OR.65 
( 6 December 1962 

GEKERAL Distr. 

General Conference ENGLISH 


SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF TIED SIXTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 19 September 1962, at 3.30 p.m. 

President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 

10 General debate and report of the Board 1 - 122 

of Governors for 1961-62 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1-5 1 
Canada 52 - 56 
Poland 57-82 
Israel 83 -92 
Albania 93 - 100 
Republic of Korea 101 - 109 
France 110 - 122 

* GC(VI)/207. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document. 
GC(vi)/INF/56/Rev.2. 


62-5672 



GC(VI)/OR.65 


page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1961-62 (GC(VI)/195, 
.204) (continued) 


1. Mr, EMELYAWOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) pointed out that, 
as the opening of the sixth session of the General Conference marked the 
Agency's fifth anniversary, the Conference should reassess what had so far been 
done, and utilize its past experience in planning for the future. 
2. It was doubtless true that a certain amount of useful work had been 
done for Member States during those yearss training, the holding of numerous 
conferences, the preparation and issue of instructions regarding the safe 
handling of radioactive materials and so forth. 
J. However, things were moving extremely slowly in the Agency and it was 
not keeping pace with the problems facing it. Why? 
4. In his view the stumbling block was that the leading countries of the 
West were not making an honest effort to carry out the aims, as set out in 
the Statute, for which the Agency had been set up, 
5. It might seem obvious to everyone that its main task was to co-operate 
in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Yet the United States and 
the Western countries which supported it had been endeavouring all through 
the past five years to instil into everyone's mind the idea that the control 
functions were the main thing, although the Statute clearly intended that they 
should be secondary - as the Japanese proverb put its "a ram's head hung 
out at the door but the trade was in dog-meat". 
6. During the past years two attitudes towards the Agency's development had 
taken shapes the first, that it should in a real sense be made the scientific 
and technical headquarters for co-operative endeavour in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy^ the second, that it should be transformed into a worldwide 
controlling instrument. 
7. As was well known, the idea of turning the Agency into a controlling body 
was being pushed in every possible way. A system of control had been adopted 
without there being any practical need for it and despite the opposition of a 
considerable number of Member States? but notwithstanding the assertions of 
those who held it to be urgently necessary to the Agency, it had found no 
application in two years. Over the past three years there had been only six 
cases in which the Agency had acted as an intermediary in the acquisition of 
fissionable materials and equipment5 and in three of those the Board had 
already released the countries concerned from the application of safeguards. 



GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 5 


8. The safeguards document itself stipulated that it should .come up for a 
general review at the present session.—' It was not on the agenda? however, 
because no safeguards had been applied and there was consequently nothing to 
review. 
9. The Soviet delegation had pointed out that a system of safeguards was 
premature, a monstrous bureaucratic arrangement that would impede scientific 
activity. . . 
10. In Norwayj for instance, the NORA experimental reactor had been started 
up with some assistance from the Agency, Scientists were carrying.out 
experiments on it, in the course of which various operations had to be performed, 
such as the removal of fuel elements which were then arranged in a 
particular way for the purposes of physics measurements. According to the 
document accepted and approved by the Agency, that could not be done until 
approval had been given by the Board, Instead of carrying out scientific 
experiments, therefore, the Norwegian scientists had been obliged to wait until 
the Board met and decided whether they should be given permission to do so 
or not. 
11. The fact that about one-third of Member States had opposed safeguards in 
the debate', and that experience of attempting to apply them to Agency projects 
over a period of two years had shown them to be premature and impracticable, 
had not taught the United States anything. 
12. In August 1962 the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy of the United States 
Congress had debated the report of the Advisory Committee on United States 
Policy toward the Agency. Diaring the discussion, the representative of the 
United States Atomic Energy Commission had said that the Commission considered 
the Agency's safeguards functions to be its most important activity. The 
representative of the State Department had declared that his Department regarded 
safeguards as the most important, indeed the sole? aspect of the Agency's 
future programme. It was not surprising that in February of the current year 
the Board, under pressure from the United States, had taken the senseless 
decision of putting four American research reactors under Agency control. 
The cost would be. borne by the States represented at the present Conference, as 
the relevant expenses were met from the Agency's regular budget. 

1/ INFCIRC/26, 1.5. 


GC(VI)/OR,65 


page 4 


13. Discussions regarding the United Arab Republic's request for help in 
organizing a regional centre for the training of specialists and radioisotope 
applications had gone on for two'years. Although perfectly straightforward, 
a .decision had been taken on that request" only at the last meetings of the 
Board. 
14. ' Co-operation was suffering no little as a result of the cold-war 
atmosphere that was being extended to the Agency. In April 1962 the wellknown 
American atomic scientist Leo Sziiard had published an article in the 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists under the title "Are we on the road to war?". 
In the article he attacked the cold-war policies of the United States. 
Significantly, Professor Sziiard, by way of example, had selected the activities 
of the Agency. He had writtens "Take the International Atomic Energy 
Agency in Vienna, for instance. This organization has at present no function 
whatsoever, and if it is maintained in existence at all, it should be main2/ 


tained as an exercise in co-operation among nations."—7 , and had gone on to 
say that .since America had votes at its disposal it could, gain victory in the 
meaningless battle of the cold war. 


15. Prom the Agency's very beginnings the Soviet-Union had urged that it 
should have a scientific advisory committee. . For long the Western countries 
had objected energetically, particularly the United Kingdom and the United 
States,. Why should they be against bringing .in scientists and engineers? 
The answer*of course was that serious scientific and technical work in the 
Agency was not in their intentions. 
16, After a long struggle, a Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) had neverthe


less been formed, but it was little used. The knowledge of the experts who 
were its members was used only now and then, and only in connection with 


isolated problems. He would quote a characteristic example. It had been 


necessary to determine which Latin American country - Argentina or Brazil was 
most advanced in regard to atomic energy. The Committee had not asked 
for a solution, although that was precisely M:e sort of decision it should take, 


17* Long-term planning was an item on the agenda of the present session of 
3/ 


the General Conference ,-^ The Soviet delegation welcomed such discussion, 


2/ Volume XVIII, Number 4? p.26. 
j5/ GC(VI)/207, item 17. 



GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 5 


having long considered a long-term plan to be necessary. He would give his 
views in full when the item was discussed? hut meantime wished to comment on 
one aspect. 


18. New, independent States had been set up during recent years in several 
parts of the world. The idea of planning the economy, first put forward and 
first carried out in the Soviet Union, was gradually gaining ground in other 
countries too. Some had five-year plans, others three-year, seven-year, 
ten-year plans, and so on. Those plans made provision for the utilization 
of atomic energy, and the Agency must take account of them in the many 
countries where they had been worked outf in preparing its programme of 
assistance, the Agency should consult representatives of those countries 
about the help they wished to receive from the Agency in carrying out their 
national plans. 
19. Theoretically, the Agency could familiarize itself with national plans 
through the missions it sent to many countries. Unfortunately mission 
recommendations not only were out of touch with national plans but frequently 
even conflicted with them. Thus, the mission sent to Mexico had recommended 
that uranium mines should not be opened and that the construction of a 
metallic uranium and graphite plant should be stopped, 
20. Such missions not only did nothing in association with people in the 
countries -they visiteds they did nothing for them. It was hard to justify 
the heavy expenditure on missions. Most of the material in mission reports 
could probably be obtained directly from the governments of the countries 
concerned, without sending an Agency mission for the purpose, 
21. Missions must be more carefully prepared and visits to an excessively 
large number of countries would probably have to be excluded in favour of 
limiting activities to a more thorough study of those countries most in need 
of technical assistance. Great care should also be taken in the composition 
of missions, which should be made up of experts knowing the areas to be 
visited. The present composition of missions could hardly be considered 
satisfactory from that point of view. The mission's reports should give 
greater attention to explaining national plans for the development of atomic 
energy. 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 6 


22, The Agency had been set up for purposes of co-operation. Practical 
achievements in atomic energy called for co-operative efforts,. 


23, . He wished to give details of international co-operation brought about by 
the Soviet Union. It took various forms.. 


24. Under agreements with economically under-developed countries the Soviet 
Union was furnishing economic and technical assistance in connection with 
the construction of some 48O different undertakings, installations and other 
projects in 23 countries. Geological, geophysical and prospecting work for 
various useful minerals was being undertaken in order to develop the rawmaterial 
base in 12 under-developed countries. 
25. Under bilateral agreements, the Soviet Union was co-operating at present 
with 14 countries under 30 international agreements and contracts. 
26J It was endeavouring to help those countries to establish their own 
atomic centres, equipped with up-to-date instruments and apparatus, so that 
they would be able to do research and train their own expert personnel. 

27. With the assistance of the Soviet Union 25 atomic installations, including 
10 reactors, 7 particle accelerators and 8 physics and radiochemistry 
laboratories, had been constructed and put into operation in various parts of 
the world, and a large quantity of special fissionable materials had also 
been delivered. 
28. Those activities had led to the establishment of atomic physics centres 
which were now successfully operating in Romania, Poland, Czechoslovakia, the 
United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Bulgaria, the German Democratic 
Republic and the Chinese People's Republic. The Soviet Union had seconded 
some 600 highly qualified experts and scientific workers to those countries, 
in order to give assistance in the construction, erection and start-up of the 
atomic installations. 
29. From 1955 "to August 19&2, it hv-~- brained for service in those centres 
over 1500 experts,.drawn from countries having agreements with the Soviet 
Union on various aspects of atomic science and technology. Training of 
personnel was increasing year by year. Whereas in the whole of 1961 223 
persons had been trained, in 1962 194 bad received training during the first 
eight months alone. Some 140 short-term trainees were at present undergoing 

GC(VI)/OR„65 
page 7 


instruction or would be accepted for that purpose by the end of 1962. Sixtystudents 
were undergoing long-term training in university physics-, radiochemistry 
and other departments giving courses in the uses of atomic energy? 


and another 25 would start work in September 1962, 


30. It was maintained in some quarters that training of local staff in the 
developing countries was a sheer waste of time and money. The Soviet Union 
accorded prime importance to such training, however, and it was important to 
listen to what the representatives of the developing countries themselves said 
regarding its value. In that connection he referred to a statement by the 
prominent Indian scientist P„C. Mahalanobis, who had said that the training 
of scientific cadres in the developing countries was essential and that the 
aim of scientific assistance should be the provision, as soon as possible, 
of an adequate number of experts in every under-developed country. 
51. Soviet co-operative activities were still expanding and developing. 
The design and.construction of equipment for atomic centres in Iraq, 
Indonesia and Ghana was approaching completion. At the new atomic centre 
in the United Arab Republic there were now Soviet scientists who had come to 
make a long-term study of problems of contemporary physics under a general 
programme drawn up jointly by Arab and Soviet scientists. 
32. The Soviet Committee on the Utilization of Atomic Energy had a cooperation 
agreement with the French Atomic Energy Commission under which 
three young French scientists were working in physics institutes in the 
Soviet Union and two Soviet scientists were working in France, where a third 
Soviet physicist would shortly arrive. A young French scientist, Mr. Coutant, 
was working with Soviet experts on one of the most important of contemporary 
problems - controlled nuclear fusion. That represented an entirely new 
stage of co-operation. 
33. Soviet co-operation with other countries on the basis of bilateral 
agreements- benefited all the participating countries. Moreover? such cooperation 
was increasing in scope and volume although the Agency, specially 
set up to take over all such questions, had now been in existence for five 
years. It was sad but true that life was passing the Agency by. 
34- The Agency's scant success could not be explained by a shortage of funds 
or by the fact of its having the two budgets which the United Kingdom delegation 
proposed should be combined. 



GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 8 


35. It was not a matter of funds at all. The fault lay in the fact that 
the Agency was departing from its statutory aims and devoting its main 
attention to questions which were of interest only to a small group of 
Western countries. 
36. The Soviet Union was in favour of a long-term plan and believed it could 
he carried out at relatively little cost. The budget should be stabilized, 
and there was no need to go on increasing it. 
37- The Agency's technical assistance programme was most unsatisfactory, 
and took no account of the needs and requirements of the developing countries 5 
nor was the necessary effort made to dove-tail it with the objectives aimed at 
in such countries' own national programmes. It was for that reason that the 
Agency was still unable to use the funds allocated for technical assistance 
in 1959- That situation could not be allowed to continue any longer. 


38. The Soviet delegation considered that the Agency's main efforts should 
be directed not so much to meeting sporadic requests for individual items of 
equipment or for experts as to establishing in the developing countries 
installations designed for a specific purpose which would provide those 
countries with a basis for the further development of their work on atomic 
energy. 
39. As the first practical step in that direction the Soviet delegation, 
jointly with the delegations of the Byelorussian SSR, Bulgaria, the 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.; Hungary, Poland, Romania and the Ukrainian 
SSR, proposed the following programme for the provision of technical assistances 
(a) 
The establishment in the developing countries of six medical centres 
which would use radioactive isotopes and irradiation for diagnosing 
and treating malignant tumours and diseases of the thyroid gland, 
the blood, the skin and other organs; 
(b) 
The equipment of six physics laboratories at higher educational' 
institutions and scientific centre's in the developing countries 
with the requisite instruments and apparatus, and also with subcritical 
assemblies, for scientific research and the training of 
scientists in those countries in nuclear physics and technology% and 
(c) 
The provision to the developing countries, without charge, of 300 
fellowships for the instruction and training of specialists in 
higher educational institutions and nuclear research centres. 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 9 


40. The delegations of the socialist countries had submitted a draft resolution 
in which they proposed that the General Conference should approve such a 
programme and declared their readiness to assume responsibility for implementing? 
within two to three years, one third of the projects referred to in the 
4/ 


programme in question.—' The cost of the plant, equipment and fellowships 


to be supplied by the socialist countries was equivalent to 700 000 roubles. 


41. The Soviet Government for its part was prepared to supply plant and 
equipment for two sub-critical assemblies, together with 7 tons of natural 
uranium for the assemblies against its contribution of 50 kg of uranium-SjS 
to the Agency. In terms of money that would be equivalent to 350 000 roubles, 
42. The present session of the General Conference was opening in a complex 
international situation characterized, by the intensified struggle between the 
forces of peace and the aggressive circles who were pushing the world towards 
annihilating thermonuclear war. True to the Leninist principles of peaceful 
foreign policy, the Soviet Government was struggling untiringly for pe.aceful 
co-existence and international collaboration, and for the establishment of 
conditions in which war would be banned for ever from the affairs of mankind. 
43. Ift i"ts view, the most effective means of ensuring lasting peace would be 
general and complete disarmament under strict international control. At the 
14th session of the General Assembly of the United Nations the programme of 
general and complete disarmament-^ had not only met with a warm response among 
ordinary people throughout the world but had also won the support of a large 
number of Governments and eminent statesmen In all continents. 
44. In "the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament the Soviet Government was 
endeavouring to bring general and complete disarmament out of the realm of 
programmes and plans and make it a practical reality. It was only the negative 
attitude of the Western Powers that prevented the actual achievement of general 
and complete disarmament. . . 
45. Some months previously, at the very start of the work of the Eighteen-
Uation Committee, the Soviet Union had submitted a draft agreement on general 
and complete disarmament providing for a carefully thought-out system of 
measures which would enable general and complete disarmament to be rapidly 
achieved by successive sbages and would ensure strict international control 
at every stage of the process. 
4 / OC(VI)/COM.1/67/Eev.l. 
5_/ General Assembly Resolution 1378(XIV). 


GC(VI)/OR.65 


page 10 


46. However, the representatives of the Western Powers, headed by the 
United States, had taken a different position in the Committee's discussions. 
The United States had submitted for the Committee's consideration a plan 
which would not lead to general and complete disarmament or remove the threat 
of nuclear war? a plan which, in that important matter, would thus fail to 
meet the wishes of millions of people, 
47* The solution of the disarmament problem required the speedy conclusion 
of an agreement for the immediate cessation of all nuclear weapons tests. 
The Soviet Union proposed to the Western Powers the immediate conclusion of a 
treaty for the cessation 'of all nuclear tests in the atmosphere and outer 
space as well as below ground and under water. The means which States 
already had available for detecting nuclear explosions were perfectly adequate 
for the purpose of checking whether the provisions of such a treaty were being 
carried out by all States, 


48, Unfortunately, the Western' Powers were not in fact at present prepared • 
to conclude an agreement to cease all testing of nuclear weapons on mutually 
acceptable terms. 


49* Disarmament questions had a direct bearing on the success of the 
Agency's work. Not one single international organization within the United 
Hations family had had such experience of the pernicious effects of the armaments 
race as had the Agency, a situation recognized in its reply to the 
United Nations when that organization was engaged in a study of the economic 


and social consequences of disarmament,—^ 


50. The Agency's reply also mad.e mention of the fact that the freeing of 
resources at present expended on military purposes would give a powerful 
impetus to the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes and would hasten the 
day when atomic energy would become economically profitable in large areas of 
the world. That reply, however, was only the beginning of the Agency's contribution 
to such work. The Soviet delegation considered that the Agency 
should devote greater study to the question and show from specific examples 
how complete and general disarmament would promote the development of nuclear 
power? that would assist in mobilizing public opinion to help in solving 
disarmament problems. 
6/ See document E/3593/Add.1, page 332. 



GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 11 


51. In conclusion, he recalled, the words of the American professor? 
A. Valentine., who had stated that when a scientific discovery was made, the 
devil got hold of it right away? while the angels were still discussing the 
best way to use it. He called upon delegates to help wrest the use of atomic 
energy - a great discovery of the human mind - from the devil's hands so that 
it could be turned to the benefit of humanity. 
52. Miss MBAGHER (Canada) said that although the Agency had not 
developed altogether along the lines originally foreseen, the Canadian Government 
did not underestimate the results so far achieved nor take a pessimistic 
view of the possibilities for useful work in the future. It was, however, 
desirable to plan with the utmost care to ensure that the Agency's programme 
was well-balanced and realistic, and to make the best use of available 
resources. 
53. With regard to the Agency's programme of conferences, seminars and 
symposia, the Canadian Government had been pleased to play host to one meeting 
in 1962, the Symposium on Inelastic Scattering of Neutrons in Solids and 
Liquids, held under the joint auspices of the Agency and the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UHESCO). The re was 
little doubt that such meetings gave scientists of all countries a valuable 
opportunity to exchange views and information. If, however, the most useful 
results were to be achieved and if scientists of the highest calibre were to 
continue to attend such meetings, it was essential that their numbers should 
be kept within reasonable limits and that subjects of study should be selected 
with great care. It was gratifying to note that the number of Agency conferences, 
seminars and symposia held each year had been stabilized at about 
twelve, which seemed a sensible figure. 


54* One of the principal responsibilities of the Agency was to establish 
and administer safeguards. It was pleasing to note that 'during 1962 the 
Agency had carried out its first three safeguards inspections. The Canadian 
delegation, however, agreed with the Board that the experience so far gained 
by the Agency was insufficient to enable it to make a comprehensive, review 
at the present time. The principles and procedures of safeguards should be 
kept under examination and when adequate experience had been gained it would 
be possible to undertake the review called for in the resolution adopted at 



GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 12 


' " 7/ 
the fourth regular session.-1-' With reference to the joint declaration made 
at that time by the Canadian and Japanese delegations, requesting the Agency 
to administer the safeguards provided for in the Agreement for Co-operation in 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy between the two countries, the Canadian 
delegation was pleased to inform the Conference that negotiations to that end 
had recently made rapid progress and an agreement was expected soon. 


55. With regard to the question of long-term planning, it was worth noting 
that many of the Agency's activities had already demonstrated their usefulness. 
The guiding principle in future planning should be to ascertain whether a 
demonstrated need and demand for the Agency's services existed^ hence the 
value of the proposed study of the long-term plan of work at all levels. The 
Canadian Government generally supported the joint report on long-term planning,-^ 
Two Canadian experts had participated in the work of the consultative group 
convened to define the part which the Agency might play in furthering the 
practical applications of nuclear power. Canada was ready, so far as possible, 
to provide experts and information for the Agency's studies on nuclear power, 
including work on international co-operation for developing nuclear power. 
The Agency's nuclear power studies should be closely related to actual and 
demonstrated needs, and that was true of the long-term plan as a whole. 
56. The Canadian Government considered that the operational programme of the 
Agency should be financed from voluntary contributions. While recognizing the 
immense difficulty of administering the programme when the total of funds 
available fell far below the approved budget, it could not agree to the solution proposed 
by the United Kingdom,-^ It urged all Member States in apposition to 
do so to make regular and reasonable contributions to the operational budget. 
Canada would again base its contribution to the operational programme on the 
scale of assessments for the regular budget. 
57* Mr. BILLIG (Poland), commenting on the Agency's work, noted the part 
the Agency was playing in the training of personnel. In Poland, where largescale 
work in nuclear energy had started comparatively recently, rapid progress 


7/ GC(IV)/RES/71. 


8/ GC(VI)/205. 
2/ GC(VI)/205. 


GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 13 


was being made in the intended direction, and that progress was based in the 
first place on the assistance and co-operation of the Soviet Union and the 


other socialist countries. However, Agency fellowships wore of groat 


importance to Poland and it was therefore not surprising that Poland was one 


of the- countries which made maximum use of them. The Agency had shown 
understanding for that state of affairs and had acted so as to meet Polish 
requirements. 


58. During recent years the nuclear research centres of Poland had been 
considerably consolidated and expanded, and were now beginning to interest 
scientists -from abroad. However, as before, the Agency was not making full 
use of the fellowships offered by Poland. Poland was taking an active part 
in the scientific conferences and symposia organized by the Agency, Nevertheless, 
he felt it would be better for the Agency riot to confine itself to its 
own conferences and symposia but to participate to a greater extent in similar 
functions organized by Member States on an international basis. As an 
example, reference might be made to the conference on nuclear geophysics 
held at Krakow in September 1962, in which prominent scientists and experts 
from the Soviet Union? the United States and other countries wore participating. 
59. It was difficult to reconcile oneself to the fact that scientists and 
technicians from the German Democratic Republic, with whom Poland worked in 
the closest co-operation in matters of nuclear technology, wore unable to 
participate in the Agency's scientific conferences at which the results of 
joint research by scientists from Poland and the German Democratic Republic 
was discussed. His delegation would continue to call for a change in that 
state of affairs. 
60. Credit was due to the Agency for its continued work in drafting international 
rules and regulations governing the transport of radioactive 
materials, waste disposal, liability for nuclear damage, and so on. The 
Agency had also to be congratulated on successes in its publishing activities. 
61. As to safeguards, experience had demonstrated the artificiality and 
untimeliness of the safeguards system. At its last series of meetings the 
Board had itself withdrawn the safeguards previously applied to installations 
in Japan, Finland and Norway. 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 14 


62. He considered that the failure to grant consultative status to the 
World Federation of Trade Unions (WF.TU) constituted a flagrant act of 
political discrimination, 
65. At the preceding session of the General Conference there had been a 
•disagreement of principle on the choice of Director General. 
The Polish 
delegation had repeatedly stressed that the problem was not one of personalities 
hut of principle - the principle being that the election of the Director 
General should he as nearly unanimous as possible and that the developing 
countries should be properly represented in the Agency's directing bodies. 
He hoped that the principles in defence of which his delegation had fought, 
would be applied in the Agency's future practical work. During recent months 
a certain easing of tension on matters in dispute had been'observable in the 
Agency's internal affairs, a circumstance which to' some extent had been 
reflected in the. work of the Board and had laid the basis for better cooperation 
and consequently more effective work by the organization. 
64. Nevertheless, certain countries had not given up the habit of submitting 
proposals which were known in advance to be unacceptable to a large number 
of States. A specific example was the proposal to amend Article XIV of the 
Statute. The Polish Government strongly opposed any attempt to amend that 
article because it would stand in contradiction with the voluntary principle 
underlying the United Nations technical assistance system and would constitute 
a violation of national sovereignty. Adoption of the amendment in question 
could lead only to a weakening of effort in the provision of technical 
assistance to the developing countries within the framework of the international 
organizations. The aim should, of course, be to increase that 
assistance. 
65. He also hoped that acceptance of the amendment to Article VI.A.-J of 
the Statute would represent the first of several changes whose purpose was to 
provide for just representation of the developing countries on the Board. 
66. Thus far, the results of the Agency's technical assistance activities 
had to be regarded as highly dubious, since that assistance had not been 
adapted to the basic trends of development in the countries in ques-tion. 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 15 


67* Turning to long-term planning? he observed that many countries began 
their work on nuclear energy on a large scale by establishing centres 
equipped with reactors and accelerators. The result frequently xvas, 
however? that having set up major establishments they found themselves unable 
to use them properly or to carry out research with them. That was the type of 
problem to which attention should be paid during the years immediately ahead, 
and the countries in question should be helped in determining appropriate 
lines of research, in training personnel and in obtaining equipment. Such 
matters had received insufficient attention in the past. The use of isotopes, 
particularly in medicine and agriculture, could of course be of great practical 
significance for the developing countries, and the long-term plan should 
provide for a gradual and systematic intensification of work with isotopes. 
The fact remained, however, that the most important use of nuclear energy in 
both the developed and the developing countries was the production of nuclear 
power (including, in certain countries, power for marine propulsion) and it 
was likely that that problem would soon acquire great international significance. 
The Polish delegation considered that the Agency could and should play an 
important part in dealing with it. The experience accumulated by a number 
of countries was probably sufficient to justify convening, by 1964? a conference 
devoted to the specific purpose of considering the technical and 
economic prospects of nuclear power. Perhaps the Third Geneva Conference, 
in the preparation and organization of which the Agency had its part to play, 
should be devoted to that subject, 


68, The Polish delegation had repeatedly emphasized and was now again 
pointing out that a correct delineation of the Agency's tasks and programmes 
of work was one of the vital factors in obtaining the resources needed to 
implement them. 


69' Together with a number of friendly countries, Poland had come to the 
conclusion that, irrespective of the long-term plan, work which could be 
brought to completion within the next two or three years should be begun 
forthwith, without recourse to the Agency's normal budgetary resources. 

70, The Soviet delegate had already discussed that subject. With the full 
authority of his own Government, he could state that Poland would take part 
in the work within the limits.of its modest resources. As part of the amount 



GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 16 


allocated for assistance purposes, Poland was prepared within the next two 
or three years to supply the countries concerned with apparatus and equipment 
for nuclear centres (e.g. neutron spectrometers .and radiochemical apparatus) 
and also to provide a considerable number of fellowships. 


"71. Speaking of other forms of activity, he stressed the role which the 
Agency could and should play as an organizing and catalyzing force in 
scientific and technical work that was of great significance for all. 


72. Definite progress had already been made in that regard, e.g. the work 
on nuclear data, the establishment of an expert committee on that subject, 
and the related NORA experiment. Such work should be expanded under Agency 
auspices1 Poland could also take part' thanks to two new zero-power reactors 
which would be put into construction in the near future. 
73. His own and other delegations had repeatedly drawn the attention of the 
General Conference to the need for complete and universal disarmament as a 
fundamental condition for the Agency's development and the attainment of its 
aims, 
74. Science could exploit atomic energy in either of two directions? for 
peaceful purposes, or for military purposes - with the prospect of destroying 
civilization and inflicting inestimable loss on mankind. To utilize to the 
full all the possibilities that atomic energy made available for the peaceful 
development of mankind, more positive international measures were required. 
Complete and universal disarmament, nuclear disarmament included, was 
undoubtedly one such measure, New resources - financial included - would be 
released for scientific research, greater international co-operation and, in 
particular, for the purpose of assisting the developing countries. 
75. Under present conditions, nuclear disarmament depended on finding a 
solution to the problem of banning nuclear weapons testsj agreement there 
would not only improve international relations in regard to a matter of direc 
interest to all nations but constitute a great stop towards general disarmame 
76. The neutral States in the Eightoen-Nation Committee on Disarmament had 
put forward a compromise memorandum. The socialist countries had accepted i 
and hoped the Western States, on their side, would make an effort to accept 
the proposals in the memorandum for ending niiclear weapons tests. The probl 
was vitals the Agency could and should do much to exploit the opportunities 
which wore opening up. 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 17 


77. The Agency could not stand aside, an idle witness of all that was 
taking place in regard to nuclear disarmament in another international body. 
The same applied obviously to its Member States, 
78. The report to the Secretary General on the economic and social consequences 
of disarmament? which leading world scientists had helped to draw 
up5 stated that complete universal disarmament would be of inestimable 
benefit to the whole of mankind. That statement was of course supported 
not only by their authority but by the resolution which ECOSOC had adopted 
on the subject.—' The United Nations was thus opening up new prospects for 
co-operaticn within the framework provided by the Agency. 
79* The ECOSOC resolution requested the Secretary General to continue to 
study, in close co-operation with regional economic commissions and other 
appropriate agencies concerned; the fundamental aspects of the economic and 
social consequences of disarmament. 


80, That ECOSOC decision laid an obligation on the Agency as well to concern 
itself with the problem. 


81. With other delegations, the Polish delegation would? as at the thirtyfourth 
session of ECOSOC—', in due course submit a draft -resolution? and 
hoped it would be unanimously adopted. 
82. The Agency's study of the vitally important problems in question would 
also make it possible to improve certain aspects of its long-term planning 
and any progress towards disarmament would enable it more effectively and 
more fully to roach its noblo objectives. 
83, Mr. 5ERGMAMN (Israel) said Israel felt indebted to the Agency for 


the moral and material assistance provided during the past year. 
84., The course in radiology at the Eadioisotope Training Centre in Israel 
had been as successful as any first venture of its kind could be. For four 
months of intensive theoretical and practical work, it had brought together 
scientists from seventeen countries. The course might possibly have been 
too long or too comprehensive? but one could learn only from experience. It 
was hoped that, with the continued assistance and encouragement of the Agency? 
the course would be repeated after a reasonable lapse of time and become a 
regular feature. 


10/ 3/3671, Resolution 89l(XXXIV). 
Il/ Draft resolution S/L.963 (soe document E/SR.1220). 



GC(VI)/OR„65 
page 18 


85. The Israeli Government believed it could best contribute by sharing its 
experience with countries that had similar problems, and was happy to report 
that', under the auspices of the Agency, scientists from many countries 
were visiting Israel and becoming acquainted with its plans and methods. 
86. He had three projects to propose to the Agency which his Government was 
willing to carry out and finance. First, it would provide a number of 
grants for scientists interested in problems under investigation in Israel. 
Secondly, in order to provide training for the lower echelons of atomic energy 
establishments, a course would be arranged for technicians from countries 
interested in the sound planning of nuclear programmes. Thirdly, it would 
arrange a similar course for high-school teachers of physics, chemistry and 
biology. Agency assistance in the organization of those three projects 
would be much appreciated, 
87. The co-operative efforts of Member States represented the first step by 
which common aims could be attained under Agency auspices. Unless that 
first step were taken the establishment of regional centres would be apt to 
stimulate the host country but stifle development in other countries in the' 
region. The proposal to set up an international centre for theoretical 
physics would undoubtedly meet with enthusiastic approval from all Member 
States, but at the present stage it should serve as an inspiration rather than 
as a project ripe for conversion into bricks and mortar, 
88. With respect to the exchange of scientific abstracts, Israel was already 
exchanging its publications with a number of countries, but appreciated the 
Agency's advice on how to utilize more fully the scientific information 
available in Member States. 
89. Many problems affected Member States irrespective of their geographical 
location, e.g. the economics of nuclear power, to which the Agency devoted a 
commendable effort. Three other subjects deserved no less attention. The 
first was fall-out. It was a matter of satisfaction that the Agency was 
co-operating in that respect with the United Nations Scientific Committee on 
the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and with the World Meteorological 
Organization, Only a co-ordinated survey of the whole surface of the globe 
could achieve the desired results and only the Agency could provide an 
authoritative load. Secondly, chemical protection against radiation was 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 19 


a problem which might become more urgent with the Increasing use of radioisotopes 
and the advent of nuclear power stations. Much work was being 


.done? but could.be made more effective if co-ordinated by the Agency. 
Thirdly, there was the question of insect control by ionizing radiation. 
Existing methods' of chemical control were becoming less and less efficient 
and attention should be directed to- insect sterilization by ionizing 
radiation. That was a worthwhile task for the scientific staff of the 
Agency and it was gratifying-to know that a panel would meet shortly to 
discuss it. . 


90. Such panels should be constituted not on the basis of geographical 
distribution but on the basis of knowledge and experience. 
91. Many new countries believed that their own work on atomic energy could 
begin only when they had a power reactor. The Agency must demonstrate that 
there Vircre many tasks which could be performed much earlier with by-products 
from the reactors in advanced countries. 
92., His delegation believed that long-term planning had become a factor of 
great importance so far as the problems facing the Agency were concerned, 
and was glad that attention had been drawn to.the question of more realistic 
budgeting. It was the responsibility of Member States to ensure that the 
Agency became an organization excelling in scientific and technical matters 
rather than a political institution. 


93. Mr. MJiSHO (Albania) said that the peaceful use of atomic energy 
could make a.great contribution to the further development of all sectors of 
the economy. It was for that reason that the establishment of the Agency 
had aroused the earnest hope that-the use of atomic energy would effectively 
promote the progress and well-being of all mankind. 
94* Since the Agency's inception its membership had increased from 66 to. 

77. - It had published the results -of a-great deal of scientific research on 
questions of atomic science and technology, as well as holding a large number 
of important scientific meetings and doing useful work in the training of 
personnel? in particular for the developing countries. 
95* It must be recognized, however, that the Agency had not fulfilled the 
hopes that had been placed in it. Instead of promoting the peaceful use of 
atomic energy the Agency was daily becoming more and more in the nature of a 



GC(VI)/OR.65 


page 20 


blind tool to serve the interests of the Western Powers, headed by the United. 


States5 it was being transformed into a political instrument whose purpose was 


to prepare and unleash a nuclear war. Over the past five years Member States 


had had occasion to witness the stubborn attempts of the 7/estern Powers, with 


the United States at their hoad? to occupy the key positions in the Agency, 
Representatives of the Western Powers and their allies at present held 6lfo 

of all positions in the Agency, including 10fo of all leading positions. 

Representatives of the United States alone occupied as many posts as the 


representatives of all socialist countries taken together. All delegations 


recalled the bitter struggle at the previous session when the Yfestern Powers, 


at the behest of the United States, had used every means available, including 


open blackmail and intimidation, to elect their candidate as Director General. 


96. Overt political discrimination was occurring. There was no other way 
of explaining the fact that the Agency's Members included countries such as 
the Federal Republic of Germany and South Korea, while countries such as the 
German Democratic Republic and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea were 
not Members. It was also difficult to explain the fact that social organizations 
such as the International Federation of Christian Trade Unions and the 
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions enjoyed consultative status 
with the Agency, but such status was withheld from WFTU, which embraced millions 
and millions of workers who were directly interested in the peaceful use of 
atomic energy. Finally, the place lawfully belonging to the Chinese People's 
Republic was still occupied by a long-since bankrupt clique which represented 
only the interests of its American masters. ' It was' ixnthinkable to leave 
outside the Agency the lawful representatives of an immense nation such as 
the great Chinese nation which included a quarter of the world's population. 
97* Under pressure from the United States and other Western Powers, its 
allies in the Worth Atlantic military bloc, the Agency had never moved to 
meet popular 'demand and had never supported the peace-seeking proposals which 
the Soviet Union and otbpr countries had repeatedly put forward with a view 
to prohibiting nuclear weapons tests. In addition, under pressure from the 
United States and at its bidding, the Agency had become increasingly involved 


in activities which had no bearing whatever on the peaceful use of atomic energy 
but, on the contrary, served to enable the-United States and its allies to 



GC(VI)/0E.65 
page 21 


establish a system of strict control over the raw material sources of other , 
countries and to exploit those sources in the interests of the Pentagon's 
intelligence services. 


98. Most countries of Africa and Asia and of the Middle and Far East were' 
increasingly disturbed by the arbitrary way in which the United States and 
its allies behaved in the Agency. That had been particularly evident the 
previous year, when the United States had refused to give the post of 
Director General of the Agency to an Indonesian candidate. Further proof 
was provided by the failure to use the 5000 kg of uranium which the Agency 
had long had available for meeting the needs of the developing countries, 
and by the recommendations which the 7/estern Powers had presented at the 
fourth session of the General Conference for establishing safety and safeguards 
procedures to operate at the various stages of technical assistance 
projects undertaken by the Agency. 
99- The Agency had important work to do in training personnel in the use of 
radioisotopes in agriculture and so forth. It could only succeed in that 
work if it returned to the role laid down for it in its Statute and remained 

true to the principles proclaimed in the United Nations Charter, and if the 
United States and its allies abandoned their dictatorial policy and arbitrary 
course of action. 


100. The Albanian delegation was prepared to make its utmost contribution 
towards achieving those ends. It would support any proposal designed to 
make atomic energy serve the social advancement of all mankind, 
101. Ifr. SHIN (Eepublic of Korea) paid tribute to the work of the 
Director General and to the Board, which had developed a vast programme that 
took special account of the interests of the developing countries. The 
Agency had some remarkable achievements to its credit. 
102. Apart from work connected with a Triga Mark II reactor, which had gone 
into operation on 30 March 1962, his country's activities were being concentrated 
for the moment on radioisotope applications in agriculture and 
medicine. The Atomic Energy Research Institute had set up a Division of 
Huclear Medicine which would apply radioisotopes in the treatment of cancer, 
thyroid disturbances, and so on. The medical schools had established 
radioisotope clinics which ware being subsidized by the Office of Atomic Energy. 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 22 


103. A Division of Agricultural Research was to be set up by the Institute 
in 1963, As the economy was mostly agricultural? it had been decided that 
the application of radioisotopes in agriculture should be one of the most 
important objectives of the atomic energy programme - a decision in full 
conformity with the five-year plan for economic development, 
104. However? the effective use of radioisotopes in agriculture called for 
a high standard of technical skill? and the country was therefore very 
dependent upon technical advice and assistance. The services of the expert 
on nuo.lear instrumentation who had been sent to Korea had been highly 
appreciated. The success of such assistance depended entirely upon its being 
provided where and when needed, particularly in countries which were just 
building up their research establishments. Hitherto? expert services and 
equipment had usually been provided together - an arrangement which often did 
not suit the recipient countries and should therefore be reconsidered. He 
also suggested that more funds be appropriated for training programmes in the 
coming years because of the urgent need for scientists and technicians in 
developing countries. 
105. His- delegation had consistently advocated the establishment of regional 
training centres and asked that research contracts be awarded to developing 
countries. While approving the establishment of training centres in Latin 
America and in the Arab countries? he wished again to emphasize the needs of 
the Par East. The radioisotope training centre planned by the Japanese Government? 
for which Agency help had boon asked? was a significant stop towards the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy in that area, 
106. The establishment of reactor centres was equally urgent and his Government 
was pleased to be participating in the forthcoming conference at Bangkok, If 
the regional centres were to be successful? all Member States in the area 
must take part in operating them. 
107, Research contracts were a useful spur to research workers in developing 
areas and deserved to be given priority. His country had applied for one 
under the Agency's exchange programme for 1962? but no decision had been . 
reached despite the urgent need for a favourable reply. 



GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 23 


108. In deciding where symposia and seminars should be held, the problem of 
expenditure for participants must be taken into consideration. 
109. He hoped that the Agency would help developing countries, which badly 
needed up-to-date scientific and technical data, by encouraging the supply 
and exchange of information. 
110. Mr. COUTURE (France) said that, after some years of excessive 
optimism about the rapid advent of nuclear power? countries with large-scale 
nuclear programmes had gone through a discouraging period during which they 
had seen the goal they thought to be on the point of attainment recede. It* 
was all the easier to be frank about those difficulties because the experience 
gained of operating nuclear power stations and the more precise economic 
estimates which could now be obtained on the basis of what had already been 
achieved gave promise of a considerable expansion of atomic energy? and 
that was, after all, the prime objective of all the programmes. In the light 
of those events it was not surprising that the Agency had been unable to 
expand, in its early years, as its founders had anticipated. He therefore 
noted with satisfaction that the Agency's technical assistance programme was 
becoming increasingly effective. 
111. His Government was grateful to Dr. Eklund for accepting the difficult 
office of Director General3 it admired the work he had already done and the 
way in which he had quickly mastered the workings of a large international 
organization. Furthermore, it approved of his efforts to stabilise the size 
of the staff while increasing the emphasis on the technical side, and to keep 
the 1963 Budget at more or less the 1962 level. 
112. One of the Agency's main tasks was to serve all its Members. Amongst 
the general activities he particularly stressed the importance of the regulatory 
functions, including radiological protection, reactor operation codes 
and siting. The countries more advanced in atomic energy would welcome the 
Agency's continuing interest in the technical, administrative and legal 
problems that wore familiar to all concerned with'the international transport 
of radioactive materials and particularly irradiated fuels. 
113. Scientific conferences and publications ^vere also useful to Member States. 
Interest in the first had grown, and he had been glad to note that the records 
of proceedings were now issued more promptly. The time had come to arrange 
another Geneva conference, and he hoped one would take place in 1964. ^c 
Agency should undertake to organize it on behalf of the United Nations. 

GG(VI)/OR.65 
page 24 


114. His Government had always believed that the Agency's essential task was 
to assist countries on the threshold of atomic development both from its own 
resources and by acting as a.channel for the technical assistance which the 
more advanced countries could provide, 
115. Training remained the fundamental problem for countries embarking on a 
nuclear programme and Prance accordingly favoured an expansion of the fellowship 
programme. In 1962 it would receive fifty Agency fellows and would continue 
to accept them for training courses and work in its laboratories. The 
provision of exports was another particularly effective form of assistance 
provided that their duties were well defined and that they could be integrated 
into an existing team. A dozen French experts would be at the Agency's disposal 
during the current year, 
116. For many countries radioisotopes were the first practical application 
of atomic energy that could contribute to their general development, and in 
that respect the Agency's Laboratory could be most useful as a training centre 
for technicians. He was pleased to announce that France had decided to make 
a gift to the Laboratory of a unit for handling radioisotopes which was 
specially adapted for training purposes and valued at $25 000. 
117. Research reactors, usually of the swimming-pool type, came as a second 
stage of nuclear development. However, it was important to remember that the 
simplest reactor was expensive both to buy and to run and must be used to the 
full if it were to justify its existence. His country therefore renewed an 
offer it had made two years earliers to train experts who would be responsible 
for the operation of reactors in their own countries at the ten research 
reactors currently operating in France, The Agency could - as it intended to 
do in Asia at the end of the year - play a major' role in ensuring that maximum 
use was made of such reactors, perhaps by encouraging a system of close 
association between reactor centres, 
118. Although the Agency had not yet received any specific requests for assistance 
with power reactors, it had carried out some interesting studies on the 
possible establishment of nuclear power stations in various countries and a 
number of Member States wore known to be contemplating requests for help in 
drawing up programmes for the production of nuclear electric power. 

GC(VI)/OR.65 
page 25 


119. Developing countries should once again be' warned against premature or 
over—ambitious power programmes which would load them to invest in one industrial 
sector only. Howeverj at a moment when the first nuclear power station 
in Franco was approaching criticality, the French authorities woro more than 
ever convinced that such stations would be valuable in the near future. 
He only hoped that the Agency would advise countries to study their own requirements 
and not embark upon costly plans unless they were based on thorough 
and impartial studies. It would in itself be a great achievement to help 
countries with limited resources to avoid ruinous experiments. 
120, The present structure of the Agency would probably have to be modified 


if it was to carry out its programmes? and no doubt the Director General 
would submit suitable proposals in due course. 


121, On the grounds of both efficiency and economy, his delegation had often 
expressed the view that the Board's meetings were too frequent and too long. 


It was therefore pleased to note that they woro now less frequent and shorter, 
and that the hundred or so meetings of 1958 had been reduced to thirty in 


1962. Ho hoped that the Board would eventually come to have a single main 
annual session devoted especially to the programme and budget5 with a limited 
number of meetings in the interval attended by alternates to the Governors. 
The French delegation also hoped that the General Conference (which would 
presumably be shorter in the present year) would be reduced to a week, from 
Monday to Saturday. At the same time it recognized the great usefulness of 
the Conference? which provided the only opportunity for those in charge of 
atomic energy commissions throughout the world to come together? apart from 
international conferences of the type held in Geneva in 1955 and 195^. 


122. His suggestions were made in a constructive rather than a critical spirit, 
and with the aim of helping the Agoncy to frame its long-term programme and 
define more precisely the direction its activities should take in the coming 
years. Franco had every confidence that, under the leadership of the 
Director General and with its admirably qualified Secretariat, the Agency 
would be capable of playing its full part in enhancing the role of atomic 
energy throughout the world. 
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m. 



international Atomic Energy Agency GC(VI)/OR.66 
10 December 1962 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 
ENGLISH 


SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 20 September 1962, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 


CONTENTS 


Item of -the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


10 
General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1961-62 (continued) 1 - 118 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Japan 1-9 
Yugoslavia 10 - 19 
Romania 20 - 30 
United States of America 31 - 69 
Pakistan 70 - 79 
Sweden 80 - 87 
Austria 88 - 101 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 102 - 118 


* GC(VI)/207. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VI)/INF/36/Rev„2, 

62-5676 


GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 2 


GENERAL-DEBATE AND REPORT OF TIE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1961-62 
(GC(VI)/I95-, 204) ( continued) 


1. Mr. UCHIDA (Japan) said that the most significant point dealt with 
in the Board's report was long-term planning. Although it was rather early 
to decide the contents of the programme, it could already he said that it 
would he necessary to draw up a balanced programme of activities, perhaps even 
to adopt a priority system, and to simplify the working methods of all the 
organs of the Agency in the interests of efficiency and economy. 
2. In providing technical assistance the Agency had taken full advantage 
of the resources of the United Nations Special Fund and the Expanded Programme 
of Technical Assistance, and such co-operation between organizations within 
the United Nations family should he encouraged. 
3. The question of safeguards had lost nothing of its importance. He recalled 
that his Government was at present negotiating, with the Governments of 
the United States and Canada, the transfer to the Agency of the administration 
of safeguards provided for under bilateral agreements. 
4. The Japanese Government appreciated the progress made in regard to the 
regulatory activities of the Agency. It was particularly interested in the 
adoption of international regulations on the disposal of radioactive waste 
into the sea, and hoped that the relevant draft convention would soon he 
completed. 
5. With regard to financial questions, his delegation shared the view that 
the Agency's activities were hindered by the uncertainty of its Operational 
Budget and he hoped'that the General Conference would adopt the draft 
resolution on that subject submitted by the United Kingdom and a number of 
other countries, including Japan.-^ 
6. Reviewing recent developments in Japan in the utilization of atomic energy, 
he pointed out that the so-called "slow-down" in nuclear power programmes had 
resulted in an adjustment of the long-term national programme, providing for 
a better balance, and safer and more stable use of atomic energy for power 
generation* The long-term programme stressed not only power generation, but 
also research and development in the industrial uses of radiation sources, A 
radiation chemistry research centre was under construction. 
l/ GC(VI)/208 and Add.1 and 2. 



GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 3 

7. Japan had 13 reactors in operation or under construction. One of them the 
JRR-3, a research reactor of 10 M thermal output using natural uranium and 
heavy water, which had been designed and constructed entirely by Japanese 
scientists and technicians - had gone critical on 12 September. The Agency 
had helped Japan to obtain 3 tons of natural uranium for that reactor. In 
that connection, he wished to express his gratitude for the assistance and 
encouragement given to Japan by the Agency, the Government of Canada and other 
Governments. Another reactor-, of the boiling water type with 46.7 MW thermal 
output, was due to go critical at the beginning of 19&3* and the first Japanese 
power reactor, of the improved Calder Hall type, with 595 MOT thermal and 150 MOT 
electrical output, which had been under construction since the previous year, 
would go into service in 1965. 
8. So far as international co-operation was concerned, his Government had, 
with the help of several countries in the region, worked out a plan for an 
international radioisotope centre for the countries of Asia and the Par Bast, 
to be established with the Agency's co-operation. Pending the implementation 
of that plan, a training course on the application of radioisotopes, for 
fellows from countries in Asia and the Far East, would be held in Japan in 
1964. In 1963 Japan would be host to the Agency's symposium on the 
application of radioisotopes in hydrology. 
9. His Government planned to convene in 1963 a conference of countries in Asia 
and the Far East for the promotion of peaceful uses of atomic energy - another 
example of the effort Japan was making to further the Agency's objectives. 
10. Mr. NAKICMOVIC (Yugoslavia) said that, thanks to new advances and 
the experience gained in large-scale nuclear power plants, the utilization of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes had now reached a phase in which there 
were sufficient data for a more realistic appraisal of its future prospects. 
11. It was high time for the Agency to define its practical policy in terms of 
its statutory tasks. 'In view of the part it should play, he was glad that in 
the application of radioisotopes in agriculture and medicine, in radiation 
protection, in regulatory activities, and especially in the organization of 
scientific meetings, the Agencyls work had been both useful and successful. 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 4 ' 


12. The fellowship programme, had also been successful, mainly because it 
offered excellent training .and the. opportunity of specialization to young 
experts. It was regrettable that the funds available for it were tending to 
decrease, but it was a matter for satisfaction that the procedure for awarding 
fellowships had been speeded up, and -that more 'fellowships were being provided 
for subjects which had hitherto received relatively little attention., 
13. Under the Statute, the Agency was authorized to concentrate its efforts 
on nuclear power, with due regard to the needs of the under-developed areas., of 
the.world. The results were not very striking, however, and there too the 
Agency must define its policy more clearly. ' . 
14. By 1970, at the present rate of development, considerable, experience 
would have accumulated in the operation of nuclear plants of various types and 
sizes. The number of countries planning to utilize nuclear power in the near 
future would continue to increase. But the undertaking was long-term. In 
the case of a developing country, it required 10 years of preparatory work, 
systematic, rational and effective. The Agency had a major part to play and 
should do more -than it had in the past. Suclear demonstration plants on an 
international basis would be' a step in the right direction. 
15. It must also plan on' a'long-term basis, particularly for nuclear power, 
and attempt more systematically and effectively to give effect to the re-. 
2/ 


solution adopted at 'the fifth session.—' * The necessary conditions for the 
execution of the plan would have to be created, the Agency's role being 
defined in terms of .the Statute and the realities of the world situation. 


16. With the funds at its disposal;, the Age'ncy could not be expected to 
participate in large-scale projects but must devise other ways and means of 
promoting nuclear power. 
17. New, more suitable forms of assistance to the developing countries were 
needed. Research contracts and fellowships,'experts and equipment, should be. 
combined in a single coherent programme designed to achieve specific objectives. 
'If that were done, the technical assistance provided would be far 
more effective. In viow of the disproportion between administrative 
expenditures and operational costs, a more rational structure of the Secretariat 
would also help. 
2/ , GC(V)/RES/105. 


GC(VI)/OR,66 
page 5 


l8o Finally, a large measure of responsibility for the Agency's difficulties 
in formulating policy and implementing the decisions of the General Conference 
devolved on the nuclear powers, which could provide considerably more assistance 
to the developing countries through the Agency. Unfortunately, the Agency was 
still"too often a forum for political dispute


19= It was regrettable that the peaceful development of atomic energy was still 


overshadowed by military programmes. The armaments race was quickening, and 
more and more nuclear tests were being carried out. His Government considered 


that an agreement on general and complete disarmament was indispensable, and 
would continue to oppose all nuclear tests irrespective of who performed them. 


If the principal powers concerned obeyed the dictates of common sense and if 


the constructive solutions proposed by the non-aligned countries were adopted, 


agreement on the prohibition of nuclear tests would be possible. The task of 


the Agency would then become much easier. 


20. Mr. HULUBEI (Romania) stated that the Agency had a number of solid 
achievements to its credit thanks to the competence and efforts of those who 
had honestly tried to forge it into an instrument of international collaboration. 
21. He recalled the historic moment when, in the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, Member States had unanimously demanded universal and complete disarmament 
as the only means of saving humanity from destruction in a nuclear 
holocaust. His Government was taking part in the work of the Eighteen-Kation 
Committee in Geneva, and its representatives, while favouring universal and 
complete disarmament, were prepared to give their support to any other measure 
which might bring about a relaxation of world tension before it was too late. 
The Agency had an effective contribution to make in that regard. It had also 
an important role to play in ensuring that the infinite resources made 
available by modern science were placed at the disposal of the developing 
countries. 
22. Reviewing the Agency's activities, he was pleased to note the improvements 
that had taken place. The main scientific and technical problems were being 
solved with increasing competence and fairly good results were being achieved 
in the training of experts. ' . 

GC(VI)/OB.66 
page 6 


23. He also welcomed the efforts to draw up a long-term plan - a matter of major 
importance for the Agency's future work. The general outline of the plan 
appeared to be acceptable. The details should now be worked out and adapted 
to national long-term programmes, and a start should be made by tackling 
specific problems* The plan should come up for consideration by the Board$ 
in that connection, a useful and specific proposal had been submitted by 
the Soviet Union on behalf of the socialist countries.-^ 
24. The establishment of a radioisotope centre in Cairo was welcome., The 
exchange of scientific and technical information should be stepped up and 
studies made to determine the best means of harnessing nuclear power to serve 
the real interests of Member States* 
25. Technical assistance was still not in line with the actual desires and 
needs of Member States* It was to be regretted, for instance, that the number 
of fellowships awarded by the Agency had decreased* In 196I the number of 
fellowships had decreased by Ij/o and the appropriation by 34$ as compared with 
the previous year* On the other hand, the number of experts recruited and 
dispatched to different countries had increased by 53^. That tendency was not 
to be deplored, but the work of the experts would be' more useful if geared to 
a general long-term plan that aimed at creating favourable conditions for the 
development of nuclear power rather than being nothing more than a way of 
meeting occasional requests from countries* In any case, it would be more 
rewarding to train home experts by means of fellowships* Although the budget 
had increased, the amount of technical assistance granted had diminished^ 16.75. 
of the budget had not been implemented, and funds in non-convertible foreign 
currencies had not been fully used. 
26* Too much was being spent on research contracts at present and there, too* 
the absence of a long-term plan made itself felt* The increase of 17!$ on the 
1962 budget could have been avoided had the increase in salaries not been 
insisted upon and Gofo of the expenses of operating the Laboratory charged to 
the Regular Budget* 

_3_/ GC(VI)/OR.65, para* 39



GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 7 


27. His delegation was unable to support the draft amendment to Article XIV 
of the Statute.; it would violate the principle of voluntary contributions, 
accepted from the very outset and successfully applied in other international 
organizations, the United Nations and its specialized agencies. 
28. His country jointly sponsored the specific proposal which aimed at 
satisfying the urgent needs of the developing countries. 
29o Romania had a whole array of scientific and technological resources at 
its disposal for work on nuclear physics and was prepared to make available 
the results of its experience in reactor physics, the chemistry of radioactive 
substances and radiochemistry, nuclear interactions at medium and very high 
energies, neutron physics and corpuscular spectrograph^. It had also constructed 
a great variety of equipment and installations with a view to basic 
research and the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


30. Under the joint programme of technical assistance already announced, 
Romania could offer fellowships, experts, and nuclear physics equipment of 
various types to a total value of-500 000 lei. 
31. Mr. SSABORG (United States of America) recalled that 20 years had 
passed since the beginning of the atomic age. During the summer of 1942 the 
first visible, weighable amounts of plutonium had been isolated, and on 
2 December 1942 Dr. Enrico Fermi and his colleagues had produced the first 
controlled nuclear chain reaction. 
32. In the ensuing two decades there had been an enormous development of 
atomic energy in the peaceful service of mankind. The earliest and most 
extensive development had been in the use of radioisotopes, which were no?/ 
produced on a large scale and had become an indispensable tool in agriculture, 
medicine, industry and science. The exploitation of radioisotopes for human 
welfare had, however, only begun. 
33. Nuclear research facilities had multiplied in the advanced countries and 
had started to appear in the developing nations. There were now over 200 
research reactors around the world,' about 30 of them in the developing 
countries. The number of radioisotope laboratories was also increasing a* "an 
impressive rate. 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 8 


34. Though the pendulum of opinion had oscillated between extreme optimism and 
an equally unwarranted pessimism., there was no doubt at the present time that 
nuclear power would soon play a major r.ole in the activities of mankind. For 
special projects, where there were no other appropriate means and where cost 
was not a significant factor, nuclear energy had already demonstrated its usefulnesso 
The satellite TRANSIT IV~A, for instance, which had been in orbit 
for nearly 15 months, was equipped with a thermoelectric generator fuelled 
with plutonium-2580 Weighing about five pounds, the generator had produced 
over 23 kWh of electrical energy in 12 months, the equivalent of the energy 
from about, a ton of storage batteries„ Other nuclear-powered thermoelectric 
devices were operating as automatic weather stations in the Arctic and 
Antarctic regions and as navigational units off the shores of the United 
States* A compact, 1500 k¥ reactor had been in operation at McMurdp Sound 
in Antarctica since July, and others were under development for use in remote 
terrestrial locations and in space. Finally, the Savannah, the first 
nuclear-powered merchant ship, had made its first voyage. 
35. Nuclear power stations were beginning to go into operation in many countries 
and their number was rapidly increasing. Development programmes were being 
prepared or carried out in a dozen countries and large-scale nuclear power 
generators should soon be competitive in places where the cost of fossil fuels 
was high* 
360 During the last two decades atomic energy had greatly contributed to human 
knowledge. Radioisotopes had enriched man's understanding of such diverse 


matters as his own evolutionary and cultural history, his genetic heritage, 
the chemistry of photosynthesis, the lifetime of blood cells in the body, the 


structures of chemical compounds, and the rate of mixing of the waters of the 


oceans. Accelerators and reactors had given a new insight into the nature of 


matter. Technology had greatly developed^ in many countries, large numbers 


of persons of great talent were devoting their lives to discovering new ways 


of doing things. In some of the newer nations important beginnings were also 
being made. 

37. The development of atomic energy had been marked by greater international . 
co-operation in research, in training and in the acquisition of facilities and, 
in that regard also, the Agency had had an important role in recent years. 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 9 

38. However, the peaceful development of atomic energy was not the onlyfeature 
of the past two decades? there had heen other no less significant 
processes. Their sources could he traced hack to the various great movements 
of liberation in recent cenburies, fen had rebelled against authoritarian 
domination and proclaimed the liberation of the mind, the conscience and the 
human person, emphasizing the individual and claiming for him rights not 
previously known. If man had thus succeeded in freeing himself, it was mainly 
due to the scientific progress which enabled him to accumulate a real knowledge 
of nature and thus increase his power over his environment. 
39. I>uring the past twenty years the search for knowledge and its systematic 
exploitation had become a conscious part of the social effort of many nations. 
A large proportion of national resources had heen devoted to scientific 
research. As a result, huge new industries had arisen and communications, 
transport, agriculture and medicine had been drastically changed, with deep 
repercussions on political systems, economies and social institutions. 
However, if those benefits were to be preserved and further extended the 
reservoir of fundamental knowledge would have to he continuously enlarged. 
40. What was now taking place was a transition of some societies into a 
truly scientific phase§ they were dependent upon science for survival and 
systematically used science to solve material and social problems. The 
technological nations were at various stages of that transition. Most of the 
developing nations had not had the advantage of nearly two centuries of 
technological evolution but recognized that modern knowledge and skills could 
increase the well-being of their people. They hoped to acquire such knowledge 
and skills with the help of the Agency, other international organizations and 
individual friendly States\ thanks to that assistance, their development 
could certainly be speeded up. 
41. In the decades to come - assuming that the nations were able to live in 
peace - a world society built upon a scientific-technological basis was possible, 
in which famine v/ould be abolished and the reasonable material needs of maneverywhere 
met. Unfortunately, it must never be forgotten than man's new 
power, if misused, might destroy the promise of a better life. In that 
connection, the Agency had an opportunity to build the substantive basis to 
support the political co-operation for which the United Nations had assumed 

GC(VI)/0E.66 
page 10 

responsibility* - The American people were second to none in their desire for 
peace throughout the world. The United States Government was firmly convinced 
that effective disarmament offered the only real security for mankind. 
However, an examination of disarmament issues in the General Conference could 


only serve to complicate the task of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament 
and the General Assembly in dealing with that crucial problem. 


42. The Agency's role was primarily technical; it was well designed to help 
the developing nations to acquire more quickly the skills and capabilities 
necessary for the new age, and well placed to provide objective analyses and 
guidance in its field. It could contribute to the solution of many problems 
that knew no national boundaries - disease, hunger, the protection of the oceans 
and the atmosphere against unregulated waste disposal - problems which could 
be handled only by the combined efforts of all the countries concerned. 
43. Member States should be willing to attack problems outside the immediate 
sphere of atomic energy if the talents and facilities associated with the 
Agency were needed - as, for example, the United States had done in connection 
with research on the desalinization of salt water. 
44. In long-term perspective, the Agency clearly had a great potential power 
for increasing the well-being of mankind. It must build up substantive, 
productive, enduring programmes that would encourage men's work and help those 
who needed help in their struggle to reap the benefits that science and 
technology could provide. That in turn would help to lay the foundations 
necessary to achieve the ideals of the United Nations, and would contribute 
in a real way to man's adaptation to his new environment. 
45. In the light of those larger possibilities, what should be the goals of the 
Agency in the years ahead? He personally considered that they should follow 
those of the Development Decade, suggested to the United Nations in 1961 by 
President Kennedy and endorsed by the General Assembly, and aim at enabling the 
developing peoples of the world to achieve in a short time what others had 
achieved in a century or more. As President Kennedy had said, "... under the 
framework of the resolution, the United Nations' existing efforts in promoting 
economic growth can be expanded and co-ordinated. Regional surveys and 
training institutes can now pool the talents of many. New research, technical 
assistance and pilot projects can unlock the wealth of less developed lands 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 11 . . 


and untapped waters. And development can become a co-operative and not a 


competitive enterprise - to enable all nations, however diverse in their 


systems and beliefs, to become in fact as well as in law both free and equal 


nations." 


460 On the threshold of an unlimited future, in which atomic energy would 


play a major role, it was necessary to examine in more detail how the Agency 


could contribute to it. 


47. The question had been submitted to a group of experts in the United States 
headed by Ambassador Smyth* Although the specific recommendations were still 
under review, he could say that the general thesis of strong United States 
support for the Agency was fully accepted by the Government. The programme 
must, of course, be dynamic, changing in accordance with the needs of Member 
Stateso It must be continually under review in order to ensure the most 
productive use of Agency funds and talents. In that connection he welcomed 
the spirit of the statement of the Soviet delegate in his general description 
of a proposed new programme of technical assistance to the developing countries. 
He felt that the Board should study the detailed proposal as soon as it was 
made. 
48. Recent events seemed to indicate that nuclear power was emerging from the 
experimental stage. Nuclear power plants were in operation, under construction 
or planned in Europe and in lorth America. Japan had two nuclear power' 
reactors under construction and others were being considered. India planned 
to construct a large power reactor near Bombay, and a number'of other countries 
were actively studying nuclear- power programmes. 


49. It could accordingly be expected that many nuclear power reactors would 
be built during the next decade. In view of the growth of populations and 
the enormous needs for energy, it-seemed clear that nuclear reactors would 
constitute a significant fraction of the world's power capacity in a quarter 
of a century. 
50, The Agency's role in encouraging the worldwide development of nuclear 
power could be much larger than its present or immediately-projected programmes 
suggested^ ->-n fact that could be its outstanding contribution to the Development 
Decade. In certain respects it had made an excellent start. Its studies of 



GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 12 

potential nuclear power needs in Finland, Pakistan and the Philippines had won 
an excellent reputation for their objectivity and competence and it would no 
doubt be called upon to make similar studies elsewhere. It could help to 
identify the areas where fuel costs ?/ere high and nuclear power accordingly 


likely to be competitive, recommend suitable types of power plant for parti


cular countries, and advise and assist in siting and in the evaluation of 
hazards. As power technology improved in the advanced countries, the Agency 
must be prepared to an increasing extent to provide experts and expert advice, 
materials and equipment,training of plant-operating personnel, and to spread 


information and provide cost studies. 


51. The Agency would render an important service if it'helped interested 
countries to arrange for the financing of their power projects, by providing 
expert advice and evaluations which could be used by financing agencies such 
as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the United 
Nations Special Fund, various national aid programmes and private loan 
institutions. There were naturally many other ways in which the Agency could 
contribute to the development of nuclear power. 


52. The Government was considering whether the uranium enrichment facilities 
in the United States could be made available for toll enrichment, on a service 
banis, of natural uranium delivered by other countries. The United States 
was prepared to sell, through the Agency, the material for enriched reactor 
fuel. It had already announced that fuel could be made available on a longterm 
basis. Foreign users were charged the same price for fuel and reprocessing 
as domestic users. With a view to bringing nuclear power closer 
to economic feasibility, the price of fuel was reduced as soon as reductions 
in cost justified it, and prices had been lowered twice in the past two years. 
53. During the next decade the world must learn to live in safety and without 
fear of atomic energy, and many aspects of that adjustment could best be 
handled by an international organization such as the Agency. There must, for 
example, be additional assurances that fissionable materials designated for 
peaceful purposes would not be diverted to military uses. The necessity of 
further strengthening safeguards had been considered in the United States by 
the Smyth Committee and the study was continuing in consultation with other 
Member States. 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 13 


54. It was worth recalling that the United States had volunteered to place 
four reactors under Agency safeguards, and that the first inspections had been 
carried out during the preceding year. That had been done in order to 
demonstrate the acceptability of the Agency's system. The inspection had 
provided some initial international experience and should assist the Agency in 
further developing its work on safeguards. While it was' premature to undertake 
a review of the system, serious work mus't soon1 begin on safeguards 
procedures for large power reactors5 uniform international protection must 
be provided against the .diversion to military purposes of materials which were 
provided for the peaceful generation of power. 
55" Uniform international regulations must also be developed to ensure pro


tection against radiation. Work on the safe disposal of radioactive waste, 


for example, continued to be a matter of urgency. The Agency's international 


character made it particularly well suited for studies, in co-operation with, 


the Member States concerned, on deep sea disposal and the effects of disposal 


in long international waterways. It was significant that the Agency was 


continuing to develop suggested practices for sea disposal. The United States 
was prepared to participate financially in joint research projects in the field 


of waste management that wore of international interest. 


56. His Government supported the Agency's efforts to encourage the full 
utilization of research reactors, particularly those in the developing countries. 
He would again like to emphasize - as he had at the fifth regular session^ the 
many uses to which a co-operative international high-flux reactor could be 
put. The Agency's Symposium on the Programming and Utilization of Research 
Reactors had certainly done much to publicize the need for worldwide cooperation- 
Its regional- meeting in Bangkok -in December 1962 was important and ' 
would be attended by a number of United States experts. 
57* Radioisotopes continued to provide ono of the most useful -ways of deriving 
immediate benefit from atomic energy. The Agency's programme was sound, and 
he hoped that an unflagging effort would be made to extend the application of 
radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture and industry, the Agency, for example, 
could serve as a focal point to increase interest and co-operative work in food 
irradiation and the disinfestation of grain.


4/ GC(V)/OR.50, para. 8, (27) and (28). 



GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 14 


58. Trained intellects were, without doubt., the most valuable resources of any 
nation. It was especially important, if the Development Decade was to have 
real meaning, that the -intellectual resources of the developing nations should 
be cultivated to the greatest extent possible, The Agency had recognized 
that need through its training and technical assistance programmes, which were 
among the most beneficial of its activities. To many countries, such assistance 
had provided the most immediate evidence of the Agency's usefulness, 
59. ^n the light of the. considerable experience it had now gained with the 
fellowship programme, the Agency should review the selection and placement 
procedures in order to ensure that, to the greatest possible extent, the 
programme would meet the needs of the developing countries. It must continue 
to see that applicants were'well qualified, that their study programmes were 
carefully planned, and that the time required to place them was reduced to the 
minimum. The fellowship programme should be carefully integrated with other 
forms of technical assistance, particularly the provision of equipment and 
experts, so that the fellowship-holders would be able to make the best possible 
use of- their training, 
60. The United States would continue to receive Agency candidates and would 
endeavour to place fellows where appropriate. It might be mentioned that the 
Cambridge electron accelerator, which had gone into operation on 14 September 
1962, would be made available to suitably qualified scientists from other 
countries, including Agency fellows, 
61. The offer to donate up to $^0 000 worth of special nuclear materials for 
use in Agency research and medical therapy projects was being.renewed for 1965. 
62, Both the conferences and the publications of the Agency had been generally 
valuable. For example, the Conference on Plasma Physics and Controlled 
Huclear Fusion Research was widely praised in the scientific world and the 
Plasma Physics Journal was held in the highest regard. The various symposia 
organized by or in co-operation with the Agency had provided the developing 
countries with useful information on radioisotopes. The Agency's prestige 
would be further enhanced if it continued its programmes of conferences and 
publications in carefully selected areas, 


63, During the preceding session the United States delegation had expressed 
the view that a third international conference on the peaceful uses of atomic 



GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 15 

5/ 


energy might be held in 1963 under the Agency's auspices. ' In the meantime 


the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) had recommended that the third 


conference be held in 1964 and sponsored by the United Nations with Agency 


co-operation and assistance, In view of that recommendation, he urged all 
delegates to recommend that their Governments should support a resolution to 
that effect at the present session of the General Assembly, which would give 


the Agency major executive functions. A conference of that kind in 1964 
would entail some curtailment of the Agency's programme of meetings for the 


same year. 


64* In view of the practical limitations of its resources, the Agency should 
explore means of helping Member States in ways that did not call for additional 
expenditure on a large scale, Could not the Agency, for example, serve as 
the starting point for new international co-operative ventures and as a forum 
for States interested in facilities that were often too expensive for a 
single nation? The Agency could provide secretariat services arid do some of 
the required studies. 


65 . Welcome progress had been made towards ratifying the amendment to Article VI 
of the Statute, whose purpose was to increase the membership on the Board of 
the countries of Africa and the Middle Easto—' It was to be hoped that 
Governments which had not yet accepted the amendment would take the necessary 
steps to do so during the present session* 
660 The United States also strongly supported the earliest resolution of the 
Agency's financial difficulties. The present system was not satisfactory 
and long-term planning was unlikely to give the desired results until the 
Agency's programme rested on a solid financial foundation, namely a budget 
based entirely on assessed contributions. There seemed to be widespread 

support, for that solution among many Governments of the technologically less 


advanced countries, and the studies proposed for the Board to undertake would 
no doubt result in a formula which would meet the needs of the Agency while 
accommodating Member States that had special financial difficulties. The 
problem must be solved as soon as possible5 the Agency could not be expected 


to grow sufficiently to cope with the tasks ahead when, year after year, the 


operational funds which were budgeted were not forthcoming* 


5/ GC(V)/OR*50, para, 8, (55)0 
6/ GC(v)/SBS/92



GC(VI)/OR,66 
page 16 


67 . Mankind's prospects and the Agency'.s potential for serving man, twentyyears 
after the release of atomic energy, brought several thoughts to mind. 
68. The explosive growth of knowledge during the period in question had had 
two main results* First;, men had obtained the power, through science and 
technology, to create their own environment, to abolish want, and to enhance 
the dignity and moaning of individual human life. Secondly, there was the 
paradox that that same power was so great as to become a new factor in 
the environment, testing man's capacity to maintain a high civilization* The 
mechanisms most essential for human adaptation to that new factor were strong 
and effective international organizations which could maintain and strengthen 
working relationships between nations. By its very character, the Agency 
must be one of the most important in strengthening such relationships and in 
spreading the benefits of science and technology around the globe, and it 
must not be allowed to falter in that task. 
69. The fulfilment of that mission depended, however, upon the vision of its 
Member States and the extent to vrtiich txi ey gav e it their moral and financial 
support. No one nation, no handful of nations, could make a world organization 
succeed. Each, so far as lay within its power, must lend strength to the 
Agency, not only in return for the benefits it mi^ht now receive but perhaps 
even more for the much larger rewards that lay ahead as the world community 
moved further into the atomic age. 
70. Mr. SALAM (Pakistan) said that, for the developing countries, the 
Agency could have Only one criterion of successs the extent to which it 
contributed to their own development. They were not unduly worried, therefore, 
by political controversy in the Agency or organizational defects in the 
Secretariat. The real trouble was that, in present circumstances and from 
the point of view of the general development of countries which were still 
relatively backward, the scope of the Agency's activities was all too narrow. 


71. Wo one doubted the great role the Agency would play in the world of 
tomorrow but, as the Director General had emphasized, that world, for the 
majority of developing countries, was at least ten years away. If things 
went on as they were, all the assistance most countries would have received 
would consist of banks of Geiger counters, the training given to some students 
in reactor calculations, and possibly Agency help in obtaining fuel for 
research reactors. That really was not all that oho developing countries needed'. 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 17 


72. It had not been recognized at the time the Statute was being drawn up that, 
to benefit fully from atomic science, a country must already possess a very 
wide range of scientific competence. However, most national atomic energy 
commissions had soon realized that they must act as focal points for the 
development of the natural sciences in general, The Pakistan Atomic Energy 
Commission was training mathematicians, physicists, engineers and biologists 
not only for its own institutes but also for other scientific bodies in the 
country. The Agency must recognize the necessity of doing likewise,. Atomic 
science involved practically all the other scientific disciplines and it was 
necessary to call on them in exploiting atomic energy. That opinion, he 
beliov&d, was shared by Goiao of the most eminent orpsrts in atomic energy. 
73. His delegation accordingly urged that the Agency should widen the scope of . 
its activities, if necessary modifying the Statute in such a way as to make it 
possible to utilize the costly superstructure the Agency had built up to give 
the smaller countries that thorough grounding in the natural sciences which, 
as the delegate of the Soviet Union had so eloquently emphasized, was essentialto 
their overall development. 
74. His delegation was not thereby suggesting that the Agency should compete 
with other United Nations organizations or scientific bodies. It did feel, 
however, that the Agency had the materials, the men and the means to do 
precisely that job, and that by so widening the scope of its activities the 
Agency would escape a sterile future as a mere nuclear broker5 it would also 
gain the prestige in the scientific community which it sorely needed, 
75. It was in precisely that spirit that the Pakistan delegation had cosponsored, 
in 1960, a resolution proposing the creation of an international 
centre for theoretical physics under Agency auspices. Theoretical physics, 
needing no elaborate experimental equipment, was a discipline in which a 
scientist even from a small country could leave his imprint, making as deep, 
incisive and penetrating a contribution as anyone else. The reply to the 
frequently-asked.question whether more high-level theoretical physicists were 
needed was emphatically affirmative? it was through such men that the 
tradition of true science took roots and grew. His delegation very much hoped 
that the Agency would agree to create the centre. 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 18 


760 Where were the funds to come from? It seemed not a little ironical that 
a -world v/hich could afford $120 000 million for stockpiling armaments could 
not find more than a grudging $6 million for the work of an organization like 
the Agency. The real affliction of humanity was too much science on one side 
and not enough on the other0 Dared one hope that one day a way would he found 
to redress that imbalance in science and its financing? It might be well to 
consider the United Kingdom proposal to integrate the budget as a possible way 
of increasing the total funds' available. 

77. By 1965, 14 research and power reactors of over 25 MW each would be in 
operation in countries outside the so-called nuclear club. Those reactors 
could be used for the manufacture of atomic weapons, and neither the repeated 
assurances given by the countries in which they wore situated nor the 
bilateral agreements under which they were operated could entirely eliminate 
that risk* He accordingly appealed to such Member States to agree voluntarily, 
in a spirit of international co-operation, to submit the operation of the 
reactors to the observation of resident teams of scientists. As the Director 
General had said, if that were not done now it never could be done. 
78. So far as the working of the Agency was concerned, his delegation believed 
that all technical assistance activities should be placed in the charge of a 
single Deputy Director General appointed exclusively for the purpose. At 
present, items like fellowships, the supply of equipment, the assignment of 
experts and so on were all dealt with in different parts of the Secretariat, 
and no measure of co-ordination could hope to make that system really efficient. 
The only solution was to group all such activities in one service* Incidentally^ 
not a single one of the four Deputy Directors General came from a developing 
country, so that the majority of Member States wore deprived of an opportunity 
of having their problems personally appreciated at the highest level in the 
Secretariat. 
79. There was also a regrettable dispersion of technical resources. His 
delegation, with a view to obtaining maximum results, would prefer to see the 
Agency's financial resources concentrated on one or more selected programmes in 
each country. 
80. Mr. BRYWIBLSSON (Sweden) said that, as an outgoing Governor, he would 
like to begin b^ commenting on the work of the Board. The substantial 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 19 


decrease in the number and length of its meetings, while saving time and money, 
had by no means meant that the Board was neglecting its responsibilities-
There had on the contrary been a year of concentrated work in which the outgoing 
Chairman and the Director General had played a very important part. It 
was to he hoped that the existing trend would continue and that the Conference 
would follow suit, and it was with that in mind that his delegation had 
proposed to the General Committee that the sixth session he shortened to the 
minimum that was consistent with proper deliberation.-" By being more 
businesslike and more matter-of-fact the Agency would increase its prestige 
and facilitate its own work. Efforts were being made all over the world to 
make atomic energy competitive. However, it must be competitive not only 
economically but also from the psychological point of view. An atmosphere of 
reluctance, fear and bureaucratic red tape still surrounded the peaceful atom, 
and it should be eliminated to the greatest extent possible. Atomic energy 
must become ordinary and undramatic The Agency had an important role to 
play in that regard. It could be really useful to all its Member States by 
concentrating on problems which demanded international co-operation, such as the 
establishment of accepted rules for health and safety, waste disposal and 
transport, and so on. That in turn would help to dispel unfounded fears and 
make atomic energy acceptable as a form of energy like any other. As many 
countries lacked the necessary experience to deal with the transport of 
nuclear materials, he suggested that the Agency might look into the possibility 
of establishing a permanent expert committee which Member States could consult 
and which could help in drafting, implementing and amending the necessary 
international standards. 


81. As the Director General had pointed out, all the available sources of 
energy must be taken into account in planning a country's power supplies for 
the ten or twenty years to come. A study of the advantages of combining 
different sources of energy was being carried out in Sweden and seemed likely 
to provide interesting data which would be made known in due course to the 
Agency. 
82. Careful planning in the utilization of available sources of energy was no 
less important in the developing countries. The Agency could do them an 
important service by offering its assistance in power planning, not only with 
£/ GC(VI)/GBET/22. 



GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 20 


a view to promoting the uso of atomic energy, but as an unbiased adviser. 
Henco the desirability of including experts in all aspects of energy in Agency 
field missions. The attention of the United Nations and its agencies should 
be drawn to the important services the Agency could offer. 


83. Technical assistance was one of the most important, if not the most 
important activity of the Agency, and the Director General's report showed 
that the Secretariat v/as fully aware of the fact.—' Nevertheless, the Agency 
had apparently been unable on several occasions to answer requests for urgent 
assistance from Member States because the Director General could take no 
decision without the Board's prior consent. The Director General should be 
given more liberty of action, and a contingency fund should be set up to deal 
with such cases. 
84. It was even more important that the necessary financial means should be 
put at the disposal of the Agency. The annual report showed that the aid 
given by the Agency had slowed down in 1961 because voluntary contributions 
had been insufficient. If the Agency was to survive as an active instrument 
of international co-operation, the present situation must be put right. He 
reserved the right to refer to the problem again when the proposed United 
Kingdom amendment to the Statute - which, incidentally, his delegation had 
received very favourably - came up for discussion. 
85. I^ Sweden atomic energy would be called upon to play an increasingly 
important part as a source of power during the nest decade. It was estimated 
that by 1980 the production of nuclear power in Sweden would probably reach 
between 3000 and 4-000 M7 electric3 for a country like Sweden that was a bold 
programme. 
86. In 19639 the first Swedish prototype natural uranium, heavy-water reactor 
o 
would go into service at Agesta. It would produce 55 MW thermal, 10 1M 

electric and would be largely experimental. In 1968, a heavy-water reactor 


rated at 150 to 200 I-G7 electric would be installed at Marviken. Probably at 


the beginning of the next decade a full-scale 400 to 500 MW station would be 


commissioned, followed by one or two more of the same size to be commissioned 


in successive years a few years later. 


8/ GC(VI)/0E.63, para. 39. 



GC(vl)/OR.66 
page 21 


87o He hoped that the experience gained from that Swedish programme would 
interest the Agency and its Member States., With that in mind Sweden had begun 
discussions with the Director General with a-view to putting two fellowships 
at the disposal of the Agency at the Agesta prototype power reactor. 


88. . Mr. WALDHEIM (Austria) recalled that the General Conference had, at 
its preceding' session, recognized that the still very high investment costs of 
nuclear stations and installations were hindering the realization of national 
nuclear power programmes and even the Agency's own work. Thus after years of 
illusory optimism it had become necessary to adjust activities to the more 
realistic assumptions now made about the future of nuclear power. 
89. Austria had followed with particular interest the constructive work done 
by the Board during 1962 and complimented the Director General on what he had 
done to give effect to the resolutions adopted at the fifth session. The 
better spirit of co-operation that now prevailed could not but serve the 
interests of all.Member States, and particularly the developing countries. 
90. He warmly approved the recommendations contained in the Director General's 
report, sharing the opinion that the success of the long-term programme 
depended largely on generous support from all Member States? obviously, the 
Agency could not fully carry out its technical aid programme unless provided 
with the funds to do so. 
91. General agreement on the United Kingdom draft amendment to Article XX? of 
the Statute could hardly be expected during the present session, and so he 
approved the United Kingdom delegate's suggestion that the question he referred 
to the Board for further discussion and report. 
92. As the host country, Austria did not wish to pronounce on the question of 
holding the General Conference every two- years only, but saw no objection to' 
that arrangement if it appeared to he in the Agency's interests. 
95. More should be done about the practical applications of atomic energy. 
Cost studies would certainly prove useful to certain Memher States5 above all, 
the smaller countries must clearly know the cost of a nuclear power programme. 
If their need for nuclear power was not urgent, limited resources might he 
better used on advanced reactor programmes. 

GC(VI)/OB.66 
page 22 


94. Agency studies should take account of the advanced techniques for the 
generation of nuclear power. The Agency should also advise the developing 
countries on matters of power in general in order to help them to avoid 
investing in projects of doubtful value. The collaboration of power 
specialists from the various United Nations organizations should he enlisted 
and it might he desirahle to set up a "Joint Power Division", which would he 
attached to the Agency. 
95. In connection with training and the exchange of information, the Agency 
had organized scientific symposia and panels and, under the fellowship 
programme, many scientists and technicians had been enabled to acquaint 
themselves with various aspects of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
96. The Austrian delegation knew vexj well how valuable that programme was, 
since numerous Austrian graduates and scientists had received specialist 
training under it in various atomic centres abroad. Austria was happy to 
be able, in its turn, to offer Agency fellows a year's training as from 19&3 
at the Seibersdorf atomic energy study centre, and hoped that young scientists 
from the developing countries would be able to take advantage. 
97* Austria also intended to place the installations of the Seibersdorf centre 
(including the 5 W$ ASTRA reactor) at the Agency's disposal part of the time for 
the purposes of a long-term training programme on the lines suggested by the 
Director General. That programme could start in 1963 in collaboration with 
the Agency's radioisotope laboratory, and the Austrian authorities would do 
everything in their power to ensure its success. 

98. The Agency had acquired considerable experience in the application of 
atomic energy in agriculture, chemistry and biology, and seemed the body best 
suited to co-ordinate the scientific work of the other international 
organizations interested. Such co-ordination was bound to benefit Member 
States, and the Agency should take the leading role in that respect in all 
technical atomic energy activities. 
99. The increasing applications of atomic energy seemed to justify holding a 
third Geneva-type conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, as 
recommended by SAC. The question must be considered by the United Nations, 
but the Agency would necessarily be deeply involved in any case. 

GC(vT)/OR,66 
page 25 


100, With regard to legal matters, international regulations governing the 


transport of radioactive materials and the disposal of radioactive waste were 
undoubtedly of importance, and his delegation hoped it would prove possible to 
adopt the draft convention on civil liability of operators of nuclear 


installations at the diplomatic conference which, lie was pleased to, say, was 


to he convened in Vienna., 


101, The Austrian Government welcomed the amendment to the Statute giving 


two additional seats on the Board to Africa and the Middle East. The number 


of Member States had considerably increased, most of them being only at an 


early stage -with regard to the development of atomic energy. But that 


should not lead to controversy about the respective roles of the advanced and 
the developing countries within the Agency* Only by frank and close 


collaboration between all Liember States could the Agency attain its noble 


objectives and serve the best interests of humanity, 


102, Mr. CH3VTCHENK0 (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) considered 


that atomic science had made considerable progress during the'past year. 
Scientists from many countries were at present helping to set up new atomic 
power plants and develop better and more economical reactors, including 
fast-neutron and nuclear superheat models. The use of radioisotopes was 
being- extended in medicine, agriculture, hydrology and industry. The 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic was paying very great attention to 


those matters. In May 1962, it had started up an IRT-2000 research reactor 
whose inauguration marked the first stage "in setting up a nuclear power centre. 


The nuclear reactor at the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences served several 


institutes and was also used in teaching nuclear physics at the University, 


103. Satisfactory arrangements had been made in the Republic for training 
specialists in nuclear physics, nuclear spectroscopy, radiobiology, the 
production of nuclear power and the utilization of radioisotopes in medicine, 
agriculture and industry, 
104. All that showed that the Byelorussian Republic was truly able to help, in 
collaboration with the Agency, in carrying out the programme of assistance to 
developing countries proposed by the socialist countries, 
1050 Scientists from the developing countries would be welcome to come for 
training free of charge in Byelorussian scientific and research establishments 



GC(71)/OR;66 
page 24 

and to take advanced courses, lasting one or two years, in nuclear spectroscopy, 


the operation of research reactors and the utilization of isotopes in industry. 
Fellowships were offered to cover the training of scientists in nuclear 
physics. Specialists in the production of nuclear power, the utilization of 


isotopes in industry, and in theoretical physics could also he provided. 


106= Experience in collaborating with the developing countries was already 


considerable. Thus, nearly 4-00 students from Asian and Latin American 


countries were studying at the State University and the Byelorussian 
Polytechnic Institute; a group of Indonesian specialists were familiarizing 


themselves with reactor start-up operationsj and Iraqi scientists were 


shortly expected for training* 


107. The Byelorussian SSR had always been in favour of widespread international 
co-operation, particularly within the framework of the Agency., 
Unfortunately, experience over the last five years had shown that the Agency's 
activities were subject to certain defects which hindered true international 
co-operation.. That was particularly true of some of the Agency's essential 
functions as, for instance, the supply of fissionable materials and equipment 
to countries in need of them. The facts showed that there was much to be 
desired. The quantity of equipment hitherto supplied by the Agency to Member 
States was altogether inadequate and represented only \&fo of the expenditure 
incurred on all Agency projects whereas, under the rules, it should not be 
less than 25$. Matters were no better with respect to deliveries of 
fissionable materials. The Agency failed to make use of all the fuel placed 
at its disposal mainly because Member States refused to accept the system of 
control and safeguards attached to the supply of fuels, a system that had been 
forced on the Agency by the Western Powers and was offensive to the prestige and 
sovereignty of developing countries. 
108. Eighteen months' experience of the system of control and safeguards had 
entirely confirmed the view of many countries, of which the Byelorussian SSR 
was one, that the system could do nothing to help encourage the "practical 
application of atomic energy for peaceful uses". The system instituted by the 
Agency was doomed to failure from the beginning and the Secretariat did not 
now deny the fact. 

GC(VI)/0E.66 
page 25 

109. The impossibility of applying the safeguards system was by now well known 
to its authors* A much-publicized United States project under which four 
reactors-were placed under Agency safeguards was intended 'to persuade countries 
receiving Agency assistance that the system was really necessary. A superficial 
analysis of the American proposal, for which large sums were allocated 
in the Agency budget, sufficed to prove the contraryj they were four secondclass 
reactors which, even without safeguards, would obviously not serve 
military purposes. On the other hand, the United States allotted to the 
production of nuclear weapons several much higher-powered reactors, none of 
which had been placed under Agency safeguards, 
110* The training of scientists was another Agency activity that was of 
particular importance to the developing countries, as they now needed scientists 
for all purposes, and especially in connection with the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. However, there had been a tendency of late for 'the Agency to 
reduce the training programme, a fact expressly recognized i'n. the Board's 


9/ 


annual report to the General Conference.-^ The argument put forward by the 
Secretariat in justification, i.e. that the Agency lacked the necessary 
financial resources because "voluntary contributions again failed to meet the 
target sot", was not convincing. If the Agency lacked the money to supply 
technical assistance to countries in need of it, and more particularly for the 
training of scientists, why had the Secretariat for several years blocked the 
funds offered for technical assistance? Why were the voluntary contributions 
offered by certain States - particularly by the Soviet Union - not utilized in 


due time? 


111. But, instead of ending an abnormal financial- situation, it was now 
proposed to .combine the administrative and operational budgets, thereby increasing 
the financial obligations of Member States. That was the purpose 
of the proposed United Kingdom amendment to Article XIV of the Statute, which 
the delegation of the Byelorussian SSR emphatically rejected, considering that 
its adoption would derogate from the established principle, recognized by the 
United Nations, that contributions for technical assistance should be voluntary. 
The transformation of voluntary into obligatory contributions would make it 
difficult for many States to participate in'the Agency's work. 
2/ GC(VI)/195, para. 2. 



GC(vi)/OE.66 
page 26 


112. The Secretariat allocation of 70$ to 75$ of the funds appropriated for 
scientific and technical assistance to States forming part of the Western 
military and political blocs, while the neutral and socialist countries together 
received only some 25$ to 30$? could not he considered tolerable-. 
113. Irrespective of whether a question was important or not, the policy of 
the Secretariat and its heads was framed in the interests of one group of 
States. In December 196l, the United States had only had to express the 
desire for an observer from the Agency to attend an underground atomic explosion 
in the State of Nevada for the Secretariat to send a representative 
there, without troubling itself about the fact that the Agency would thus lend 
its authority to the beginning of a new series of atomic tests of great power 
'to be carried out by the United States, and by that very fact violate the 
Statute. The Secretariat was simply complying with the wishes of the United 
States, and it was only after strong protests by the Soviet Union and other 
socialist countries that that inadmissible course was abandoned. 


114. The reason why the Agency had still not become a universal organization 
was that for many years the United States and its allies had opposed the 
admission of a group of socialist States whose social and political structure 
was not congenial to somo Western countries. 
115. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR was firmly convinced that nothing 
would contribute more to the development of international collaboration in 
using atomic energy for peaceful purposes, or better promote the Agency's work, 
than a satisfactory solution to the problem of general and total disarmament. 
The Government of the Soviet Union spared no effort to reach such a solution. 
If that vital problem on which the fate of humanity as a whole depended had 
not been solved, it certainly was not the fault of the Soviet Union and the 
other socialist countries. The Western Powers, which did not wish to disarm, 
were alone to blame. 
116. General and total disarmament would set free enormous material and 
spiritual resources which, in the present armaments race, served for the 
production of arms of massive destruction. It would free those resources for 
the development of atomic energy throughout the world, the supply of technical 
and economic assistance to developing countries and, in particular, would 
assist the latter to establish their own atomic industry and improve their 
methods of combating disease, thereby improving working and living conditions 
in many countries- throughout the world. 

GC(VI)/OR.66 
page 27 


117. An overwhelming majority of the world's population had come to recognize 
that general and complete disarmament would he of inestimahle value to the 
whole of mankind. That had heon underlined at the World Congress for General 
Disarmament and Peace, the most fully representative ever held on that matter 
of primary importance, which had taken place in Moscow in July 1962. Speaking 
hefore that Congress, Mr. Khrushchev, President of the Council of Ministers of 
the USSR, had said that disarmament and peace would set free countless productive 
resources now tied up by war industries5 the immense resources 
hitherto swallowed up by military preparations could serve to meet mankind's 
countless and urgent requirements. 
118. The Agency could not and should not stand aside from the problem of 
general and complete disarmament. It should make its contribution to achieving 
that vital goal. It should for example very carefully consider to what 
extent general and complete disarmament would help to quicken the pace at which 
atomic energy could he developed for peaceful purposes throughout the world. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VI)/OR.67 
7 December 1962 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 
ENGLISH 

SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 20 September 1962, at 3.35 p.m. 

President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 

10 
General debate and report of the Board of 1-44 
Governors for 1961-62 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Senegal 1 12 
Ghana 13 24 
India 25 32 
United Arab Republic 33 44 


* GC(VI)/207. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VI)/INF/56/Rev.2. 
62-5680 



GC(VI)/OR.67 
page 2 


GENERAL DISCUSSION AID REPORT'OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1961-62 
(GC(VI)/195, 204') (continued) 


1. Mr, DIALLO (Senegal) said that by electing the representative of 
an African country to the Presidency of the session, the General Conference 
had shown that the problems of the developing countries were very much in 
its thoughts. Those problems could be solved by strengthening international 
co-operation in scientific matters and, in particular? the Agency's part 
in it? for it was self-evident that the progress of the under-privileged 
countries depended on developing their power resources and training their 
technicians. 
2. Fully appreciating the importance of the Agency's work, the Government 
of Senegal had arranged to be represented at the sixth session by the 
Minister especially concerned with research and scientific development - one 
of the key-stones in the national policy of economic and social development,. 
the foundations for which had been laid in the first four-year plan (196I-64). 
J. Senegal considered that science - constructive ar.d not destructive should 
provide one of the fundamental ways of enabling African countries to 
emerge from under-development and famine, reduce the constantly increasing 
gap between the advanced and less-advanced countries; and so become a 
factor making for peace and concord in international relations. As Senegal 
had had occasion to say at the United Nations, independence was for it only a 
means, its real aim being its own betterment. Science and technology could 
rapidly improve living conditions in countries that had recently become 
independent. 
4. An extension of the peaceful applications of atomic energy could constructively 
alter economic conditions in such countries. The Senegalese 
Government had accordingly decided to keep in close touch with scientific 
bodies in the advanced countries, with the international scientific 
organizations and, more particularly, with the Agency? it could but welcome 
what the Agency was doing for the developing countries. 
5. Pursuant to the very constructive recommendations made by a preliminary 
assistance mission, an expert had prepared an atomic energy development 
programme in collaboration with the Senegalese Government which was to be 
integrated in the four-year development plan. In conformity with the 

GC(VI)/OR,67 
page 3 


objectives and general tendencies cf the plan, that programme had the main 


object of encouraging radioisotope applications in agriculture and medicine, 


and establishing institutions that would enable Senegal to train nuclear 
soientists - although the latter would depend largely on the country's power 
requirements. As nuclear electricity might be competitive in existing 
circumstances in certain of the industrial areas, there was a proposal to 
establish at the University of Dakar an institute designed specifically for 
nuclear research, with its own research reactor, in anticipation of the time 
when the demand for energy would raise problems which would be more and more 
difficult to solve. 


6. A radioisotope laboratory would soon go into service at the West African 
Cancer Institute at Dakar% centralizing work for various hospitals in 
Senegal, it would be expanded under the second four-year plan* The radioisotope 
laboratory at the National Agronomic Research Centre at Bambey 
would also be expanded to provide a larger laboratory that would deal with all 
aspects of radioisotope utilization in agriculture - agronomy, hydrology, 
radiogenetics and entomology. 
7. The use of radioisotopes could not have been developed without the Agency's 
help, which had often been very valuable% but above all it would have been 
impossible without the assistance of France. Senegalese engineers and 
doctors had for the last two years been in training at the National Institute 
of Nuclear Science and Technology at Saclay. With the assistance of the 
French Atomic Energy Commission the Senegalese Government would organize a 
course in radioisotope applications in agriculture and medicine at the Faculty 
of Sciences in Dakar, mainly for nationals of the French-speaking Member States 
of the African and Malagasy Union. 
8. Anxious to work constructively for African unity, the'Senegalese 
Government would prepare its scientific research programme and design its 
scientific infrastructure to harmonize with those of friendly countries 
since the problems of under-development were-regional and the same for all 
countries of the African and Malagasy Union and for the members of the 
Commission for Technical Co-operation in Africa (CTCA). 
9. A specialized body, the African and Malagasy Organization for Economic 
Co-operation (OAMCE), had been sot up within the Union. In one year, OAMCS 

GC(VI)/OR„67 
page 4 


had' proved to be one of the most original and fruitful experiences of the 
twelve Member States of the Union and had done much to promote African unity. 
It already had noteworthy achievements to its credit and, at the last 
Committee meeting in Douala, Cameroun, had laid the foundations of Pan-African 
scientific development. 


10. Similarly, the Senegalese Government and twenty-five other independent 
African States supported CTCA. On the recommendation of its committee for 
scientific and technical research, OAMCE had recently decided to establish 
closer relations between CTCA, OAMCE and four international organizations 
(including the Agency) that were concerned with scientific matters. The 
role CTCA had always played in the solution of specifically African problems 
'and in the co-ordination of research had not gone unnoticed by the newlyindependent 
States? .and practically all States which had worked together 
in CTCA with the former colonial powers were still members. Their first 
concern had been to transform CTCA into a Pan-African intergovernmental 
scientific organization. 


11. Senegal, and no doubt other Member States of CTCA and OAMCE, regretted 
that CTCA was not represented at the present session. It was to be hoped 
that it would be invited to send a representative to the seventh session. 
An international organization concerned with scientific matters could not 
overlook CTCA without ignoring the real interests of the African people in 
its twenty-five Member States. 
12. The people of Africa had confidence in science and hoped for much from 
the Agency's activities in the continent - expectations which he hoped would 
not be disappointed. 
13. Mr. AMAMQO (Ghana) said he favoured strengthening the financial 
position of the Agency and so enabling it the better to fulfil its objectives, 
particularly as far as assistance to the developing countries was concerned. 
14. Although the suggestion that the two seats for Africa and the Middle 
East on the Board should carry the right to vote pending the ratification of 
the amendment to Article VI of the Statute—' was interesting, it seemed 
preferable to maintain the status quo until two-thirds of Member States had 
accepted the amendment. 
1/ GC(v)/RES/92. 



GC(VI)/OR.67 
page 5 


15. In June 1962, a conference organized by the Ghana Government at Accra 
and attended by 130 people had reached certain conclusions. First, that 
disarmament would release vast quantities of radioactive material for . 
peaceful purposes, of high purity and so involving no technical processing 
difficulties, hut an agreement would have to he reached to ensure that such 
materials would never he used for military purposes. Secondly, that because 
of the increase in the world's population, rising standards of living and 
+-he depletion of conventional fuels, nuclear power was hound to play an 
increasingly important role5 if existing stocks of radioactive materials were 
made available to all nations at a very low price, the cost of power could he 
cut by from 15$ to 20$, 
16. The use of military stocks for peaceful purposes would make nuclear 
power competitive in almost all parts of the world, stimulate the development 
of nuclear and other industries, and intensify research on breeder and other 
reactors - in short, increase the contribution of nuclear energy to the wellbeing 
of mankind. 
17. Although Article III.A.2 of the Statute emphasized that the needs of the 
less-developed areas should be considered, very little had been done for them 
since the establishment of the Agency, Africa could scarcely be said to 
have been favoured. For example, under the technical assistance provided 
by the Agency in 1961, Morocco had received $16 5^1 and Senegal $1373? while 
Ghana, Mali and Ethiopia had received no aid whatsoever. The Ghana delegation 
believed that the Agency could do considerably more to help the developing 
countries* 
18. What those countries needed from the Agency was assistance in obtaining 
radiation sources and long-lived isotopes, like cobalt,'to enable them to 
3et up radiological departments in hospitals and train experts in-all aspects 
of radiotherapy. They also needed help in solving the problems of agriculture 
and animal.husbandry, since an improvement in crop yields and livestockproduction 
would contribute directly to the raising of living standards in the 
less-developed countries. 
19. Ghana welcomed the research on the use of fertilizers in rice-growing 
areas and hoped for another programme under which radioisotopes would be used 
to combat diseases of the cacao tree. Such a programme would be sure of a 
warm welcome from the countries concerned. 

GC(VI)/OR.67 
page 6 


20. His delegation proposed that a small committee be set up to make 
recommendations to the Board regarding the practical steps the Agency could 
take to help the African countries. Once the Agency had something positive 
to offer? many more of those countries would join and co-operate with it in 
achieving the objectives laid down in the Statute. 
21. Ghana had certain reservations about the way in which the principle of 
geographical representation was applied in the Agency. 
22. Turning .to Ghana's.own atomic energy programme; he said that, pursuant to 
an agreement concluded with the Soviet Union in 1961, Ghana was carrying out a 
programme that aimed at raising the economic and scientific standards. The 
first reactor would be completed in 19&3, and other projects had been started. 
Important research work had been undertaken at the West African Cocoa Research 
Institute at Tafo. The Kwadoso Central Agricultural Station was ready to use 
radioisotopes and a laboratory was under construction. The expert on 
radiochemistry and the expert in the agricultural applications of radioisotopes, 
offered to Ghana by the Agency? would shortly take up duty. The University 
of Ghana and the Kwame Mkrumah University had well-equipped laboratories and 
qualified professors. The Government was preparing legislation to cover all 
aspects of present and future activities in atomic energy. 


23. President Nkrumah had always said that Ghana was ready to collaborate 
with all African States on questions of atomic energy as on all other. It 
was to be hoped that the nuclear Powers and the Agency would help Ghana and 
Africa by setting up a regional nuclear training centre in West Africa. 
24. Ghana would support every effort of the Agency to develop the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
25.. Mr. DAS GUPTA (India) welcomed what the Agency had done during the 
past five years, within its limited resources, to help the developing countries. 
Nevertheless the time had now come to reorient the Agency's activities if 
the hopes it had aroused were to be fulfilled. In the next few years nuclear 
power would require greater attention. He was therefore pleased to note that 
the Director General had undertaken to formulate a long-term plan to help meet 
the needs of the developing countries in nuclear power, which held such rich 
promise. 



GC(vi)/OR.67 
page 7 


26. The Agency should not on that account neglect its other activities, such 
as the application of radioisotopes in agriculture, medicine and industry, the 
training of scientists and technicians, and so forth. Those were equally 
important tasks. The long-term programme should therefore be balanced and 
comprehensive. He had noted with apprehension a recent tendency to divert 
Agency activities towards matters that were not directly within the Agency's 
competence? that could only injure the Agency and create avoidable financial 
difficulties. He therefore requested all delegates to keep in view, when 
formulating their recommendations, the Agency's proper sphere of work as 
laid down in the Statute. Every effort should also be made, in accordance 
with Article III.B.3 of the Statute, to use the Agency's resources "in such a 
manner as to secure efficient utilization and the greatest possible general 
benefit in all areas of the world, bearing in mind the special needs of the 
underdeveloped areas of the world." 
27. He had listened with keen interest to the arguments put forward by the 
United Kingdom delegation in support of the draft amendment to Article XIV of 
2/ 


the Statute,-7 submitted in an attempt to put right the Agency's financial 
difficulties. However, the Indian Government believed that it would perhaps 
be more useful to consider other moans of increasing the resources available 


to the Agency for technical assistance. The Soviet delegation had recently 
stated that the socialist countries were offering 300 fellowships and valuable 
equipment. So generous an offer deserved praise, and he hoped that other 
advanced countries would follow that example. In that way the Agency would 
have no difficulty in meeting the needs of Member States during the next few 
years. 


28. An amendment to the Statute should be accepted only as a last resort. 
The United Kingdom proposal directly contradicted the basic principle underlying 
the Statute. The Statute intended that all Member States should pay a 
contribution to the regular budget on the basis of the United Nations scale 
of assessment, while the operational budget, which should be the principal 
source of funds for technical assistance, should be financed from voluntary 
contributions. The purpose of that distinction was to avoid placing .too heavy a 
financial burden on the developing countries with regard to technical assistance, 
encouraging them on the other hand to contribute voluntarily according to their 
2/ GC(VI)/205| GC(VI)/OR.64, paras. .47-56. 



GC(VI)/QR.67 
page 8 


ability. In his view* that was a cardinal principle and should not lightly 
be violated. In the worid today thero wore developed countries on the one 
hand and developing countries on the other. It would be ignoring reality and 
putting the price for membership of the Agency too high if? for the purpose 
of financing? all countries were placed in the same category. To do so 
would defeat the very purpose intended by the proposed amendment to the Statute. 


29. In addition, the division between the two budgets was a means of ensuring 
that the administration did not grow too bulky, and that the funds and 
resources were more, fruitfully used for such activities as the Statute 
intended,for the benefit of Member States, Amalgamation of the two budgets 
would remove that di stinctionj and one should not be surprised to see Parkinson'i 
Law come into operation with money being wasted on unnecessarily increasing the 
strength of the Secretariat. That was again contrary to the spirit of the 
Statute, and would defeat the very purpose of the United Kingdom proposal. 
50. Financial difficulties were not confined to the Agency, Similar problems 
had arisen in other organizations? in particular the United Nations itself; 
where' disagreement had arisen over participation in the cost of the United 
lotions operations in the Congo, It would therefore be premature for the 
Ar,oncy to try to tackle a similar problem merely by ^amending the Statute and 
eliminating one of its cardinal principles. 
51, The Indian delegation therefore considered that the United Kingdom 
amendment should be dropped for -the time being? and efforts made to find other 
\r~,j3 aril means of meeting financial requirements. It would be unrealistic 
to draw up a long-term programme without attempting at the same time to put 
the finances of the Agency on a more solid foundation. lie therefore suggested 
that a fresh appeal be made to the advanced countries to make substantial 
contributions and to ensure that they were paid regularly* A similar appeal 
should JO made to all the developing countries to pay voluntary contributions 
according to their ability and to ensure that their payments were regular. 
It would be most helpful if Member States could indicate two or three years 
in advance what contributions thoy intended to make. For its part; the 
Indian Government was fully prepared to take on such obligations^ within the 
limits of its resources, 


GC(VI)/OR.67 
page 9 


32. He wished to clarify his Government's position with respect to safeguards. 
The Government and Prime Minister of India had declared that India would not 
seek to use atomic energy except for peaceful purposes. The Parliament of 
India had also lately passed a comprehensive Act to that effect. His 
Government considered that international safeguards should be accepted only 
when they could he made universally applicable. To apply them only to the 
developing countries would not merely be discriminatory? but would also mean 
an infringement of their sovereignty. At the present time, when certain 
countries both in the East and the West wore carrying out research for 
destructive purposes, it would be childish to talk of international safeguards 
applicable only to the developing countries, where the chances of misuse were 
the least. 
33. Mr. El TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) spoke of the great advances 
in science and technology that the modern world had witnessed, and which 
everyone hoped would be placed at the service of mankind§ he recalled, too, 
the disappointment that had been caused by the failure of the Geneva Conference 
on Disarmament. The United Arab Republic was convinced of the need for 
international co-operation in the peaceful utilization of atomic energy and 
confident that it could be brought about by a more wholehearted adherence to 
the Agency's objectives. Co-operation between States, bilateral or regional, 
would likewise make a valuable contribution to the progress of science and 
technology. The United Arab Republic's belief in that policy was 
demonstrated by the agreements it had concluded with the Agency and with 
different countries. 
34* In that connection, the Board, on 16 September 1962, had approved a draft 
agreement on the establishment in Cairo of a regional radioisotope centre to 
serve the Arab countries.-^ The United Arab Republic had first proposed in 
1958 that the Cairo national radioisotope centre should be converted into a 
regional centre, and a formal request in that sense had been submitted to the 
Agency in 1959. The request had been endorsed by the Board of Governors in 
Juno i960. The national atomic energy establishment, in co-operation with 
the Agency, had organized two regional training courses in Cairo during 1961, 
the first on general applications of radioisotopes and the second on their 


_3_/ INFCIRC/38. 



GC(VI)/OR,67 
page 10 


medical uses. Both courses had been fully successful* In September 19&2, 


the Arab countries, including the United Arab Republic as host State, had 
finally reached an agreement with the Agency* He paid tribute to the 
Director General for the active part he had taken in bringing about that 
agreement, which would enter into force in January 19&3. 'The United Arab 
Republic was firmly resolved to honour all its obligations towards the centre. 
Although the proposed financial support by the Agency was inadequate to'meet 
the centre's needs, his country was sure that success in the enterprise would 
show the need for more positive help to such projects. 


35. The national atomic energy establishment had obtained, with the Agency's 
co-operation, a 560--curie cobalt unit for use in agricultural research. 
The Cairo University Hospital was now provided with a jJOOO-curie cobalt-60 
teletherapy unit„ The country would need six more units of the kind in all, 
which explained why his Government had asked the Agency in 1959 "to supply one 
further unit for the Alexandria University Hospital. The Board had approved 
that request on 12 September.1962. The unit had been kindly offered by the 
Czechoslovak Government during the fifth session of the General Conference, 
36. Although appreciating what the Agency had done, he nevertheless felt 
obliged to deplore the considerable time lag between the submission of the 
request and receipt of the unit. It was obvious that the technical assistance 
furnished by the Agency lacked efficiency and was always behind schedule defects 
which were prejudicial to the developing countries. Radical changes 
should be introduced in the system of providing technical assistance. 
37" In that connection he referred to the proposed United Kingdom amendment 


to Article XIV of the Statute. The United Arab Ropublic felt little 


inclination to support the amendment as it stood, but would support an 
amendment calculated to ensure financial stability and adequate funds for the 


technical assistance programme, 


38. Coming to his country's activities in atomic energy, he stated that 
bilateral agreements for co-operation in research and development in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy had been concluded with India and Yugoslavia* 
During 1960, the national atomic energy establishment had exchanged scientists 
with various countries and scientific institutions and it was ready, in its 
turn, to roooivc scientists who needed training. The 2 MW reactcr, tniilt 

GC(VI)/OR,67 
page 11 


with the help of Soviet scientists, had reached criticality in July 1961, and 
had since been used for various investigations, A number of experiments 
concerned with neutron diffraction and fission physics and chemistry were 
in progress. His Government would' be glad to place two channels of the 
reactor at the disposal of nuclear scientists from other countries for 
experimental purposes? the offer was open till the end of 1963. 


59- The country's nuclear chemistry laboratory was now completely equipped? 


it had four main units, covering the production of radioisotopes, nuclear 


ores, reactor metallurgy and analytical chemistry. Tfco radioisotope unit 
would produce the processed isotopes, iodinc-131? gold-198, sodium-24, 


potassium-42, chromium~51, sulphur-35 and phosphorus-;?2, as well as a variety 


of radiation sources and •unprocessed isotopes..._ As from November 1962, the 
a+-omic energy establishment would be ready to deliver any of those isotopes 
to interested countries. The remaining three laboratory units were engaged 


in developing low-cost technical procedures for the separation of uranium, 


thorium and other reactor materials from Egyptian ores, and in studies on 
fuol-oloment production, fission-product chemistry, waste.disposal, analysis 
and concentration of heavy water, and a waste decontamination plant. The 
establishment hoped that the construction of two new laboratories, one to 
deal with geology and raw materials and the other engineering and scientific 
instruments, would be finished in the course of 1963, 


40. The country's power programme provided for the building of a reactor of 
about 100 MW electric. Preliminary studies had boon made and further steps 
towards putting the project into effect would be taken during the current year* 
41. In its future work, the Agency should place special emphasis on nuclear 
power technology with the overriding object of helping the developing countries, 
42. The establishment of a long-term programme raised the question of 
safeguards. His Government had from the outset consistently opposed the 
safeguards system. It was convinced that the time had come to reconsider the 
original concept of the system, in order that the developing countries might 
be supplied with power reactors on conditions that were compatible with their 
dignity and therefore acceptable. 

GC(VI)/OR.67 
page 12 


43. ™he United Arab Republic had made a voluntary contribution of Egyptian 
4,5000 ($11 261) to the General Fund for 1962 and would he making a 
contribution for 1963. 
44. His delegation welcomed with enthusiasm the promising programme of aid 
to the developing countries which the Soviet Union had proposod, and noted 
that the United States delegation was in favour of asking the Board to studythat 
proposal in detail.—' The recommendation of the United States delegation 
that the Agency should direct more attention to nuclear power projects was 
also highly appreciated. It was by co-operation between th© Great Powers 
that peace and prosperity would come? the ultimate aim of all mankind. 
The meeting rose at 4.55 p*"1* 


4/ GC(VI)/OR,66j para. 47. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VI)/OR.68 
12 December 1962 


GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 


SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 21 September 1962, at 10.50 a,m. 


President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


General debate end report of the Board 


of Governors for 1961-62 (continued) 1 - 111 


Statement by the delegates of: 


Greece 1 — 13 
Thailand 14 -. 18 
Federal Republic of Germany 19 - 34 
Philippines 35 - 44 
Hungary 45 - 61 
Indonesia 62-69 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 70 - 95 
Tunisia 96 - 102 
China 103 ~ 111 

* GC(VI)/207. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VI)/INF/56/Rev.2. 
62-5684 



GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1961-62 
(GC(VI)/195, '204T'('continued')' ' 


1. Mr. SPAHIDES (Gr eece) said he was gratified by the Agency's steady 
progress since its inception and considered that, among other things, the 
increasing number of applications for membership, particularly from the 
developing countries, was tangible proof of its usefulness. 
2. It was regrettable that lack of funds was hampering technical assistance, 
and particularly.training - of such great importance to the long-term needs 
of the developing countries. Training should be on a high level and given 
at academic institutes rather than in the form of one-year courses at research 
centres in the more advanced countries. Many developing countries, having 
had the benefit of the second type? had made some progress in atomic energy 
but.now.needed scientists with sound theoretical knowledge to initiate their 
own research. 
3. Despite financial difficulties, Greece would comply with the resolution 
adopted at the fifth regular session—' and increase its voluntary contribution 
o / 
ky 50/^. I"k supported the United Kingdom amendment to the Statute—{ being 
satisfied that a unified budget and a programme financed from regular contributions 
would make planning easier. 


4. He was glad to see the Agency encouraging the practical applications of 
radioisotopes through the fellowship programme; radioisotope training courses, 
visits of experts and scientific meetings, and expressed appreciation for the 
valuable assistance Greece had received in past years', 
5. His delegation believed long-term planning was desirable and hoped that 
in the programme - which might take some years to develop - full account would 
be taken of the needs of all, and particularly the developing countries which, 
with the Agency's help, should soon benefit from the technological progress 
made in the more advanced countries. 
6. He would comment later on the question of establishing a centre for 
theoretical physics. 
7. He wholeheartedly approved the Agency's efforts to make nuclear power 
competitive? the discussions in the panel on nuclear power the previous day 
gave grounds for hoping that nuclear power would soon be competitive with 
1/ GC(V)/RSS/IOO. 
2/ GC(VI)/205. 



GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 3 


conventional power in most parts of the world. Greece did not need nuclear 
power immediately but very much hoped that what was being done by the Agency 
in that regard, particularly in Yugoslavia and Pakistan, would enable developing 
countries to start producing nuclear power as soon as they were ready for it. 


8. The 1-megawatt swimming-pool research reactor at the Democritus nuclear 
research centre had gone critical in July 196lf the centre was now producing 
some short-lived radioisotopes for use in hospitals and industry. 
9. Greece was particularly interested in the agricultural applications of . 
atomic energy. As an olive-producing country, it was working in co-operation 
with United States and Agency experts on the problem of the Dacus fly which 
caused damage evaluated at $15 million every year in Greece. The male flies 
were sterilized by irradiation - the method successfully used some years 
previously against the screw-worm fly in Curacao. Results obtained were 
encouraging. 
10. The Greek atomic energy commission was also exploring underground water 
resources in the Argos-Tripolis plain in the Peloponnesus in cc—operation with 
the Agency, the United Nations Special Fund and the Greek Institute of Geology 
and Subsurface Research, tritium being used as the tracer. In another 
experiment, non—radioactive tracers had been used, the qualitative and 
quantitative analysis being done by neutron activation5 a paper on the 
experiment would shortly be appearing. 
11. The Greek authorities .fully realized that the development of atomic 
energy in a country depended largely on the availability of scientists, 
technicians and research workers. Hence the many courses it had organized, 
particularly on radioisotope techniques. The most important would be a 
four-year course at the Centre for Advanced Studies in Physics and the 
Philosophy of Science, which would give graduates specialized training comparable 
to that given in European and American universities. The teaching 
staff would consist of Greek and foreign doctors of science5 the facilities 
of the Democritus centre would be at the disposal of the Centre. Twenty 
students had enrolled for 1962-63 and students from other countries vrould 
soon be accepted also. 
12. An Agency-sponsored training course in the medical applications of 
radioisotopes for Mediterranean countries had recently been held at the 

GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 4 


Democritus centre and the Alexandra Hospital in Athens-, both well equipped for 
such courses. Attended by 20 trainees from 8 countries, it had been a great 
success. 


13. About a hundred participants from all over the world were expected at 
an international symposium on radioactive dating that was to be held in Athens 
in November 1962, , The question of holding another conference (on entomology) 
in Athens was also being discussed. 
14. Mr. VEJYAWT-RAKGSRISHT (Thailand) said he had been gratified by the 
Agency's progress during the past few years% he was aware of its difficulties 
and hoped the friendly atmosphere which had prevailed in the Board during the 
preceding year would be maintained., The technical aspects of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy were the Agency's chief concern and it would perhaps 
obtain better results if politics were entirely eliminated. 
15. Thailand had always been a strong supporter of the Agency's safeguards 
and hoped that the administration of safeguards applicable to the nuclear 
materials used in its research reactor would be transferred to the Agency, 
The reactor was expected to reach criticality in October 1962 and, with its 
associated laboratories, would provide a centre for atomic activities in 
Thailand^ his country was very grateful to the atomic energy commissions of 
the United States and Australia for their much-appreciated co-operation. 
16. Thanks were also due to the Agency for sending a group of experts to 
make a hazards evaluation of the research reactor. The Agency team that was 
to study the prospects for nuclear power in Thailand, and the study group on 
research reactor utilization that ?;as to meet it Bangkok toward the end of 
the year, would -be very welcome. 
17. His delegation favoured long-term programming in the Agency^ the 
amendment to Article XIV of the Statute should also greatly facilitate its 
work. 
18. The procedure for providing technical assistance to the developing 
countries must be made more flexible In view of the real difficulty of 
recruiting suitable experts, he suggested that the supplying of equipment 
should not be too rigidly bound up with the provision of. experts. 

GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 5 


19* Mr, BALKE (Federal Republic of Germany) said that the most urgent 


task of the Agency at the moment was to extend knowledge and ensure its 


dissemination, There was, in addition, its regulatory work - the drawing up 


and unification of legislation - which had already given such good results in 


matters of health, safety and safeguards, 


20. The Agency could effectively contribute to international understanding§ 
its Members should avoid political controversy and co-operate in true 
partnership, 
.. ^ning tctne Board's annua! report^ and the Erogr— and Budget 
he stressed the necessity of. establishing priorities and adopting the best 
methods of work and the best possible administrative organization, 


22. First priority should go to training., which should above all serve the 
needs of the developing countries. The allocations for training in 1961-62 
had been lower than in the preceding year, and the number of fellowships had 
dropped accordingly. That regrettable development was not due to bad 
administration but to the insufficiency of funds. 
2J. The scientific meetings arranged in 1961-62 had been of great interest 
and those planned for 1963 had been selected with care. The Federal Republic 
hoped to gain from them information of value for its prototype reactor programme. 
Agency publications, incidentally, maintained their high reputation. 


24. Nuclear research sorely needed the Agency's encouragement but, until 
the financial situation drastically improved, it could hardly do more than 
co-ordinate - a role, however, which also' offered great opportunities that 
so'far had not been fully used. As the research contract system was costly 
and. could give only meagre results unless mere money was made available^ 
perhaps existing research installations could be made available for joint 
programmes without cost to the Agency, 
25. The Agency would then suggest subjects for research which would 
simultaneously be of general interest and satisfy individual national needs. 
The major research projects would be split up by ad hoc panels and distributed 
among the national institutes best qualified to handle them. When a research 
subject was of particular interest to a given State, it might be prepared to 
2/ GC(VI)/195. 
4/ GC(vT)/200. 



GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 6 


contribute to the cost of a joint project:; the research institutes concerned 
would have-to keep in close touch, and that would naturally strengthen the 
links between Member States. 


26. The Laboratory at Seibersdorf had done useful work for several Member 
States in research on environmental radioactivity. It was in a position to 
make exact and impartial radioactivity analyses and? providing of course that 
sufficient funds were allocated, would be particularly suitable as a training 
centre. 
27. The Agency had very important practical tasks in regard to radiation• 
protection. As several international organizations were working on the 
subject also, guiding principles for collaboration should be laid down in 
order to prevent overlapping. 
28. Radiation protection should figure largely in the Agency's educational 
programme which must extend to those who had to handle radioactive materials 
in the course of their biological or medical work and be both theoretical and 
practical. Centres gave such training in several Member Statesf if so 
requested the Federal Republic could organize courses for about 100 foreign 
participants every year at the radiation protection research and training 
centre at Neuherberg, near Munich. The major problem in ensuring radiation 
protection was radioactive waste disposal. No entirely satisfactory method 
yet existed but salt deposits and other geological formations offered the 
particular advantage that radioactive materials could not permeate thorn and 
so contaminate underground water. The storing of wastes of medium specific 
activity in salt deposits was being investigated in the Federal Republic. If 
the means wore available, the subject might profitably be more extensively 
investigated by the Agency, whose valuable regulatory work in connection with 
radiation protection should be further developed, 
29. The treatment of radiation diseases must be considered a first priority 
among the radiobiological problems. The Agency should intensify its work on 
it by encouraging close co-operation between the various treatment centres 
with a view to speeding up the discovery of effective methods of treatment. 
30. The deliberations of the Conference and the proposals made during its 
sessions would come to nothing so long as the Agency continued to lack the 

GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 7 


indispensable funds. During the preceding year its activities had had to he 


curtailed because voluntary contributions by Member States had been less than 
what was budgeted. There was no point' in drawing up a long-term programme 
without knowing approximately what financial means would be available for • 
putting it into practice. 


31. His delegation would support any proposal that aimed at improving the 
existing system of financing. The Member States must either voluntarily 
agree on a standard of contributions to the General Fund or drop the principle 
of voluntary contributions and amend the Statute accordingly. In aocordance 
with the resolution adopted by the General Conference at its fifth regular 
session, his Government had decided to contribute to the General Fund in 
the proportion of its assessed contribution to the Regular Budget, and 
accordingly increase the amount in .1963 from $65 000 to $100 000. 
32. The Director General's proposed reorganization of the Secretariat must 
obviously depend to a large extent on what was done about long-term 
programming? some changes in its structure would probably allow a reduction 
in the administrative machinery, and consequently in the amount of the 
Regular Eudget, 
33. To raise standards of living in the developing countries, the Agency 
must do more than place a promising source of energy at their disposals the 
prerequisites for utilizing it must also be supplied. Its current activities 
were providing detailed knowledge about their economic trends and civil 
engineering ncedS'f it would be lamentable if that wide experience wore not 
used within the framework of the United Nations Development Decade. 
34. Under the leadership of its new Director General the Secretariat had 
continued its tradition of devoted service. His Government had faith in the 
Agency's future and would continue to give it every support. 
35. Mr. de CASTRO (Philippines') said that, reviewing the Agency's 
operations, his delegation noted the generally larger contribution of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy -to world health and prosperity. 
36. The Agency could really help the less-developed countries through 
experts, fellowships, equipment and research contracts. His own country was 
grateful for the excellent help it had received^ three Agency experts in 

GC (VI)/OR .68 
page 8 


health physics, the agricultural uses of radioisotopes and the industrial 
applications of atomic energy were at present working in close collaboration 
with. Philippine colleagues, and fellowships and equipment had also boon made 
available. 


37. The national atomic energy programme was now at a stage where more Agency 
assistance would pay dividends, and he accordingly hoped that its' requests' 
would continue, to be met. 
58; ''-Hist delegation was fully aware of the complicated-problems the programme 


involved, and particularly the recruitment difficulty mentioned by the Director 
5/ .


General in his opening statement-7 - one that could be overcome only by more 
co-operation from the scientifically advanced countries which could provide 
at least a part solution by making their experts more readily available to 
countries in need of technical assistance. 


39- The, proposal to appoint regional experts should be supported. The 
.Agency could now determine the type of service for which a common need 
existed in the countries of a particular region? by appointing the corresponding 
regional experts, it would be able to provide expert services 
at short notice wherever they were most needed. The regional experts 
would serve to keep the Agency in touch with the atomic energy programmes 
of- -Member States, a factor which would not fail to improve the efficiency 
of the Agency's work. 


40. Attention should be paid to proper timing in the provision of technical 
assistance and the delivery of equipment connected with it. It often 
happened that equipment arrived weeks or even months after the expert who 
was to use it. Apart from messing up his programme, valuable time was lost. 
The Agency should be more adaptable and hence more efficient. ' ' 
4-1. With regard to scientific and technical activities, he congratulated 
the Agency on the regional research programme on fertilizer utilization in 
rice-growing. The Philippines and other countries where rice was the staple 
food considered that no project could better serve international efforts to 
increase rice production and stave off hunger in many areas of the world. 
The Government was happy to participate in the project with six other countries, 
and had offered'to serve as host country for the Agency's regional expert.. 


5/ GC(VI)/0E.63, para. 39. 



GC(VI)/OR,68 
page 9 


It hoped the Agency would accept the invitation and take advantage of the 
facilities of the new International Rice Besearch Institute in the Philippines. 


42. Tropical and subtropical diseases constituted another research group 
of great interest to many less-developed countries. His country was very 
anxious to participate more actively, and looked forward to the regional 
training course on the medical uses of radioisotopes to he held in Manila 
in 1963? the Government had offered facilities and support. 
43* In 1960? the Philippine delegation had suggested that the Agency should 
consider measures for the tropicalization of nuclear equipment. It was 
gratified to know that a consultants' meeting on tropicalization of instruments 
had heen held the previous year and that a document on the specifications of 
nuclear electronic instruments for use in tropical countries had heen 
discussed. The document should he published as soon as possible. It was 
interesting to note that duo attention was now being given to documentation 
services, and that the Agency had started providing fellowships for training 
in that subject. As his delegation had pointed out at the fifth regular 
session—{ it was a matter of urgency to improve the library and documentation 
services in many Member States by providing direct technical assistance. 

44. For countries such as the Philippines, the Agency provided a most 
important link with the world of science and technology. It was the only 
world atomic energy organization, representing all shades of political opinion. 
It had nevertheless done useful work and, oven though its very nature limited 
its scope of action and dynamism, it would continue to receive the full 
support of the Philippine delegation which believed firmly in multilateral 
co-operation and assistance. 
45- Mr. .TBTEMT (Hungary) said there had recently been cause, in 
national administrations and bodies concerned with atomic energy, more and 
more frequently to ask what the Agency was for and what were its prospects 
for the future. The question was still more urgent in the Agency itself, 
in view of the proposed long-term plan, 


46. His delegation's views were based on Hungarian experience following 
the establishment of its own atomic facilities and an analysis of the Agency's 
activities as observed during a year's participation in the work of the Board. 
6/ GC(V)/0E.52, para. 95. 



GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 10 


47. When the Agency was founded., international circles had generally 
believed mankind to be on the threshold of large-scale nuclear power production. 
That opinion had since proved mistaken. The development of atomic 
energy was impeded by considerable obstacles, since complete and universal 
disarmament was still an unsolved problem and fissionable materials wore 
mostly used not as nuclear fuel but in weapons tests. As long as that' 
problem remained unresolved, the large-scale use of fissionable materials for 
power production was out of the question. His delegation therefore agreed 
with those delegates who had requested the Agency to do its utmost to remove 
the obstacles impeding the achievement of complete and universal disarmament, 
48. Apart from that fundamental problem, the development of atomic energy 
also involved difficulties of a technical nature. Nuclear power stations 
were still not economic, and were still only at the experimental stage. 
Experimental plant required investment on a scale which only the Great Powers 
could afford. Major technical problems such as the disposal of radioactive 
waste also remained to be solved. 
49* The Agency's main task was to disseminate the new information obtained 
as a result of the great advances in various countries in science and 
technology, using the means at its disposal first and foremost to organize. 
co-operation between countries in that respect. As only the larger countries 
could afford research in all branches of atomic energy? it must ensure that 
the results wore made available to developing countries in Africa, Asia and 
Latin America^ it could help in spreading knowledge about radioisotope 
techniques, further the use of radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture and 
industry, and encourage the training of scientific and technical staff. 


50. The fellowship programmes, the exchange of scientific information and 
the organization of scientific meetings wore worth-while activities of the 
Agency. 
51. The Hungarian delegation attached groat importance to providing technical 
assistance to developing countries, believing it should be regarded as one 
of the most important of the Agency's activities and broadly interpreted to 
include the distribution of information about technical advances, assistance 
in obtaining equipment and instruments, on-the-job training for scientists, 
and the sending of exports. 

GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 11 


52, Agency technical assistance was not free from blemish. It lacked 


clear guiding lines and was often given on the basis of requests that were 


unacceptable or technically unjustifiable (such as the request submitted by 


Portugal in February 1962), rIence funds wore wasted, 


53. In the 1962 programme, an entirely disproportionate share of the 
available funds had been allocated to States that wore members of aggressive 
military blocs, to the detriment of the developing countries. 
54* The' programme of its Laboratory was much too extensive and would really 
need several hundred scientists and a large amount of equipment. Given its 


scope and nature, it could not hope to compote with the great national 


centres. It should limit itself strictly to the Agency's main objectives 


and have a scientific board to supervise the programme and its execution. 


55. There was another regrettable tendency to attempt, much too often, to 
transfer General Conference responsibilities to the Board and Board 
responsibilities to the Secretariat. Thus the question of financing Laboratory 
expenditure had been settled - without reference to the General Conference by 
debiting it to the Regular Budget. Again, an attempt had been made to 
authorize the Director General to dispose of small quantities of fissionable 
materials - a matter which was the prerogative of the Board* The alleged 
justification in all cases was the need for a more "flexible*' procedure. 
The purpose of the United Kingdom proposal to amend Article XIV of the Statute 
was similar in character. His Government could not accept that proposal 
because it believed that the difficulties encountered by the Agency in 
performing its work should, and could, be removed by other means, since they 
could not be attributed to a lack of financial resources, 
56. Nuclear research undertaken by the Hungarian People's Republic included 
micro studies, work on the dual nature of light and the theory of relativity, 
and the elaboration of principles deriving from measurements. Accelerators 
designed and constructed by Hungarian- scientists had been used in important 
research in certain branches of nuclear physics, 
57- Nuclear chemistry had considerably developed during the last few years 
and Hungary was now able to manufacture many radioisotopes, labelled compounds 
and sealed sources - details were available in the recently-published Agency 



GC(VI)/OR.68 
pago 12 


7/ 


directory-". Radioisotopes produced in Hungary had been used in the Agency's 
Laboratory, 


5&. Radioisotopic methods wore being more and more used. During the previous 
two or throe years, the number of radioisotope users had doubled. The 
number of radioisotopes supplied in 1961 was four times the i960 figure, 

and over 200' different institutions were now using them. All Hungarian 
establishments for higher and technical education now had radioisotope 
laboratories. Host research institutes also used radioisotopic methods. 


One of the Hungarian scientific research 'institutes was working in closo 


collaboration with the Agency's Laboratory on certain questions relating to 
rice-growing. 


59* The use of radioisotopes in industry was also extending. There was a wide 
use of gamma-radiation to reveal defects, and of radioisotopes to check quality 
and measure levels-, thickness and density. With the growth in isotope 
techniques went a corresponding growth in the construction of equipment for 
their application. 


60. Ho unreservedly supported the Soviet proposals regarding the programme of 
technical assistance for the developing countries—'. His Government was 
ready to play its part in that programme. 
61. More specifically, Hungary was prepared to place at the Agency's disposal 
long-term and short-term follo^vships, medical equipment such as cobalt bombs 
(1300 curios activity), a Scintikart diagnostic apparatus and various items 
of laboratory equipment. His Government attached the greatest importance 
to measures that would facilitate the use of atomic energy and increase the 
well-being of all peoples, particularly those of the developing countries. 
62. Mr. DMUSMAH (Indonesia) said that, in reviewing the Agency's 
activities during the previous five years, ho would like to call attention 
to various difficulties Indonesia had faced in the development of nuclear energy, 
difficulties which other developing countries wore probably encountering 
as well. 
63. Thanks to hard work by local experts, and with the assistance of the 
Agcnoy and friondly countries, Indonesia was now able to provide training 
courses in radioisotope applications in agriculture and medicine. 
STl/PUB/45. 
8/ GC(VI)/OR.65, para. 39, 



GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 13 


64. "A sub-critical assembly operating at the Gadjah Mada University in 
Djakjakarta had an entirely Indonesian staff. ' The university had its own 
radiochemistry laboratory, ' The cobalt-60 unit at Djakarta was being 
extensively used for medical therapy and agricultural purposes. An 
IRT 2000-kilowatt reactor for research and training was also to be sot up 
under the supervision of the Indonesian Institute for Atomic Energy? provided 
the necessary instruments arrived on time, the TRIGA MARK II training reactor 
would go critical in 1963 at the Technological Institute in Bandung* 
65. During the fifth regular session, the Indonesian delegation had proposed 
the establishment of a regional isotope centre in Indonesia-^ and a formal 
request had been made to the Director General. The Government had set aside 
$400 000, togother with land and buildings, for the project, which would be 
of great benefit to the countries of South-Sast Asia and the Pacific. It 
was therefore to be hoped that the Member States concerned would support it. 
66. Referring to the difficulties he had mentioned earlier, he said that the 
Indonesian Government, with advice from an Agency mission, had three years 
previously requseted the services of eight experts in nuclear raw materials 
prospecting, radiochemistry, radiobiology, theoretical physics and health . 
physics. The request had been approved by the Board the same year, but only 
three of the eight experts requested had arrived and the national atomic energy 
development programme had been seriously held up in consequence. It was to 
be hoped that in the future the services of experts and equipment would be 
forthcoming as arranged. 
67. His delegation considered that more fellowships should be awarded for the 
study of the following subjects, which were of particular importance to the 
developing countries; nuclear raw material processing, electronic equipment, 
radioisotope, applications in industry, reactor technology, and nuclear power 
reactors. Part of the funds appropriated for safeguards could be used for 
that purpose, and for the dissemination of information. 
68. In the latter connection, the Indonesian delegation had repeatedly 
requested that the Agency, through the schools and in conjunction with the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, implement 
a Board decision regarding a world campaign of information about the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, so that in the minds of men atomic energy might become 
synonymous with progress and reason. 
2/ GC(V)/0E.55, para, 30. 


GC(VI)/0H.68 
page 14 


69. Safeguards should not lie too rigid. The countries that requested Agency 
assistance were developing countries and it was extremely improbable that they 
would use nuclear energy for military purposes. If safeguards had to he 
applied as a matter of principle, that should only be done to the extent to 
which they were applicable to the project in question, as laid down in 
Article XII of the Statute. 
70. llx. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
humanity was going through a great scientific and technical revolution which 
offered immense possibilities for increasing production capacity and 
harnessing the forces of nature for numerous purposes. 
71. A daring and systematic penetration of outer space by man had been undertaken. 
The grouped flight, unparalleled in its complexity and duration, of 
the space vessels "Vostok 3" and "Vostok 4"? piloted by the Soviet astronauts 
Nikolaev and Popovich, provided new evidence of the unlimited possibilities 
of human genius. The Ukrainian people was rightly proud that its celebrated 
son, the astronaut Pavel Popovich, had joined the valiant family of the 
conquerors of space. 
72. The year which had elapsed since the fifth regular session of the General 
Conference had been an outstanding one for the Ukraine, which had continued 
to extend its activities in.connection with the peaceful uses of atomic energy.73• 
Scientific research institutes in the Ukraine were very actively occupied 
with nuclear physics and other branches of nuclear science, with the effect of 
radiations on solid bodies, the chemistry of radioactive substances and the 
applications of atomic energy in geology,.biology and medicine. 


74* The research reactor of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, which had come 
into operation In i960, was being used to study the structure of nuclei, physical 
phenomena in solid bodies under the effect of radiation and the interaction of 
slow neutrons with nuclei. 'The maximum sensitivity of cadmium sulphide to 
gamma radiation under neutron bombardment had been determined, and the effect 
of radiation on biological substances was being studied. Reports on the 
various experiments made had been presented at a conference in Romania and at 
the Symposium on Inelastic Scattering of Neutrons in Solids and Liquids held 
recently at Chalk River, Canada. 



GC(vl)/OR.68 
page 15 


75- Particular importance had been attached to discovering the primary 
mechanism of sub-cellular lesions in the tissue of various organs. Interesting 


data had been obtained by subjecting animals to bombardment by fast neutrons 
with an energy of 4 mega-electron-volts. 


76. During 196I alone, Ukrainian industry had been equipped with over 200 
instruments and 8 installations for the application of radioisotopes and 
radiation, which would permit annual savings of the order of 450 000 roubles. 
77. In the Ukraine the radioisotopes of gold and sodium were widely used in 
treating breast cancer, and thyroid cancor was commonly treated by means of 
radioactive iodine. Twenty-one cobalt teletherapy units were in use in 
hospitals. 
78. The universities of Kiev, Kharkov and Uzhgorod and various other teaching 
institutes trained specialists highly qualified in the peaoeful uses of atomic 
energy. 
79* In all higher educational institutions throughout the Republic, the 
faculties of science and technical colleges gavo a course on "the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy", which included laboratory work. 


80. Turning next to the strengthening.of the international links between 
Ukrainian scientists and those of other countries, he pointed out that the 
Ukrainian scientists concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy shared 
their experience with their colleagues abroad. In 196I, a group of young 
foreign specialists had vicited the Ukraine for training in methods of research 
with linear accelerators. For over a year, two Ukrainian specialists, 
Inopin and Sorokin, had been providing assistance in carrying out scientific 
research in the first nuclear laboratory of the United Arab Republic, near 
Cairo, which had been organized with the help of the Soviet Union. 
81. In many higher educational institutions in the Ukraine there were students 
from Ghana, the United Arab Republic, Indonesia, India, China, Cuba and many 
other countries, The number of foreign students and fellows in the Ukraine 
was already several thousand. Some of them would be specializing in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and many were taking advanced medical and 
technical courses with that end in view. 

GC(VI)/OR.68, 
page 16 


82. The report of the Board mentioned certain achievements of the Agency in 
the training of specialists? the provision of equipment and ex-ports? the 
"organization of scientific meetings an,d the dissemination o'f scientific and 
technical information. What it had done was insufficient to meet existing 
needs, however. The Agency was still far from having attained the objectives 
laid' down' in its Statute"? its activities had not reached the desired volume, 
especially in view of the successes obtained by various' countries without 
any assistance. There was no justification for curtailing the Agency's work 
in 1961 in so important, & matter as specialist training. 
8j. The programme was encumbered with secondary questions which often had no . 
direct connection with the Agency's work (environmental contamination, disposal 
of radioactive wastes into the sea, ctc„)„ Excessive importance was attached 
to safeguards and supervision, although there was hardly anything to supervise 
at the moment. Quite unjustified sums were swallowed up by the Agency's 
Laboratory, the financing of which from the Regular Budget ?ra.s a violation of 
Article XIV of the Statute. Instead of working to improve international 


collaboration and increase assistance to the developing countries, the 
Secretariat increased its establishment and raided staff salaries| most of 
the funds available were spent in that way, which was inexcusable whatever 
point of view was adopted. The Secretariat should take account of the 


criticisms made by Member States, 


84. The delegates of the United States, the United Kingdom and certain 
other countries often.said that the Agency should not concern itself with 
political questionsp yet in many cases they themselves pursued political 
ends, while claiming that such action had nothing to do with politics. What 
was the political significance of the United Kingdom amendment to Article XIV 
of the Statute, merging the Regular Budget with the Operational Budget? The 
Operational Budget way financed by voluntary contributions from States, 
i.e. it was made up of' the'assistance which certain States furnished to other 
States through the Agency'. The amendment was directed against national 
currencies and merely amounted to converting all currencies into dollars. 
Thus if somebody wished to make a present to another person, it would only 
be accepted if it was paid for in dollars? it would be refused if it was paid 
for in roubles, rupees, forints etc. It was pointless for the United Kingdom 

GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 17 


delegate and those, who supported him to claim that the amendment was of a 
purely,financial nature5 they would not convince anyone, for they were really 
.trying to create unequal conditions, whereas all the Members of the Agency, 
had equal rights. 


85. Again, the delegates of the'Western countries considered that any statement 
or action in favour of peace was political. Progressive people 
in all countries well knew what enormous benefits would result for humanity 
if all the achievements of.science now applied to military ends were used for 
peaceful purposes. The most important of such achievements were those 
relating to the use of atomic energy. 
86. ,As the Soviet Union delegate had already pointed out, the joint draft 
resolution submitted by the socialist countries and proposing a programme of 
technical assistance to the developing countries—' was an important and 
timely measure calculated to re-activate the Agency. The adoption of that 
resolution would greatly facilitate the drafting and execution of, a long-term 
programme, since it provided for assistance to developing countries over a 
period of two or throe years. 
87. The Ukraine could receive trainees at its scientific research centres for 
training in experimental physics, nuclear physics, the applications of radioisotopes 
in agriculture, the production of radioisotopes by means of the cyclotron, 
and the production of radioisotopes for medical diagnosis and treatment $ 
it could also send developing countries highly qualified instructors who would 
help to train specialists in nuclear physics and the applications of radioisotopes. 
The Ukraine could also take part in the programme for equipping 
laboratories in the developing countries. 
88. The Agency - whose noble purpose was the preservation of peace and the 
use of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind - could not stand aside from 
the solution' of the most urgent problem of the day, namely general and 
complete disarmament. 
89. Disarmament and the establishment of world peace would open up wonderful 
prospects for the peoples of the world? for armaments swallowed up in one 
hour resources which would be enough to enable the Agency to award 25 times 
as many fellowships every year as it did at present. 
10/ GC(VI)/COM.1/67/Rev.1. 



GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 18 


90. But peace could not come of itself. It was necessary to fight against 
the forces that sought to use atomic energy against humanity in order to 
enrich themselves through the sufferings and extermination of millions of people. 
The Government of the Ukraine would support any measure proposed hy 
any country with.a view to heating swords into ploughshares. 
91. The Ukrainian delegation therefore unreservedly supported the draft 
resolution referred to by Poland on the consequences of general and complete 
disarmament for the peaceful uses of atomic energy—'. 
92. Aggressive circles in the West? especially the United States, wore 
continuing the arms race, creating centres of tension in different'parts of 
the world, spreading war psychosis and intensifying preparations for war. . 
The most flagrant example was the shameful measures directed' against the 
Republic of Cuba and its heroic people. 
95* The world knew the consequences of the thermonuclear explosion which the 
United States had carried out in space. The radiation holt it had created 
had proved to be more intense than the scientists had expected and might 
subsist for several years, 


94. However, 'the greatest danger lay in the accumulation and continual 
improvement of nuclear weapons. The armaments race not only swallowed up 
enormous resources, but also constantly threatened international disaster. 
.95* The formidable power.resulting.from scientific discoveries now had an 
enormous influence in speeding up social progress and the creation of living 
conditions worthy of human^ beings. That was the noblest objective which any 
international organization had ever set. itself, Every effort must be made 
to attain it. 


96, Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) said that the Agency's work during the period 
covered by the Board's report had been satisfactory on the whole. The Agency 
was now drawing up a long-term programme. His delegation supported that 
effort and hoped that the programme would stress the study of nuclear reactors 
and their use, particularly in the developing countries. It was glad that the 
Director General had decided to send with the preliminary assistance mission 
to Africa an expert on conventional power as well as an expert on nuclear power, 
which could already be competitive in certain regions, particularly in developing 
countries. 


11/ See document GC(vi)/OR„65, para. 8l. 



GO (VI.) /OR .68 
page 19 


9?. The training of senior technical staff was one of the major problems 
those countries had to solve, and sotting up national training centres was the 
only real solution. The Agency should give more assistance to such centres. 
The Tunisian Government was happy to confirm its full support of the regional 
centre recently set up, in Cairo, to which it would contribute $2000 a year. 
He hoped that the Agency would consider the possibility of setting up other 
regional centres in Indonesia and Japan. The Director General's proposal for" 


12/ 


using the Agency's Laboratory to train senior technical staff—' should also_ 
be supported. 


98. The Agency, had successfully organized courses, conferences and symposia, 
among which particular mention must be made of the seminar on theoretical 
physics hold in Trieste. The brilliant success of that seminar, the inadequate 
number of places in other national or regional institutions, and the obvious 
success of the regional institutions set up a few years previously in the 
technically developed countries were all reasons why the Tunisian delegation 
supported the establishment of the international centre for theoretical physics 
in Trieste. 
99. Turning to the Tunisian atomic energy programme, he said that with the 
help of the Agency Tunisia had first sot up'throe laboratories concerned with 
the use of radioisotopes in agriculture, industry and medicine. Then an atomic 
physics centre had been set up in the University of Tunis under a bilateral 
aid scheme. Two courses in atomic energy were being given, one at the Faculty 
of Science, the other at the Atomic Energy Commission, The Commission was 
studying the possibility of using atomic energy for desalinating water and 
producing electric power5 for fresh water and power were the two factors on 
which the Tunisian economy mainly depended, Tunisia needed fresh water not 
only for irrigation but also for developing new industries, e.g. paper pulp, 
textiles, iron smelting. Wo water in Tunisia contained less than 1.5 grams 
of salt per liter| the cost of producing a cubic meter of drinkable water in 
the south of Tunisia was about 65 cents, and not enough was produced. The 
cost of electricity per kilowatt-hour at a thermal plant was about 2 cents. 
100. To remedy that alarming situation, the Atomic Energy Commission was 
considering the possibility of installing a power reactor for desalinating 
salt water and producing electricity, and that project might be the subject 
12/ GC(VI)/OR.63, para. 47



GC(VI)/OR.68 
page 20 


of a special study by the Agency? the Government of Tunis ia v/as, of course, 
willing to accept the collaboration of any country interested in that problem, 


101. It was difficult to exclude political considerations when speaking of 
international technical collaboration, but in applying a policy one must show 
reasonableness and sincerity, seeking to attain objectives that were useful 
both to the interested parties and to all mankind. 
102. Two problems relating to the use of atomic energy had not yet been solveds 
the discontinuance of nuclear tests and general and complete disarmament. The 
Tunisian delegation wondered whether the Agency could not at least stimulate 
and encourage attempts to solve those two vital problems? international 
co-operation would be strengthened thereby and the Agency would thus contribute 
to scientific progress and to human happiness. 
10J. Mr. LEE (China) said that his country was grateful to the Agency 
for the help given it in recent years in the form of fellowship awards, 
experts' services and nuclear equipment. The Agency had also awarded Chinese 
scientists three research contracts and sent two missions to the country to 
study its needs in the development of nuclear science and technology, 


104. However, the Agency had so far failed to fulfil one obligation to his 
country. The Republic of China was not represented in the Secretariat to 
the extent required by the principle of geographical distribution. Recently, 
however, his Government had received several communications from the Director 
General asking it to nominate candidates for various posts which would soon 
be vacant. It had complied with those requests and was now waiting to see 
what decisions would be taken. 
105. Commenting briefly on the Agency's programme, he said that during the 
last few years the Republic of China had received many invitations to send 
representatives to scientific meetings organized for all Member States, but 
in view of the very heavy travelling expenses involved it had often had to 
decline. 
106. For the same reason, it was easier for his country to take part in 
regional meetings. A case in point was the study group on research reactor 
utilization to be held in Bangkok in December 1962 with the participation of 
Japan, the Philippines and the Republic of China. It might be thought that 
regional meetings were of more interest to the scientists of Member States and 
accordingly gave better results. 

GC(vi)/OR.68 
page 21 


107. With regard to contact between the Agency and the Member States, he 
thought that the latter would be better informed about the Agency's activities 
if the records of the Board's meetings were communicated to them. As to the 
Board's annual report to the General C onferonce. Member States did not receive 
it until a late date, and he himself had only been able to obtain a copy at 
the beginning of the session. 
108. Up to the present, the Republic of China had never had the privilege of 
serving on any of the commissions or committees of the Agency or of the General 
Conference. If the reason had boon that the Republic of China, which vra.s not 
represented on the Board, had no permanent representative in Vienna, that 
reason was no longer valid, for his Government had just designated as its 
permanent representative to the Agency His Excellency Ambassador Cheng Paonan^ 
a distinguished diplomat who had been a member of the Chinese delegation to 
the United Nations for several years. 
109. He also pointed out that the Republic of China had offered to act as 
host to a scientific meeting, but had rocoived a negative reply without any 
explanation. 
110. As to the Programme and Budget for 1963? ho approved the increase in 
the budget. However, he supported the Pakistan suggestion for biennial 
programmes and budgets, which would certainly result in savings. 
111. Referring to the work of the Republic of China on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, ho said that the research reactor of the National University 
had produced some radioisotopes for use in medicine and agriculture, and 
scientists planned to study the neutron flux distribution of the reactor and 
related questions. The Republic of China was now setting up a radiation 
protection service and the Government had for the first time awarded two 
fellowships to foreign students at the National University's Institute of 
Nuclear Science. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VI)/OR.69 
12 December 1962 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

.SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 
OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
onHeld at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
Friday, 21 September 1962, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 
CONTENTS 
Item, of the 
agenda* 
^aragragfls 
10 General debate and report of the 
Board of Governors for 1961 62 
(continued) 
1-56 
Statements by the delegates of; 
Bulgaria 
Portugal 
Italy 
Mexico 
Turkey 
Cambodia 
Ceylon 
1 
10 
18 
30 
36 
43 
48 
-9 
- 17 
- 29 
- 35 
- 42 
- 47 
- 56 
Applications for membership of the 
Agency 
57 03 


GC(VI)/207. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(vI)/INF/56/Rev.2. 

62-5688 


GC(VI)/OR.69 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1961-62 
(GC(VI)/195? 204)( continued) 


1. Mr. KADJAKOV (Bulgaria) said that the Agency, enjoying as it did 
almost universal support, should have been able to give proof of its worth 
even in so short a period as the five years of its existence. In his delegation1 
s opinion, no such proof was yst forthcoming. 
2. Like some previous speakers, he granted that certain positive results, 
more or less favourable to the development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in States receiving assistance from the Agency, had been recorded. He 
had in mind in particular the training of key scientific staff for the 
developing countries, through the fellowship programme. That programme was 
also of benefit to countries like his own with a long-standing scientific 
tradition. The procedures for the award of fellowships were on the right 
lines and a considerable impetus would undoubtedly be given to further development 
in the peaceful applications of atomic energy if the means could be found 
to expand the programme further. It was undeniable that every country, even 
the most advanced, needed large numbers of scientific and technical staff to 
tackle its own particular problems. But the task of meeting such a vast need 
was obviously beyond the Agency's capacity with the modest means at present at 
its disposal. Other useful aspects of the Agency's work included the organizing 
of symposia, the formulating of regulations and standards for utilization and 
transport of radioisotopes, the work on waste disposal, and the publication of 
scientific data* Activities of that kind, however, were also being undertaken 
by other international bodies and could not be regarded as fulfilling the 
Agency's main purpose. And if account were taken of other sectors where nothing 
positive had been achieved, the reasons for the Agency's failure so far to 
justify the hopes reposed in it were easily understandable. 
3. It was essential to analyse the factors that prevented the Agency from 
developing normally, A primary factor was that not enough assistance in the 
training of scientific staff was being provided. The Agency could play a most 
important role by helping to train key staff and by providing the material aid 
that would enable countries to set up scientific centres of the kind that were 
largely responsible for the advanced stage of science, in particular nuclear 
science, at the present day. Such centres provided a better means of spreading 
scientific knowledge than regional courses. 

GC(7I)/OR,69 
page j 


4. He had a number of recommendations to make. First, the standard required 
of candidates selected for training, both by the requesting countries and by the 
Agency, must be raised to a higher level. Secondly, the duration of fellowships 
should be extended by one or two years for those trainees who showed special 
aptitudes. Thirdly, the Regular Budget, instead of increasing from year to year, 
should be reduced and the resultant savings transferred -to the budget sections 
covering the Agency's real purposes - particularly technical assistance, which 
should be extended to as many needy countries as possible. Funds for technical 
assistance could be increased further by transferring allocations for research 
contracts to the Operational Budget. Action to that end. should not be blocked 
on purely formal grounds? good-will would be enough to remove any obstacles. 
5. He did not wish to deny that the research contract programme might prove 
useful in solving certain problems of decisive importance for the Agency's work5 
but -no detailed analysis was available on which to assess the relative value, of 
the results obtained as compared with work done on the same problems by other 
national and international institutes. It would be better to replace the present 
system by a system of competitions with prizes, which would have the great 
advantage of engaging the efforts of more institutes and research workers while 
producing results - often better results - at less cost. 
6. A further possibility for extending and increasing technical assistance 
within the framework of the long-term plan lay in the proposals put forward'by 
the Soviet delegation on behalf of the socialist countrie He was gratified 
that there had been further support for that initiative, and Bulgaria would do 
its utmost to further the proposed programme. ' Every man of sense would agree 
that that was the right way of expanding the Agency's activities, rather than to 
2/ 


amend Article XIV of the Statute as the United Kingdom delegation proposed—7. 
His delegation would strongly oppose the amendment in question. 


7. A further source of funds for technical assistance could be found in savings 
on the $35^ 000 appropriation for safeguards, if the Western States, headed by 
the United States, would change their attitude. Expenditure on such activities 
was pointless and useless. Moreover, the safeguards system was one of the basic 
obstacles hampering the Agency's-work, since it discouraged Member States from 
1/ GC(VI)/COM.1/67/Rev.1, 
2/ GC(VI)/205. 



GC(VI)/OR.69 
page 4 


asking for aid. Unless the matter were reviewed, there was a danger that the 
Agency would be-come isolated and its importance as a United Nations body 


diminished. 


8. The Agency's usefulness was also directly affected by the fact that the 
Chinese People's Republic was still not a Member, its rightful place being 
usurped by the Chiang Kai-shek clique. Such a situation could' no longer be 
tolerated. If the principles of universality and international collaboration 
were to be respected, the Chinese People's Republic must be enabled to join in 
the Agency's work. 
9. On purely formal grounds, the Conference was also avoiding any action to 
reduce the threat of nuclear war and to relieve mankind of the greatest menace 
that had ever threatened the world. The tenth Pugwash Conference, recently held 
in London, had issued a unanimous statement declaring that its participants more 
than 200 of the world' s, most eminent scientists - would do' their' utmost to 
ensure that science should be a source of good rather than harm to mankind. 
The General Conference could and should add the weight of its international 
authority to that statement and take effective steps to ensure that atomic energy 
was used in that way. His delegation therefore warmly supported the joint 
Soviet-Polish proposal for a study of the consequences of general and complete 
disarmament for the Agency's work—. Every formal obstacle to general disarmament 
and the complete destruction of nuclear weapons stocks should be overcome 
before it was too late, 
10. Mr. L2ITE PINTO (Portugal), referring to the production of radioactive 
materials in Portugal since the first discovery of radioactive ores in the 
country in 1908, said that, between that year and 1926, a total of about 
10 grams of radium had been produced? between 1951 and 1944, 20 grams.' Uranium 
had at first been regarded as a useless by-product, and by 1944 some 500 tons of 
it had gone to waste? later, a rational, low-cost method of chemical treatment 
of the ores had been adopted. 
11. In 1949 a Commission for the study of nuclear energy had been set up, and 
since then more'than 200 scientists and medical men had received fellowships to 
study in Germany, Denmark, France, Italy, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the 
United States and the United Kingdom. The Commission, working in collaboration 
^/ See GC(VI)/OR.65, paras, 50 and 81. 



GC(VI)/OR.69 
page 5 


with the universities? had prepared the way for the establishment of the 
Portuguese Atomic Energy Authority in 1954. Both the Authority and the 


Commission had promoted scientific research on radioactive materials. 


12. Since 1950 the Commission had set up 13 laboratories. The Atomic Energy 
Authority had set up the Sacavem Centre for Physics and Nuclear Energy and 
provided various radioisotope services at the Cancer Institute, the faculties 
of medicine, the teaching hospitals, the Higher Institute of Tropical Medicine, 
and the Overseas Hospital. It had also drawn up prospecting and training 
programmes and had received valuable assistance from Prance, the United Kingdom 
and Spain. 
1J. Since 1955 large areas had been prospected, first by airborne scintillometer 
and then systematically, on foot, at the selected sites. Between October 1955 
and June 1962 more than 100 deposits had been investigated by means of over 2000 
borings. Between 1951 and 1962, 1325 tons of uranium oxide had been exported 
in the form of concentrates of 10$ - 25$. To December 1961, metropolitan 
reserves had been estimated at 65OO tons of uranium oxide, but subsequent 
investigation had shown that the true figures would turn out to be much higher. 


14. Prospecting in overseas territories, where the reserves of certain minerals 
having applications to nuclear energy were fairly high, had led to Portugal's 
taking second place among world producers of beryllium and a high position 
among producers of tantalum ore, 
15. The purpose of the Sacavem Centre, opened in 1961, was to train working 
groups in the main branches of nuclear technology. Special attention was 
being given to power reactor problems, to exploiting Portugal's mineral wealth 
for the production of nuclear materials, and to radioisotope applications in 
medicine, agriculture and industry. The Agency had awarded two research contracts, 
to the Portuguese National Centre for Agronomic Research and to the 
National Civil Engineering Laboratory. 
16, A great deal of other work was being undertaken? various forms of research! 
applications of radioactive materials in physics, chemistry and metallurgy? 
checks on the radioactivity of water and atmospheric dust in Portugal, 


17. Working groups were being organized to study the technical and economic 
problems of power reactors, and one private organization had been set up to 
consider the first Portuguese nuclear reactors. In spite of all efforts, 

GC(VI)/OS.69 
page 6 


however, progress had not .been as fast as was desired, because of difficulties 
in recruiting qualified personnel and in procuring equipment. Portugal had 
collaborated on nuclear matters with several countries? and received help from 
the Agency and some Member States for v/hich it was very grateful. Its experience, 
its technicians and its laboratories were at the disposal of all interested 
States. 


18. Mr. MARTINO (Italy) said that Mr. Smilio Colombo, the leader of the 
Italian delegation, regretted his inability to participate in the present 
session of the General Conference. 
19. The Agency had overcome numerous difficulties in its first five years.and 
had made steady progress. In the past year, some excellent results had been 
achieved thanks to the enthusiasm and competence of the Director General. The 
way in which the recommendations made by the Conference at its fifth session 
had been followed up was worthy of particular praise. 
20. Much remained to be done, however, and it was a matter of satisfaction that 
long-term planning was an item on the Conference agenda. The Agency should 
define its programme of activities and the related expenditure as precisely as 
possible. In that connection it was important that political issues should be 
excluded if the Agency was to function efficiently as a scientific organization. 
21. It was encouraging to note that the Agency was devoting its limited 
resources more and more to carrying out its statutory functions and assisting 
new countries. It was essential to keep administrative expenses to a minimum. 
The fact that the Director General had been able to reduce the total number of 
administrative staff was most gratifying. 
22. In the formulation of a long-term plan, every effort should be made to avoid 
duplication with the national programmes of Member States. In Italy great 
progress had been made during the past few years under the auspices of the 
Comitato Fagionale per I'Energia Nuoleare,(CMEW), the body responsible for basic 
and applied nuclear research and technological development. Under the programme 
of applied research, encouragement was being given to the construction of 
advanced power prototypes, and the construction of a 50 megawatt (thermal) 
organic moderated reactor was planned. A long-term research project aimed at 
improving the various techniques for using organic fluids in nuclear reactors. 
Another ambitious project was an investigation of the technical and economic 

GC(VI)/0E,69 
page 7 


possibilities of using the uranium-thorium cycle in reactors - a system which 


seemed economically promising. It was hoped soon to have a pilot plant for 


the chemical treatment and reprocessing of irradiated fuels. Research was 
also being done by GWSE on fast and epithermal reactors, using two different 
models; a fast dilute type based on the uranium-thorium cycle, and a fast 
reactor fuelled- with ceramic plutonium„ A new plant for the extraction of 
enriched uranium was in an advanced stage of planning. Two large power reactors 
were due to"come into operation in Italy during 1963; and a third was 
under construction. 

23. Reverting to the Agency's activities, he considered that great attention 
should be paid to long-term planning, and to projects in keeping with the 
Agency's statutory aims. 
24. On the scientific and technical side, it was interesting to note that work 
on research contracts had reached a satisfactory stage of development. The 
Soibersdorf Laboratory was making good progress and providing useful training 
for young scientists from countries less developed scientifically. The Monaco 
Laboratory was now also in full operation. 
25. The Agency's scientific meetings had been of a high standard, but care 
should be taken to avoid duplication with meetings sponsored by other bodies. 
26. It was to be hoped that a groat deal more would be done in the future in 
the way of technical assistance to developing countries. It should be brought 
home to the young students in those countries that real scientific development 
was only possible in a spirit of collaboration, on a basis of reciprocal 
assistance and mutual exchange. < 
27. In that spirit, CFEN had signed agreements with a'number of organizations 
in other countries which were beginning to develop their atomic energy programmes. 
The agreements provided for an exchange of fellows, experts and documentation 
and the establishment of joint working groups for the study of scientific 
problems. By participating in such groups, experts from the developing countries 
could make a valuable contribution to the success of the projects. 
28. In support of the Agency's activities, Italy would again make 20 fellowships 
available for foreign students in the coming year. No financial aid would be 
expected from the Agency in the case of contracts with CNEN, and Italy would 
continue to make large voluntary contributions to the Agency as it had done in 
the past year. 

GC(VT)/OR,69 
page 8 


29. 'The plan to establish an international centre for theoretical physics was 
of great interest. Its value would be considerable, especially to new nations, 
and if Trieste were chosen as the location the Italian Government would be ready 
to make specific proposals in order to minimize the financial contribution required 
from the Agency. 
3.. Mr. ORTIZ TIRADO (Mexico) said that the Board's annual report showed 


that the Agency had met with considerable success during its fifth year of 


operation and that a period of consolidation had now been reached, 


31, He wished to express gratitude to the Director General for attending 


the fourth meeting' of the Inter-American TJuci^ar Energy Commission, hold in 
Mexico. His delegation greatly appreciated the work so successfully carried 
out by the Director General and the other members of the Agency's staff, and 
hoped that future efforts would be equally successful. The progress of the 
Agency depended, however, .on co-operation between its Member States, whether 
at an advanced stage of development or merely entering the initial stage, 


32, In November and December 1961, at the Conference on the Use of Radioisotopes 
in Animal Biology and the Medical Sciences held in Mexico City, it had been most 
gratifying to hear so much praise for the papers presented by the Latin American 
representatives, and to learn that scientists would continue their battle against 
disease. The Conference had complemented the work of the Copenhagen Conference 
on the Use of Radioisotopes in the Physical Sciences and Industry, hold in 
September 1960, • Both had been highly successful., 


35. Among the various activities the Agency had carried out since its inception^ 
the technical assistance programme had been of outstanding importance. The 
allocations the Board had made in that connection for the services of experts 
and equipment in different countries had been in accordance with the aims sot 
out in the Statute, 
34. Further study of the use of radioisotopes in agriculture was of vital 
importance in -dlcw of the urgent need to increase agricultural production. In 
paragraph 62 of its-report, the Board indicated that the relevant technical 
assistance and research programmes had been extended. The effectiveness of 
fertilizers in tbe rice-growing regions of the world had boon one of the subjects 
studied. Other subjects of interest to developing countries such as Mexico 
were the relationships between various types of soil, plant genetics, pest 
control and other aspects of food production. 

GC(VI)/OR.69 
page 9 


35. Further information about the effects of irradiation was also urgently 
needed. Mexico had made investigations of atmospheric contamination, the 
presence of strontium-90 and caosium-137 in food, and might have to ask the 
Agency's advice about the most convenient and economical methods of radioactive 
waste treatment and disposal- The results ox the various research contracts 
would eventually constitute a valuable source of scientific information. It 
wont without saying that Mexico was greatly interested in the Agency's work on 
nuclear power and the possible uses of research reactors and, in short, would 
do everything in its power to enable the Agency to fulfil the lofty purposes for 
which it had been established, 
36. Mr. RABATAY (Turkey) stated that his delegation deeply appreciated the 
untiring efforts of the Agency, under its able Director General, to promote the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy throughout the world. It was an easy matter to 
criticize the Agency for its shortcomings, but a young body, beset by problems 
so new in nature and of such magnitude, was bound to commit errors. In all 
fairness, therefore, attention should rather be turned to its achievements, 
which were in fact impressive. 
370 He wished to give a brief summary of nuclear activities in his own country 
during the preceding year. Turkey's first research reactor, located in Istanbul, 
had reached criticality in the spring of the year, and was being fully used by a 
team of Turkish scientists and research workers in the various branches of nuclear 
science. It was hoped that, in the not far distant future, it would be possible 
to open the nuclear centre's facilities for purposes of international co-operation. 


38. The successful summer course on theoretical physics which had been held in 
Istanbul earlier in the year was an example of the kind of international 
co-operation he had in mind. The outstanding ability of the participants and 
the high level of the discussions that had taken place clearly illustrated the 
point made by the Pakistan delegate in the general debates in international 
scientific co-operation brains could compensate for an inferiority in terms of 
equipment and material resources. 
39. The international radioisotope course, sponsored by the Agency and the 
Turkish Atomic Energy Commission (TAEC), which was to open in Ankara in loss than 
a week's time woul'd be a further example. Ho took the opportunity to express 
his Government's gratitude to the Agency and to friendly countries which were 
contributing to that programme. 

GC(VI)/OR. 69 
page 10 


40. During the year various laboratories and rosearch institutions had really 
got down to work on nuclear physics, electronics, radiochemistry, radioisotope 
applications in agriculture and medicine, and so on. Turkey greatly valued the 
expert advice received from the Agency in connection with those programmes. 
41. With the help of the Agency and generous support from the United States and 
the United Kingdom, the TAEC had drawn up a long-term plan within the f'rnmcY/ork 
of Turkey's first five-year plan (at present under discussion) of applications 
of immediate importance for science and the national economy. 
42. Turkey followed the Agency's various activities with the greatest interest 
and hoped to see more of its energy and resources devoted to its true aim, 
namely the raising of standards of living for mankind as a whole and the 
furtherance of peace and prosperity^ achievement would depend to a great extent 
upon confining the Agency's activities to scientific and social objectives. 
Drobittered political discussions were out of place in the Agency and wore sterile, 
harmful and a source of danger for its future. 
43. Mr. CHOIT (Cambodia) said that Cambodia was particularly interested in 
seeing that the Agency should not be used as an instrument of the cold war. It 
had noble peaceful aims, but its prestige would be appreciably increased by 
proclaiming that all stocks of nuclear weapons should be destroyed and all 
nuclear tests discontinued. 
44. Cambodia was follov/ing with interest the progress being made in the application 
of nuclear energy, and had requested assistance from the Agency for studie 
on various agricultural subjects. 
45. The Agency had praiseworthy achievements to its credit, but must make a 
great effort to fulfil all- its obligations in the future. 'The proposed amendment 
to Article XIV of the Statute did not seem very realistic if. it meant 
ultimately that the developing countries would have to pay more in terms of 
convertible currency. The comments of the Indian delegation on that subject 
wore worthy of particular attention. 
46. The practical measures proposed by the Soviet Union and the other socialist 
countries for a long-term programme of assistance to the developing countries 
was most welcome. It was particularly gratifying to note the unity of views 
expressed by the Soviet Union and the United States with regard to technical 
assistance5 that was a very good sign. 

GC(VI)/0U.69 
page 11 


47. The Agency's mission'would never be entirely fulfilled until the rightful 
representatives of all the countries of the world had taken their places in 
the organization^ it was to he hoped that one day all nations which so desired 
would be represented. 
48. Mr. P3RBRA (Ceylon), commenting on the draft resolution concerning 
the amendment of Article XIV of the Statute-^, said that it dealt with two 
interconnected issues which had a significant bearing on the Agency's future 
activities, namely the amount of funds available for carrying on its work and 
the amount of technical assistance that could be provided, particularly to 
developing countries. Unless the Agency had the requisite funds. Member States 
would be unable to obtain the technical aid in nuclear energy matters so vital 
to their industrial growth. Ho wanted it to be clear that his comments should 
not be interpreted as opposition to a further increase in the Agency'3 technical 
assistance fundss in fact he was of the contrary opinion and believed that its 
work was being hampered for lack of resources. He therefore welcomed the 
5/ 


Director General's assurance that ho proposed to study the staff position—' , 
and felt sure that Dr. Eklund would seek to determine whether any retrenchment 
was possible and whether the existing staff was being used to the best advantage. 
Any savings which resulted should be used for technical assistance. Unless 
the Director General was able to resist unjustified staff increases, the 
technical assistance programme was likely to suffer. 


49. The United Kingdom proposal for a far-reaching amendment to Article XIV of 
the Statute affected a vital principle on which groat stress had boon laid by 
the authors of the Statute, namely that Member States, while required to pay 
regular contributions assessed according to a predetermined scale for the 
financing of administrative and similar expenditure, should be left full 
discretion in making voluntary contributions to the Operational Budget. The 
proposed amendment, the purpose of which was that all the Agency's activities 
should be financed from a single assessed budget, violated the principle of 
separate contributions, one fixed and the other voluntary, and would transform 
the latter into a compulsory levy. That would be contrary to the spirit of 
the Statute. 
4/ GC(VI)/208 and Add.1 and 2. 
5_/ See document GC(VI)/OR.63, para. 51. 



GC(VI)/OR069 
page 12 


50. He did not know whether it was also the intention to require that assessed 
contributions be paid in hard currencies or whether Member States would 'still. 
ho left the option of paying a proportion in local currency, as had been the 
practice in respect of their voluntary contributions. 'In the first eventuality, 
he believed that most of the developing countries would find the burden too 
heavy, since the majority of them, in Asia, Africa and Latin America, were 
elaborating long- and short-term development plans-that were-already straining 
their meagre resources and causing serious foreign exchange difficulties., 
51. With more and more countries applying for membership of the Agency ©very 
year, another consideration that must weigh was that such countries might be 
deterred if the voluntary principle embodied in the Statute were so gravely 
undermined. 
52. He had boon pleased to observe that during the past year the problem of 
using all offers of technical assistance had been more realistically tackled. 
In the past some voluntary contributions, made in local currencies and in kind, 
had not been taken up, so that developing countries were deprived of equipment 
and other forms of help, 
55. He expressed his Government's appreciation of the technical assistancewhich 
Ceylon had already received. It was confident that future requests 
would elicit an equally sympathetic response. 
54. What he had said on the subject of the proposed amendment to Article XIV in 
no way meant that his delegation failed to appreciate how great was the Agency's 
need of funds for its programme. He therefore suggested that- the General 
Conference should make another earnest appeal to all States for a serious effort 
to increase their voluntary contributions, but that it should do so without 
disturbing the existing system and inviting all the consequences of such a 
change. 
55- Undoubtedly the advanced countries, which had always shown themselves ready 
to help the developing ones m every possible way, would respond, and he was 
confident that one- the inadequacy of the operational budget had been brought 
more forcibly to the notice of developing countries, they too would not fail to 
respond. He knew that the results of such an appeal in the past had boon 
disappointing, but was sure that another would not fall on deaf ears. In any 
case it was worth making such an attempt rather than amend the Statute at 
present. 


GC(VI)/OB*69 
page 13 


56. The lj5-Power draft resolution—^ stated categorically that the financial 
provisions of the Statute needed revision to remedy the situation, and that the 
proposed amendment had the broad support of the Conference^ it also suggested 
that the question he referred hack to the Board for study. To some extent, it 
seemed to prejudge the issue unnecessarily. The Governors should he left fully 
free to examine the question objectively, and they would no doubt take the views 
expressed at the General Conference fully into account before reaching their 
considered verdict* He therefore suggested that the Board be invited to examine 
the vexed question of finance fully and to submit a report on the matter to the 
Conference at its seventh regular session. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(VI)/21l) 


57* The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to consider the application 
by Saudi Arabia for membership of the Agency. The Board had met that morning 
to consider the application and had submitted its recommendation in document 
GC(VI)/211. As would be seen from paragraph 2 of the recommendation, the 
Board had determined that the Government of Saudi Arabia was able and willing to 
act in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Hations Charter, 
and had accordingly submitted a draft resolution for consideration by the General 
Conference, recommending that the application be approved. 


58. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
59. The PRESIDENT said that Saudi Arabia would be admitted to membership of 
the Agency as soon as its instrument of acceptance had been deposited with the 
United States Government In accordance with Article XXI.C of the Statute. 
j 
60. Mr. TAYIM (Saudi Arabia) thanked the delegations for approving his 
Government's application for membership. He was grateful to the Director 
General and his staff for their advice and assistance, which had h'elpcd to 
expedite matters.' 

61. As the first representative of his country to attend a General Conference, 
he had been impressed by the efforts being made by Member States to enable the 
Agency to discharge its obligations and ensure that atomic energy would be used 
to the best advantage throughout the world. Some people had expressed surprise 
6/ 
GC(vi)/208 and Add.1 and 2. 



GC(VI)/OR„69 
page 14 


that Saudi Arabia, with its extensive reserves of petroleum, should he intoroste 
in an expensive now source of energy^ hut after all, some of the countries most 
advanced in the use of atomic energy were oil exporters. It was natural to try 
to move with the times and vitally important to use atomic energy for other 
purposes hesides generating power, 


,62. His country was interested in the applications of radioisotopes in 


agriculture and medicine and was already making use of them in the petroleum 
industry. Without burdening the Agency, it hoped to obtain help and advice^ 


the sooner they were given the sooner Saudi Arabia would be able to help' others 


in its turn. That had been the case with the oil industry, for most of Saudi 
Arabian production was used in other countries where it helped to raise the 


general level of prosperity. Indeed, the revenue obtained by West European 


Governments from taxes on Middle East oil was as great as the income Middle East 


Governments derived from their petroleum deposits. A similar development of 
nuclear science and nuclear power resources in Saudi Arabia would no doubt also 
be similarly rewarding. 


63. If his Government's instrument of acceptance were deposited before the end 
of the Conference, he hoped to be given an opportunity of expressing its views 
on some of the points raised during the 'discussions. 
The meeting rose at 5.1? p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VI)/OR.70 

13 December 1962 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference ENGLISH 


SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
onHeld at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
Monday, 24 September 1962, at 3.30 p.m. 
President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
10 General debate and report of the BoardGovernors for 1961-62 (continued) 
of 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Brazil 
Czechoslovakia 
Spain 
19 
11 
23 
24 
Congo (Leopoldville) 
The Agency's accounts for 1961 
Opening date of the seventh regular session 
Annual reports on the Agency's activities 
Election of members to the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee 
13 The Agency's Regular Budget for 1962 
14 The Agency' s programme and. budget for 1963 
15 Scale of Members' contributions for 1963 

* GC(VI)/207. 
E^ESISL^X'Jr.?.. 

1

1 


0 
0 


23 
31 

43 
45 
47 
51 


53 
56 
65 


-- 42 

._ 7 


- 22 
- 30 
- 33 
.- 44 
- 46 
- 50 
- 52' 
- 55 
- 64 
- 67 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(VI)/INF/56/Rev.2. 

62-5692 


GC(VI)/OR..70 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1961-62 
("GC(vi)/195, 204) (continued) 


1. Mr. da ROCHA (Brazil) said that as his Government was in favour of 
reducing the length of the general debate and the duration of the General 
Conference, he would confine his remarks to three points? the revision of the 
Statute, technical assistance and long-term planning. 
2. The Government of Brazil believed the Statute should he revised in such a 
way as to enable the Agency to operate more effectively. On the whole it was 
a sound instrument, drafted at a time when international co-operation in atomic 
energy had been practically non-existent. The actual functioning of the Agency, 
however, had inevitably shown up some flaws, e.g. the arrangements for financing, 
in which connection the United Kingdom delegation had proposed an amendment to 
Article XIV—'. The Braailian Government, while agreeing that the present 
system of contributions to the budget was not satisfactory, was not in favour of 
making an isolated amendment to Article XIV or of abolishing the system of 
voluntary contributions. As the proposed amendment to Article XIV would affect 
other articles and hence the Statute as a whole, it should be considered within 
the framework of a revision of the Statute as a whole. Nevertheless, he wished 
to acknowledge the merits of the United Kingdom proposal, which represented a 
courageous first step, opening the way to other proposals that would eventually 
remedy the situation. 
J. Technical assistance in the form of survey missions, technicians, fellowships 
and equipment had been a feature of the Agency's collaboration in the 
development of the Brazilian programme, and his Government had in turn honoured 
its commitments to the General Fund. As the most urgent and sometimes even 
dramatic need of the less-developed countries was to be able to apply radioisotopes 
in medicine, he welcomed the announcement that the Soviet Union would 
2/ 


help tc set up sir regional medical centres—' . 


4. Brazil considered that the Agency's technical assistance programme should 
be designed to satisfy the immediate needs of the less-developed countries 
while having a logical, scientific basis that would enable the Agency to develop 
its assistance to the maximum. That led naturally to the concept of a 
1/ GC(VI)/205. 
2/ See document GC(VT)/COM.1/67/Rev.1. 



GC(VI)/OR„70 
page 3^ 


long-term programme, which the Director General had proposed and the Board had 
endorsed^ , -to take the place of the improvization that had been inevitable 
during the early years. 


5* Brazil was ready to support an increase in the technical assistance and 
regulatory activities which, taken together, it regarded as the most important 
of all the Agency's functions. 


6. The technical data so objectively put forward Toy the delegate of Pakistan 
at the panel on nuclear power showed the extent to which nuclear power was 
already competitive in the less-developed areas. Perhaps the Secretariat could 
compile relative data on conventional and nuclear power costs in those areasj 
most of the information should he already available in statistical abstracts 
and questionnaires previously sent to Governments, The information would be 
of considerable interest in drawing up the long-term programme. 
7. Little could come of the hopes expressed and the suggestions put forward 
at the General Conference unless there was a relaxation in international tension. 
On that fundamental question Brazil was optimistic. It was inconceivable that 
any Government, without betraying the faith of its own people, could commit 
itself to such an enterprise as the disarmament conference now being held in 
Geneva unless its intentions were serious. Brazil was doing its utmost to 
ensure that the Governments represented in Geneva - of which it was one - would 
dispel the threat to world peace. That was the wish of mankind. Even those 
best acquainted with the difficulties of the international situation occasionally 
let their imaginations fly, and started to plan in concrete terms for a world 
permanently at peace. At .the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations 
(ECOSOC) in. 1961, for instance, delegates had engaged in a detailed discussion 
about the use of the resources which would be released ~by total disarmament, 
A_passing remark by a delegate that the disarmament conference had'yet to reach 
agreement on the first sentence of the first paragraph of the preamble to the 
text of the disarmament agreement had brought the meeting back to reality, 
Brazil nevertheless hoped that the plans-made for the future would not be made 
in vain. 


8. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) pointed out, that many changes had taken 
place since delegates to the Conference on the Statute had decided that the 
Agency should become the principal body for providing assistance in atomic 
3/ See document GC(vi)/203. 



GC(VI)/OR.70 
page 4 


energy to the developing countries. The Agency had failed to live up to what 
had been expected of it, and had become a stray link in the United Nations 
system, carrying out work of a routine nature only. The Secretariat effectively 
handled the tasks imposed by the Board and the Conference> which met regularly 
and agreed on programmes that were subsequently implemented. So, formally 
speaking, everything was in order, and nothing would seem to prejudice a 
positive appraisal of the Agency's activities in 1962, The Czechoslovak 
delegation, however, believed that any such conclusion could be reached only if 
the Conference adopted a rather low standard for its review - and to do so would 
neither help the Agency nor facilitate its future work. 


9. The use of nuclear power as a source of energy in the modern world was too 
serious an issue to justify a purely routine approach. The Agency had still 
done nothing to further the solution of the most urgent and most pressing contemporary 
problem, namely the achievement of general and complete disarmament, 
without which it could not hope to develop its activities to the full. General 
and complete disarmament would not only relieve mankind of the threat of nuclear 
war, but would also release for peaceful purposes the vast resources now employed 
on a world-wide scale for armaments. Atomic energy should no longer be a means 
of destruction but should become a source of power and help in removing poverty, 
illness and destitution, especially in the economically less-developed countries. 
Unfortunately, a majority of Member States had prevented the Agency from adhering 
unequivocally to a- programme of general and complete disarmament, and the 
necessity of supporting such a programme had not been emphasized in Agency 
documents. If the Agency was to fulfil the provisions of Article III.B.l of 
the Statute, which called upon it to "conduct its activities ..... in conformity 
with policies of the United Nations furthering the establishment of safeguarded 
world-wide disarmament", it would have to throw its authority behind the demand 
for general and complete disarmament. ' He wholeheartedly supported the Polish 
suggestion that the Board should prepare a survey of the consequences of disarmament 
for the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


10. Even in the absence of a disarmament agreement, which was being thwarted by 
the stubbornly aggressive attitude of the imperialist powers, the existence of 
the Agency was justified and certain activities could be fully developed. It 
was essential, however, to devote all efforts to such activities, and not to 
squander finances on undertakings that only served to divert the Agency from its 

GC'(VI)/0E.70 
page 5 


true objectives. The results of the Agency's 1961 activities were far from 


satisfactory. Although the Agency had been in existence for several years, 


no clear-cut policy'had yet emerged, and energy and money were dissipated on a 


variety of different activities. It must once again be emphasized that technical 


assistance to developing countries for nuclear energy purposes should be the 


Agency1 s principal function, to which all other activities should be subordinated. 


Thus only could the. Agency fulfil its mission and make rational use of the 


financial resources at its disposal. 


11. Funds that could be used for technical assistance were being diverte-d to 
such activities as the development of safeguards or research in the Laboratory. 
Large appropriations were still allocated to those activities, although experience 
had upheld the objections to safeguards raised by the socialist counttries. 
Likewise, the results of the work performed in the Laboratory fully 
justified the reservations expressed in the past by the Czechoslovak delegation^ 
the cost of operating it was considerable and., with the possible exception of 
the standardization of isotopes, the value of the results problematic. It was 
highly doubtful whether the Agency was justified in undertaking large-scale 
measurements of radioactive fallout from nuclear explosions when a special organ 
had been set up for that purpose by the United Nations, to say nothing of the 
fact that almost all Member States performed similar work in their national 
laboratories. 
12. The Agency had also devoted a great deal of attention in 1961 to regulatory 
activities, i.e. to the standardization of rules and regulations and the creation 
of uniform international conditions for collaboration in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Such work was very valuable, particularly for the future, and 
his Government had participated in a number of the Secretariat projects. Unfortunately, 
however, there appeared to be a tendency for the Agency to develop 
its regulatory activities to the detriment of more urgent tasks such as technical 
assistance. His delegation sometimes had the impression that the real needs of 
Hember States were ignored in favour of attempts by certain countries to elevate 
their own standards and norms to an international level, in order to secure 
world markets for their own products. 


13. Paragraph 2 of the introduction to the Board's annual report stated that 
technical assistance activities had decreased in 1961. His delegation strongly 
disapproved of the assertion that the main reason for that decrease had been the 

GC(VI)/OR.70 
page 6 


insufficient level of voluntary contributions. The main reason was in fact 
that the Agency had spent large amounts on secondary activities, that administrative 
expenditures were high, and that the Agency had not fully availed itself of 
offers made to the General Fund. Finally, as 'the document on technical assistance 
provided by the Agency in 1961 made clear—', even the funds assigned for technical 
assistance had not been fully utilized. 


14. In that connection, his delegation wished to .state emphatically that the 
proposed United Kingdom amendment to Article XIV of the Statute did not offer 
an acceptable solution3 it represented an attempt to make a fundamental change 
in the whole system of technical assistance and in the very concept of the 
Statute. Should the amendment be accepted, Czechoslovakia would not consider 
itself bound to pay its contribution to any budget produced under the amended 
version of the Statute. 
15. In assessing the Agency's technical assistance to the developing countries, 
the Czechoslovak delegation could not but comment on the continued provision of 
substantial assistance to Chiang-Kai-shek's puppets in Taiwan, who pretended to 
speak in the name of China, despite the fact that the. only representative of the 
Chinese people was the People'1 s Republic of China, 
16. All those abnormal features of the Agency's work resulted from the fact that 
the Agency, its main organs, and the Secretariat, were in the tow of the 
imperialist powers, whose first purpose was to assert their interests and aims. 
The majority of responsible posts within the Secretariat were held by citizens 
of the United States and its allies, whereas citizens of the socialist and 
neutral countries represented a minority only. A radical change was needed to 
adjust the staffing of the Secretariat to the present balance of forces in the 
world, ensuring that in both.the Secretariat and the Board the principle of 
representation according to the three existing groups in the world was strictly 
respected. 
17. The Conference was meeting at a time when certain circles in imperialist 
countries, blinded by anti-Communism, were striving to reverse the course of 
history by force and aggression. Armaments allocations in the budgets of the 
imperialist countries had reached astronomical figures. The North Atlantic Pact 
(NATO) countries had taken a further step towards realizing their plans for 
4/ GC(7l)/1KP/52. 



GC(VI)/ORo70 
page 7 


making NATO the fourth nuclear power, and West German revenge-seekers and 
militarists now took the future nuclear armament of the Bundeswehr for granted. 
The Agency should not let that'situation pass unnoticed^ it should do its 
utmost to help prevent the possibility of an outbreak of war. 


18. The Agency's programme also had positive aspects which could be regarded as 
contributing to international co-operation in the use of atomic energy. A 
number of fellowship-holders had been trained and many States had gained useful 
'experience. 
The Agency had been appointed Executive Agency for a relatively 
large Special Fund project'in Yugoslavia. The exchange of scientific information 
was also significant. Those activities illustrated possibilities which 
the Agency should continue to expand, and it was for their sake that his 
Government still favoured the Agency and would continue to support its fruitful 
actions. ' ' 


19. Czechoslovakia.had further developed its programmes in various branches of 
nuclear science and technology. Agency officials had been invited to the 
Czechoslovak power reactor development centre, where experimental work had been 
successfully performed on the pressure vessel for a 150 megawatt heavy-water 
power reactor. We?/ technical and technological problems in the construction 
and equipment of a nuclear power station had been solved, and the work was 
progressing. Mien the power station finally went into operation, Czechoslovakia 
would be able to offer its experience to countries which might be interested in 
similar projects. The Institute for Hue1ear Research and other bodies were now 
engaged on projects for improving a heavy-water, gas-coolod power reactor, which 
might become the model for further po?^er stations to produce sufficient electricity 
for the planned development of the national economy. Radiation sources 
and labelled compounds were being used in numerous industrial, agricultural, 
medical and research institutes, and a series of measuring instruments and 
auxiliary equipment had been manufactured. Czechoslovakia could now design, 
build and equip complex facilities for the nuclear power industry, and many young 
specialists had been trained. Those achievements were the result of co-operation 
between Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union. Czechoslovak specialists.had 
acquired knowledge at Soviet universities and research institutes, and in certain 
cases could now help in advancing nuclear technology in the Soviet Union itself. 
In addition, international co-operation had been successfully developed on a 



GC(VI)/OR.70 
page 8 


multilateral and bilateral basis with other socialist countries. Czechoslovakia 
was ready to co*-operate with other countries and-in particular, within its 
possibilities, to provide assistance to the developing areas of the world. 


20. In the past his Government had offered voluntary contributions that had 
not been seriously utilized. It had therefore decided at the Conference in 
1961 to offer equipment which could serve an immediate purpose.. A cobalt-60 
unit had been installed,at the University of Alexandria where it was being used 
not only to combat disease but to train new doctors. His delegation and those 
of other socialist countries had co-sponsored the draft resolution recently 
5/ t 
submitted by the Soviet Union—' , and, under it, intended to provide, through 
the Agency, one complete therapeutic irradiation unit, consisting of a powerful 
cobalt and caesium source, auxiliary and manipulating equipment, and one 
oncological unit with twenty-four beds. It was prepared to train operating 
staff for the unit and to draw up the necessary plans for installing it. His 
Government had also decided to offer each year to candidates from the developing 
countries 15 scholarships at the Faculty of Technical and Nuclear Physics, 15 
scholarships at the Intermediate School of Nuclear Technology and 5 scholarships 
at national research institutions. 


21. A very successful Agency symposium on the biological effects of ionizing 
radiation at the molecular level had been held in Czechoslovakia in 1962, and 
the Czechoslovak .Academy of Science had organized a summer school on theoretical 
physics under Agency sponsorship. Both had made a considerable contribution 
to co-operation and mutual understanding between scientists of many countries. 
His Government was ready to offer the Agency facilities for organizing a further 
symposium in Czechoslovakia in 1965. 
22. Czechoslovakia was convinced that the Agency's problems must and could be 
solved, and that it could become an outstanding example of the possibilities 
which peaceful co-existence offered to the world. His Government would do its 
best to help the Agency to fulfil that noble promise. 
25. Mr. de ERICE (Spain) said that his Government was convinced that only 
close and loyal co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy between all 
countries could achieve the results that all peoples of the world desired. At 
the present time, when the natural resources of Africa, America and Asia were 
£/ GC(VI)/COM.1/67/R ev.l. 



GC(VI)/OR„70 
page 9 


awaiting more rational exploitation, the use of atomic energy was fundamental 
to the betterment of millions of men. In order to achieve adequate food 
production, greater well-being and higher living standards, co-operation between 
all Governments was essential. Spain would do its utmost for the development 
of international collaboration in the interests of all the developing countries. 


24. He wished to inform the General Conference of Spain's achievements in 
research and international collaboration in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
since the l$)6l session. Without external assistance, Spanish scientists had' 
constructed two Argonaut reactors at the experimental centre near Madrid; 
tfooy were being used exclusively for research purposes by students of the 
engineering schools of Barcelona and Bilbao. Work had proceeded on a heavywater 
moderated reactor with organic coolant, which would soon be completed. 
Prospecting had revealed that Spain had sufficient uranium to provide a surplus 
that could be used to meet the needs of other countries^ it could also supply 
services for the analysis of ores and the analytic testing of nuclear materials, 
and precise information about analytic techniques for- ore prospecting and 
quality control. Training could be provided for a wide programme of radioisotope 
applications in medicine, industry and research, and in physical and 
chemical analytic techniques. 
25. In spite of its broad atomic energy programme, Spain had received relatively 
little technical assistance - only $1200, a very much smaller figure than it 
offered to the Agency for its technical assistance programmes. 
26. The fundamental purpose of the Agency was to bring the atomically-advanced 
countries and the less advanced countries together, with a view to making 
experience and resources available to the developing areas, training staff for 
them, and providing equipment. Fellowships must be made available to students 
from all countries, without discrimination. By making their greater knowledge 
available, the more advanced countries would further international collaboration 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and ultimately ensure that better use was 
made of natural resources. 
2'7. He congratulated the Director General on his leadership of the Agency 
during the preceding year. -\ 


28. Spain was in favour of the amendment to the Statute increasing the Board's 
membership to twenty-five, to inclu.' two new representatives from one of the 
developing areas.—* It might even be worth considering the I5C0S0C recommendation 
6/ CC(v)/RES/92o 


GC(VI)/OR„70 
page 10 


that the executive bodios of the specialized agencies should comprise approximately 
ono-third of the total membership. The question of wider representation should 
be considered by the Boards Moreover, the General Conference should have xvider 
powers so that States not represented on the Board could not only make their 
views public there but also influence the Agency's development„ Spain was 
ready to join with other delegations in submitting a proposal to that end. 


29- Proposals had been made with a view to introducing biennial programming 
within the framework of annual budgets,—^ Although that would create difficulties 
for countries like his own which had currency problems, he would support the 
proposal, since the advantages far outweighed the disadvantages? to relieve the 
difficulties of countries whose currencies were not convertible, contributions 
might be made acceptable partly in convertible and partly in non-convortiblo 
currencies. Under the biennial system, the Director General would have much 
more flexibility in planning, and the developing countries could submit more 
specific and valuable projects^ there might also be some reduction in the rate 
of increase of the Regular Budget. 


JO, In connection with the amendment to the Rules of Procedure proposed by 
Iraq—', he suggested thai; the'Director General and the Board study the possibility 
of bringing the Conference Rules of Procedure into line with those of 
the General Assembly of the United Nations. 


31. Mr. MJSEIETE (C ongo - Leopoldville) said his Government welcomed the 
Agency's activities and, in particular, its constant interest xn the developing 
'countries. 
The Congo, which was the first country in Africa to possess an 
atomic reactor, felt it was especially entitled, because cf its past record and 
present contribution, to take part in the Agency's work on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Courses on the use of radioisotopes in medicine and agriculture 
had been held in Leopoldville in i960, and further courses for technicians 
would be held in 1963. 


32, He was glad so many delegations attached great importance to the development 
of regional centre-s and was very interested in the Soviet proposal which emphasized 
the need for, such centres in developing countries- It would be preferable 
and loss costly, however, if the Agency were first to make full use of the 
existing centres. Thus it was regrettable that the Agency had not yet taken 


7/ GC(VI)/INF/55. 
8/ .GC(VI)/202. 



GC(VI)/OR,70 
page 11 


a more positive approach to his Government's offer, made in October 1961, to 
place at its disposal the reactor and its ancillary facilities in Leopoldvillo 
which, according to Agency experts, were excellent. The services of an 


assistant radiochemist had been requested and, undoubtedly, the provision of 


additional staff would considerably enhance the scientific and educational value 


of the work being done. The fact that voluntary contributions fell short of 


the target fixed was a further reason why the limited funds available should be 
used to the best advantage and the Agency's assistance devoted primarily to 


improving standards in the existing centres. In providing assistance, it 


should be borne in mind that the developing countries could play a very active 
part in the practical application of atomic energy. 


55. For the reasons stated, it was desirable that the Congo should be moro 
actively associated with the Agency's work and his Government had, accordingly, 
instructed him to request the General Conference to give favourable consideration 
to its candidature for a seat on the Board. If elected, the Congo 
would be In a better position than most developing countries to make a valuable 
contribution to the Agency's work in Central Africa. 
54. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said the co-operative spirit which had prevailed 
during the general debate was stimulating and encouraging and the Secretariat 
would make every effort to justify the confidence placed in it by delegations. 
35- Referring to the regret expressed by a number of delegates that the Agency 
did not carry out its work more rapidly, ho pointed out that much of the Agency's 
work required prior agreements, often involving lengthy negotiations. He would 
carefully study the suggestions made for expediting the Agency's working procedures. 
The idea of having a relatively small and highly qualified scientific 
and technical staff, such as could help to expand the Agency's activities and 
bring about a further improvement in their quality, appealed to him very much. 


36. He welcomed the interest shown in long-term planning and hoped it would be 
reflected in a corresponding willingness on the part of Governments to participate 
in the work by making the necessary experts available. He believed there was 
unanimous agreement that the long-term plan should take full account of the plans 
for the United Nations Development Decade, and that it should be sufficiently 
flexible to enable it to be adapted to the national development programmes of 
countries that were becoming industrialized. 

GC(VI)/OR.70 
page 12 


37. He noted both the Importance attached to the Agency's role with regard to 
nuclear power and the criticism simultaneously levelled .at its dearth of now 
ideas. He hoped those comments would be reflected in the long-term plan that 
was to be submitted to the Board and the General Conference in 1963. He was 
keenly interested in the suggestion that the work of power experts in the various 
United Nations organizations arid the World Power Conference should be co-ordinated 
to the maximum extent possible. 
38. He was impressed by the importance many delegates attached to regulatory 
activities, particularly those relating to transport', radiation protection, the 
disposal of radioactive waste and the use of radioisotopes for specific purposes. 
39. Every country seemed to lack experts in radiation protection. He therefore 
welcomed the proposal that arrangements be made to ensure more widespread 
training of health physicists. 
40. In order to plan for 1964, the Agency needed to know, as soon as possible, 
whether there would be a third Geneva-typo conference. That would be decided 
by the General Assembly, but the Member States would have to take the initiative. 
A third conference would involve the Agency in a lot of additional work. If 
no conference was held in. 1964, the Agency -would probably have to- hold smaller 
conferences on similar topics or, as had been suggested, a Geneva-typo conference 
on a smaller scale. 
41. The interest shown in regional centres was-most encouraging and the 
suggestion that, in planning the establishment of such 'centres, Africa should. . 
servo as an experimental area, was worthy of serious study. Due consideration 
would, of course, have to be given to the possibility of having regional centres 
in other-areas as. well. 
42. He was deeply gratified that delegations had reached a'wide measure of 
agreement and shared a common approach with regard to the Agency's scientific 
and technical objectives. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 196I (GC(VI)/215) 


43. Mr. HAM (Indonesia), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committoe., presented the Committee's report on the Agency's accounts for 1961 
(GC(VI)/215). 
44. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VI)/215, paragraph 3? was 
adopted unanimously. 

GC(VI)/OR„70 
page 13 


OPENING DATE OF THE SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 


45. The PRESIDENT said that fho General Committee had"decided to recommend 
the Conference to set Tuesday. 24 September 1963? as the opening date for the 
seventh regular Session. 
46. The recommendation of the General Committee'was""accepted. 
ANNUAL REPORTS ON THE AGENCY'S ACTIVITIES (GC(VI)/197, 198) 


47. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the Board's recommendation concerning 
the Agency's annual reports to the General Assembly of the United Nations for 
1961-62 (GC(VT)/197) and to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations 
(ECOSOC) (GC(VI)/198). He invited the Conference to consider.., first, the draft 
resolution appearing in the first recommendation. 
48. The draft resolution contained in document GC(vl)/i97 was adopted 
unanimously. 
49. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference" to consider the draft resolution 
appearing in the second recommendation. 
50o The draft resolution contained In document GC (VI)/198 was adopted 
unanimously, 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS. TO. THE. AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


51. The PRESIDENT" explained that since the-last regular session onomember 
of the Staff Pension Committee had left Vienna and another had said he would he 
unable to continue tc serve. Therefore, under the agreement with the United 
Nations for the Agency's participation in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension 
9/ ' --.Fund—' 
, the General Conforenue would have to elect two membe'rs to the Pension 
Committee, Mr. Franco-Netto of Brazil and Mr. Hadi of Indonesia had been 
proposed for election. 


52. Mr. Franco-Net to "("Brazil)' and Mr-. Hadi- •(.Indonesia) were. unanimously elected 
members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee,• ' _ 
THE AGENCY'S REGULAR BUDGET FOR 1962 (GC(VI)/209) 


53- Mr. KAKAR (Afghanistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's report on a proposed supplementary 
budgetary appropriation for 1962 (GC(vl)/209). 


9/ INFCIRC/1l, part III, 


GC(VI)/OR.70 
page 14 


54. Mr. PETRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) moved that a vote be taken on the 
draft resolution in that report, 
55. There were 41 votes in favour and 7 against, with 1 abstention. The draft 
resolution contained in document GC(VI)/209 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 1963 (GC(VI)/214) 


56. Mr. KAKAR (Afghanistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's first report on the Agency's 
Programme and Budget for 1963 (GC(VI)/214). 
57. The PRESIDENT, in reply to a point raised by Mr. FUKSA (Czechoslovakia), 
said it had been his intention to deal with the draft resolutions annexed to the 
report one by one. Ho invited the Conference to vote on the draft resolution 
contained in Annex Is . Regular Budget Appropriations for 19&3* 
58. There were 41 votes in favour and 7 against. The draft resolution 
contained 
in document GC(VI)/214, Annex I, was adopted, having obtained the 
10/ 


required two-thirds majority.— 


59. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
Annex II? Operational Budget Allocations for 1963. 
60. There wore 40 votes in favour and none against, with 9 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted, having obtained the required two-thirds majority. 
61. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
Annex Ills Use of the Y/orking Capital Fund in 1963. 
62. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
63. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
Annex IVs Biennial Programming within the Framework of Annual Budgets. 
64. There were 42 votes in favour and 7 against, with 2 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1963 (GC(VI)/212) 


65. Mr. KAKAR (Afghanistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's report on the Scale of Members' 
Contributions for 1963 (GC(VI)/212). 
10/ See Rule 69(a) of the Rules of Procedure. 



GC(VI)/OR„70• 
page 15 


66. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the draft resolution recommended 
for adoption by the General Conference was based on the Agency's membership 
as at 31 August 1962. 
67•> There were 45 votes in favour and 6 against. The draft resolution 
contained in document GC(VI)/212 was adopted. 


The meeting rose at 5-30 p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency GC(vI)/OR.71 
14 December 1962 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference ENGLISH 


SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 
OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 26 September 1962, at 10.55 a.m. 
President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 
CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda * 
20 The Agency's relations with intergovernmentalorganizations 
21 Amendment of Article XIV of the Statute5 Credentials of delegates to the sixth regular 
session 
(h) Report of the Jredcntials Committee22 Voluntary contributions to the General Fundfor, 1963 
16 Nuclear power14 The Agency's programme and budget for 1963(continued) 
17 Long-term planning18 An international centre for theoretical physics 
Paragraph 
1-2 
5 - 4 
5 - 67 
68 - 72 
73 - 75 
76 - 78 
79 - 80 
8l - 82 
* GC(vI)/207 
The composition of delegationsdocument GC(VI)/INF/56/Rev.2. 
attending the session is given in 
62-5696 


GC(VI)/OH.71 
page 2 


THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS' (GC(VI)/217) 


1. Mr. HAPI (Indonesia), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on the Agency's Relations with 
Intergovernmental Organizations (GC(VI)/217). 
2. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VI)/217, paragraph ?, was 
adopted unanimously. 
AMENDMENT OF ARTICLE XIV OF THE STATUTE (GC(VI)/22l) 


3. Mr. HADI (Indonesia), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on amendment of Article XIV of the 
Statute (GC(VI)/221). 
4. Thoi draft resolution contained in document GC(VI)/221, paragraph 5* was 
adopted unanimously. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE SIXTH REGULAR SESSION, 


(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(VI)/2l8) 
5. Mr. McKNIGHT (Australia), Chairman of the Credentials Committee, 
presented the Committee's report (GC(vi)/2l8). The Committee's only meeting 
had been held on 24 September 1962. Its report was self-explanatory and 
called for no commentary. 
6. Mr. JANOSSY (Hungary), referring to the report, noted that the 
United States delegation had, as in past years, introduced two motions, one of 
them concerning the representation of China and the other the credentials of 
the delegate of Hungary. He deeply regretted its attitude, which showed once 
more that the Government of the United States was unwilling to abandon its 
cold-war policy. 
7. With regard to the representation of China, the Hungarian delegation had 
already emphasized the absurdity of refusing to admit to membership in the 
Agency a country as large as the whole of Europe, with a population of nearly 
700 millions. The whole world-knew that there was only one China - the People's 
Republic of China, whose legitimate Government was alone entitled to represent 
the Chinese people in international organisations. 

GC(VI)/OR.71 
page 3 


 The People's Republic of China was a powerful State and was making a 
valuable contribution to scientific progress, It was inadmissible that its 
people should be represented by a puppet regime. Some time previously he had 
had the opportunity to go to China, where he had visited institutes and 
universities, talked with a great many people and had seen for himself the 
enormous progress that had been made* 


9. It was paradoxical that the Credentials Committee should recommend the 
General Conference to take no action on any proposal to change the representation 
of China, and to find that the credentials of the delegates of the Chiang Kai-shek 
clique conformed with the provisions of the Eules of Procedurec The Hungarian 
Government could recognize no person as being representative of China other than 
the true representatives of the People's Republic of China, accredited by the 
Central People's Government of the People's Republic! he would therefore vote 
against Draft Resolution I. 
10. The delegate of the United States had introduced a motion inviting the 
Credentials Committee to take no decision regarding the credentials of the 
Hungarian delegation, He saw no reason to question the validity of the 
credentials submitted by the Government of the People's Republic of Hungary as 
they were in full conformity with the provisions of the Rules of Procedure. 
He recalled that at the fifth session of the General Conference Hungary had been 
elected to membership of the Board-^and that he himself had been elected Vice-
Chairman' of the Board* The Hungarian delegation would also vote against 
Draft Resolution II. 
11. Mr. .EI.SLYA10V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that bhe 
attitude of the Soviet Union with regard to the right of the People's Republic 
of China to be represented in the Agency was well known. The Soviet Union 
delegation, now as always, considered it a flagrant injustice that the People's 
Republic of China should continue to be- deprived of its rights, and protested 
strongly against that inadmissible situation. 
12. His delegation vehemently protested against the draft resolution regarding 
the representation of China in the Agency which had been submitted by the United 
States delegation and approved ~bj the Credentials Committee. 
l/ GC(V)/DEC/9. 



GC(VI)/OH.71 
pege 4 


15. He invited delegates to show their common sense§ in the interests of 
international co-operation, of the Agency and- of their own countries, they 
should reject the draft resolution.and support the Soviet proposal that the 
People's Republic of China be admitted to the Agency, 
14. Regarding the credentials of the Hungarian delegation, he strongly protested 
against the practice established in the Agency of casting doubt on the 
credentials issued to the Hungarian delegation by the legal government of that 
Republic. 
15. That was a typical example of cold war practices? forcing the General 
Conference to examine the question merely helped to create an abnormal atmosphere 
at its meetings.' 
16. Everybody knew, of course, that there were no grounds whatsoever for 
doubting the validity of the Hungarian delegation's credentials. Yet the 
United States and a few other countries refused to accept the facts of contemporary 
life. They insisted on clinging to outdated remnants of the famous 
Hungarian question, which they themselves had engendered. Whilst maintaining 
diplomatic relations with the Government' of the Hungarian People's Republic, 
they persisted in contesting the credentials issued by that Government to its 
delegation - an attitude deserving of outright censure. 
17. Such behaviour was absurd and stupid because, by electing the Hungarian 
People's Republic to the Board, the Agency had fairly clearly and definitely 
expressed its attitude to that Republic. Moreover, the Board had elected the 
representative of the Hungarian People's Republic to the office of Vice-Chairman. 
18. The Soviet delegation appealed to the General Conference to end the 
provocation directed against the Hungarian People's Republic, a full Member of 
the Agency, and to resist pressure from the countries that were endeavouring to 
cast doubt on the legitimacy of the Hungarian delegation's credentials. In so 
doing, the Conference would facilitate examination of the really important 
problems the Agency had to face. 
19. Mr. KESHO (Albania) recalled that the Agency had been set up to promote 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and that it had the worthy 
task of promoting the application ef atomic energy in all countries with a view 
to contributing to progress and peace throughout the world. Unfortunately, the 

GC(VI)/ORo71 
page 5 


report of the Credentials Committee overlooked those aims. Instead of throwing 
the Agency's doors wide open to all countries wishing to participate in its work, 
the Committee had applied discriminatory, political considerations, redolent of 
the cold ware The seat which rightfully belonged to the People's Republic of 
China was occupied by a representative of the puppet Government constituted by 
the Chiang Kai-shek clique which represented nobody


20. Was that situation not a flagrant violation of the elementary principles 
of international law and was it not clearly in conflict with the noble aims of 
the Agency? Was it admissible to exclude the Government of the People!s 
Republic of China, which represented 65O million people and could make a 
considerable contribution to the Agency's work? 
21. The only lawful government, which enjoyed the full and complete confidence 
of the whole country - with the exception of the island of Taiwan, occupied by 
the armed forces of the United States of America - was that of the People's 
Republic of China, which was therefore legally qualified to represent the 
Chinese people in the Agency. 
22. For the reasons he had explained, the Albanian delegation would vote 
against the report of the Credentials Committee. It protested against the 
Committee's decision, and urged that the Taiwan clique be excluded from the 
Agency and that the true representatives of the Chinese people be admitted to 
it immediately. The question could have been settled long ago% as many 
delegations had stressed, the reasons which prevented an equitable settlement 
being found for it must be sought in the hostile attitude of the United States 
to the People's Republic of China. By machinations and slander, by the pressure 
it exerted on the Governments of other countries, and finally, thanks to the 
mechanical majority at its disposal, the United States had succeeded in preventing 
the great Chinese people from enjoying the rights which no one could 
deny were theirs. 
25. The Albanian delegation was deeply indignant at that injustice to the 
People's Republic of China, which had always pursued a policy of peace. So long 
as the question had not been settled as the circumstances required, it would not 
cease to protest against the hostile attitude adopted by the United States and 
other ¥\festern countries towards the People's Republic of China. The Albanian 
delegation also considered that the validity of the Hungarian delegate's 
credentials could not be challenged. 

GC(VI)/OR.71 
page 6 


24. . Mr. CHBNG (China) protested against the remarks made by the delegates 
of Communist countries regarding the credentials of his delegation. The 
Government of the Republic of China, which he had the honour to represent, was 
the only legally constituted government of China. It spoke for the Chinese 
people in the United Nations, in the specialized agencies and in all the 
intergovernmental organizations.. 
25o The Communist regime on the Chinese mainland was a Soviet creation imposed 
by force. It maintained its precarious hold by oppression of the Chinese 
people and by aggression against its neighbours* It was a thoroughly dis


credited regime* That was shown by the fact that in May 1962 the world had 
witnessed a mass flight of Chinese people into the adjacent territories of 
Hong Kong and Macao - the greatest exodus seen since the flight of the Hungarian 
people after the rising of 1956. 


26<. The well-known patience of the Chinese people was not limitless, and a day 
would come when the Chinese mainland would regain its freedom. 


27. The Credentials Committee had rightly found that the credentials of the 
delegation of the Republic of China were in conformity with the Rules of 
Procedure. The delegation of the Republic of China would accordingly'vote in 
favour of the Committee's report. 
28. Mr. CARGO (United States of America) said his delegation would vote 
in favour of the two resolutions which, the Credentials Committee had recommended 
the Conference to adopt. He would not reply to the allegations of certain 
delegates and had no intention of engaging in a debate on a political question. 
The views of his delegation on the representation of China and the credentials 
of the Hungarian delegation had been made clear in the political organs of the 
United Nations and in other appropriate forums, and were well known to all 
delegates. 
29. The draft resolution on the representation of China conformed with the 
attitude adopted ^y the General Conference at previous sessions and with the 
decisions taken on the matter by the other organizations of the United Nations 
family. The United Nations General Assembly had debated the issue of the 
representation of China extensively at its sixteenth session^ at the conclusion 
of its debate, it had rejected proposals for a change in the representation of 
China, and had approved the credentials of the representatives of the Government 
of the Republic of China as being in conformity with the Assembly's Rules of 
Procedure. 

GC(VI)/ORo7l 
page 7 


30. The Agency and the specialized agencies had always recognized that 
political issues, including those involving representation of Member States 
in organizations within the United Nations family, were primarily the concern 
of the United Nations, and they had consistently followed the policy adopted 
by the General Assembly in such matters31. 
The action taken by the Credentials Committee in regard to the credentials 
of the Hungarian delegation also conformed to the practice followed by the 
United Nations General Assembly for the last six years. 
32. The United States delegation appealed to all delegates to make a real 
effort to avoid debates on controversial matters which were not the business 
of the Agency, but came within the jurisdiction of the political organs of 
the United Nations. The General Conference should concern itself primarily 
with ways and means of promoting the important work for which the Agency was 
responsible within the United Nations family. 
33. Mr. DIMITRIU (Romania) observed that every year his delegation had 
to speak in defence of the rights of the People's Republic of China. He 
would not adduce any new argument in defence of a thesis which clearly' needed 
no defence? the facts were there, and those who refused to see them showed a 
complete lack of political sense. The Romanian delegation would vote against 
the first draft resolution which the Credentials Committee had recommended for 
adoption. 
34. He also expressed his disagreement with the second drafi; resolution submitted 
by the Committee, which was calculated to encourage discrimination 
against the People's Republic of Hungary. 
35. Mr. SHIN (Korea) deplored the political character of the discussion. 
All delegates were well aware that the General Conference should confine itself 
to questions relating to the peaceful uses of atomic energy and should not 
enter into discussions that were within the province of the United Nations 
General Assembly. The Korean delegation would vote in favour of the two draft 
resolutions recommended by the Credentials Committee. 
36. Mr. CHAVDZ (si Salvador) reminded the Conference of the United Nations 
General Assembly's recommendation of 14 December 1950 a^d its decision of 
15 December 1961 concerning the representation of China. He saw no need for 
a change in policy in the matter, and would vote in favour of the Credentials 
Committee's report. 

GC(VI)/0E„71 
page 8 


37. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) protested 
vigorously on behalf of his delegation against the slanders uttered 'by a. 
henchman of Chiang Kai-shek against the Soviet Union, which reminded him of 
the proverbs "The dogs hark, the caravan passes on". 
38, It was extremely regrettable that the General Conference should again be 
required to examine the credentials of the self-styled representatives of China. 
What was even worse was that an attempt was .being made to impose on the 
General Conference a decision to recognize those credentials. 


39. No one with any regard for the facts could deny that the representatives 
of China could only be those appointed by the Central Government of the 
People's Republic of China. Only the delegates of that Government could and 
should represent the great Chinese people at the international level, and 
without that people no important problem relating to peace and international 
co-operation could be solved. . •40. 
The representatives of the United States, who were alv/ays asking the 
Agency to avoid politics and to concern itself exclusively with scientific and 
technical questions, should remember that the quest.ipn before the General \ 
Conference was of a purely political character. The United Nations alone was 
competent to deal with.such questions and the United States representatives 
should not raise them in the Agency. 
41. The Ukrainian delegation could not recognize the credentials of the 
representatives of Chiang Kai-shek, If the matter was not s.ettled as it should 
be in an international organization concerned only with scientific and technical 
problems, his delegation would vote against the report as a whole. 
42. Furthermore, the Ukrainian delegation strongly protested against the attempt 
to question the validity of the Hungarian delegate's credentials. That attempt 
'was made possible by the prejudice to v/hich Hungary was subject solely because 
it belonged to a different social and economic syst.em. What scientific or 
technical considerations could be put forward to justify such an attitude?• He 
was not aware of any. It seemed all the more futile to raise the.question 
because at the fifth session of the General Conference Hungary had been elected 
to the Board, of which its representative was one of the Vice-Chairmen and hence 
one of those' who directed the Agency. 



GC(VI)/0B.71 
page 9 


43. Mr. CHQN (Cambodia) said he wished to appeal to the sense of realism 
of all delegates. He urged them to reflect on the serious problem' raised by 
the representation of China. In spite of the difference in regime between 
Cambodia and China, the two countries none the less maintained diplomatic 
relations- A nation of 650 million people could not be-ignored. Consequently, 
the Cambodian delegation could not vote in favour of the first draft resolution 
recommended by the Credentials Committee. 
44„ Mr. PETRZEIZA (C zechoslovakia) said he had already stated that his 
Government recognized only the Government of the People's Republic of China* 
It was inadmissible that that Government should not be represented, The discrimination 
practised against the People's Republic of China at the instigation 
of the Western Powers was detrimental to the cause of international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Czechoslovak delegation 
could not accept the presence at the General Conference of Chinese representatives 
who in no way represented the great Chinese nation. 


45. ^ov could Czechoslovakia approve of the way the Credentials Committee's 
report dealt with Hungary. That was a cold war manoeuvre which could hardly 
facilitate international co-operation. It should be emphasized that the 
Hungarian Government maintained diplomatic relations with most of the 
Governments represented in the Agency, including that of the United States. 
46. He requested a roll-call'vote on Draft Resolution I submitted by the 
Credentials Committee. 
47. Mr. VUJOYIC (Yugoslavia) said that his Government had always regarded 
the Government of the People's Republic of China as the only legitimate representative 
of the Chinese people. Only that Government was entitled to 
accredit representatives to international organizations. The same obviously 
applied to the Hungarian Government. 
48. Mr, HASJAKOV (Bui garia) said that his Government maintained diplomatic 
relations with the Government of'the People's Republic of China only. It did 
not recognize as a legitimate representative of the Chinese people the clique 
ensconced, under the auspices of the United States, in Taiwan, a Chinese island 
which had been turned into a military base for aggression agains't the People's 
Republic of China. Each year the same manoeuvres were repeated in the Agency 
•for the sole purpose of preventing the People's Republic of China from occupying 

GC(VI)/ORo71 
page 10 


the place to which it had a right. It was high time to put an end to such 


discrimination and to allow the People's Republic of China to unite its efforts 
with those of the other Member States of the Agency. 


49. As to the Hungarian People's Republic,' it could not be denied that there 
was only one Government of that Member State and no one could challenge its . 
right to accredit delegates to the sessions of the General Conference. 
50. For those reasons the' Bulgarian delegation would vote against the report 
of the Credentials Committee. 
51. Mr. USMAHI (Pakistan) recalled that his Government had recognized the 
Government of the People's Republic of China as the only legitimate Government 
of that country. He' would accordingly vote against Draft Resolution I. With 
that reservation, he approved the report submitted by the Credentials Committee. 
52. Mr. SBVCHENKO (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that the 
question of the participation of the People's Republic of China in the Agency's 
activities should be settled without delay. The Government of the People's 
Republic of China had the full and complete confidence of 650 million Chinese 
and it was therefore the only legitimate Government of China. 
53. According to the general principles of international lav/, the Chiang 
Kai-shek clique could not be considered as the Government of China and the 
credentials which it submitted could not, therefore, be regarded as valid. 
54. The Government of the People's Republic of China was recognized by many 
countries. More than forty Governments maintained diplomatic relations with 
it, a fact which clearly showed that its role in international relations would 
grow increasingly important. 
55. The People's Republic of China had now made considerable economic, 
political and social progress. Its achievements in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and the vast resources at its disposal were well known. Its 
participation in the Agency's activities would be extremely valuable to the 
Agency, whose potentialities would be substantially increased thereby. 
56, He emphasized once more that only a delegate of the People's Republic of 


China was qualified- to represent China in the Agency. 


57. With regard to the recommendation to the take no decision regarding the 
credentials of the Hungarian delegate, he thought that a problem had been . 

GC(VI)/OR.7I 
page 11 


artificially created by the United States for political reasons - an attitude 
that favoured the cold war policy pursued by the Western Powers. The United 
States proposal concerning'Hungary., a country with which it maintained diplomatic 
relations, was an absurdity, because the credentials of the Hungarian delegate 
had been issued by the only government of that country. 


58. At the fifth session, Hungary had been elected to the Board, of which its 
representative was Vice-President. 
59. The Byelorussian delegation therefore strongly protested against the section 
of the report which recommended that no decision be taken regarding the credentials 
of the Hungarian delegation, 
60. ' Mr. MELLBR-CONRAD (Poland)" protested against the representation at 
the sixth session of a clique which called itself the. ."Government of China"* 
Only the Government of the People's Republic ,of China could legitimately 
represent that country and occupy the seat to which, it was entitled. V/ith 
regard to Hungary, the discrimination practised against' that country was unjust 
and unwarranted. The Polish delegation would accordin'gly vote against the 
report of the Credentials Committee. 
61. The PRESIDENT said he would put Draft Resolution I to the vote? in 
accordance with the request of the delegate of Czechoslovakia, the vote would 
be taken'by roll-call. 
62. A roll-call vote was taken. 
Senegal, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
The result of the vote'was as follows? 


In favours Senegal, South. Africa,- Spain, Thailand, Turkey, 
United Kingdom of. Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 
United States of America, Venezuela, Viet-Ham, 


' Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, 
France, Germany (Federal Republic of), Greece, 
Guatemala, Holy See, Iceland, Iran, Italy, Japan, 
Korea (Republic of), Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, Portugal. 



00(VI)/OR.71 
page 12 


Againsti Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Yugoslavia,.Afghanistan, 
Albania, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Cambodia, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, 
Denmark, Finland, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, 
Iraq, Norway, Pakistan, Foland, <Romania. 

Abstainings Sudan, Switzerland, Tunisia, United Arab Republic., 
Ceylon, Congo (Leopoldville), Israel, Lebanon, 
Morocco. 


63o There were 37 votes in favour and 22 against, with 9 abstentions-


Draft Resolution I was adopted. 


64. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) stated that his delegation had voted 
in favour of Draft Resolution I solely because it believed /that the credentials 
in question were in order. The vote did hot necessarily imply recognition 
of the authorities who had issued those credentials. 
65. Mr. da ROCHA (Brazil) said that his delegation had voted in favour of 
Draft Resolution I because it considered that it was not for the General 
Conference to open a discussion on the representation of Chinaf that vra,s a 
responsibility of the United Nations General Assembly. No action should be 
taken until the General Assembly had taken a decision on the matter. 
66. The PRESIDENT put to the vote Draft Resolution II, regarding approval 
of the report of the Credentials Committee. 
67o There were 41 votes in favour and 14 againstt with 10 abstentions. 


Draft Resolution II was adopted. 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1963 (GC(VI)/22o) 


68. The PRESIDENT said that the delegate of Portugal had asked him to 
announce that the Portuguese Government pledged a voluntary contribution for 
1963 equal to that for 1962, namely $3600-. He then called upon the Rapporteur 
of the Committee for Pledges of Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund to 
present the Committee's report (GC(VI)/220). 

GC(VI)/ORo71 
page 13 


69. Mr. KtJRKCUOGLU (Turkey), Rapporteur of, the Committee for Pledges of 
Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund, informed the General Conference 
that the total contributions pledged by 31 Governments amounted to $1 280 370, 
to which had to he added the $3600 just announced on behalf of the Portuguese 
Government.. The Ghanaian and-Argentine Governments would announce later what 
contributions they intended to pay. Other Governments also had indicated 
their intention of making contributions in kind for the Agency's training and 
technical assistance activities,. 
70. On behalf of his Committee he recommended the General Conference to adopt 
the draft resolution appearing in its report (GC(VI)/220), which expressed 
appreciation to the Member States that had pledged contributions and urged all 
other Member. States to pay the highest possible contributions compatible with 
their resources. 
71= The PRESIDENT said that the delegate of Pakistan had just asked him 
to announce that the Pakistan Government pledged the equivalent of.$6000 in 
Pakistan rupees. 


72. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VI)/220, paragraph 5, was 
adopted unanimously. 
NUCLEAR POWER (GC(VI)/219) 


73" Mr. KAKAR (Afghanistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented his Committee's report on Nuclear .Power (GC(VI)/219), 
and called the attention of the General Conference to the two draft resolutions 
annexed to the report and recommended for adoption. 


74. The draft resolution in document GC(VT)/219. Annex I (the Agency's 
Programme in Nuclear Power) was adopted unanimously. 
75* The draft resolution in Annex II (Co-ordination of Power Questions) was 
adopted unanimously. 


THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 1963 (continued) (GC(VI)/222)^/ 


76. Mr. KAKAR (Afghanistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented his Committee's second report on the Agency's 
Programme and Budget for 1963 (GC(VI)/222). Annexed to the report were two 
draft resolutions which the Committee recommended for adoption. 
2/ GC(VI)/OR„70, paras. 56-64. 



GC(VI)/0E.71 
page 14 


77. The draft resolution in document GC(VI)/222, Annex I (International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy)-was adopted unanimously. ' . 
78. The draft resolution in Annex II ( Action pursuant to Resolution 891 (XXXIV) 
of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations) was adopted 
unanimously. 
LONG-TERM PLANNING (GC(VI)/224) 


79= Mr. KAKAR (Afghanistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented his Committee's report on Long-Term Planning 
(GfG(yi)/224). 


80o The draft resolution contained in document GC(Yl)/224, paragraph 7o was 


adopted unanimously. 


AN INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THEORETICAL PHYSICS (GC(VI)/225) 


81. Mr.' KAKAR (Afghanistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented his Committee's report on'An International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics (GC(VI)/223). 
82. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VI)/223< paragraph 9. was 
adopted unanimously. . 
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m. 



international Atomic Energy Agency GC(VI)/OR.72 

27 December 1962 GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

SIXTH REGULAR SESSION 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 26 September 1962, at 3.20 p.m. 

President: Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 
12 Election of Memhers to the Board 1-1 4 
of Governors 
25 Amendment of the Rules of Procedure 15 - 16 
26 Closing of the session 17 ~ 38 

* GC(VI)/207. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(VI)/INF/56/Rev.2. 


62-5700 



GC(VI)/OR.72 
page 2 

ELECTION CP MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(vl)/193, 210) 

1. The PR3SIDBHT invited the General Conference to take up item 12 of 
the agenda - Election of Members to the Board of Governors - in connection with 
which it had before it a report by the General Committee (GC(VI)/210) . In 
paragraph 4 of that report the Committee; of which he was Chairman, had requested 
him, in his capacity as President of the General Conference, to inform the 
Conference immediatoly before it proceeded to elect Members to the Board whether 
the amendment to Article VI.A.3 of the Statute, which the General Conference 
had approved by Resolution GC(V)/RES/92, had come into force. He understood 
from the Secretariat chat the Director General had so far received from the 
depositary Government notification of the deposit of a total of 44 instruments 
of acceptance of the amendment. In accordanco with Article XVIII.C(ii) of the 
Statute the amendment would, however, come into force only when it had been 
accepted by two-thirds of all the Members, that was 52 out of the present 
membership of 77. Thus the text of Article VI.A.3 remained unchanged, and the 
situation reflected in paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Committee's report still 
obtained, 
2. In that report the Committee notified the Conference that, providod the 
existing text of Article VI.A.3 remained unchanged, five Members had to be 
elected to the Board during the present session. . The Committee further stated 
that elections were required in respect of two geographical areass Africa ami 
the Middle East, and South East Asia and the Pacific, and drew attention to the 
fact that the elections should be conducted with duo regard to oquitable 
representation on the Board as a whole of the Members in the geographical areas 
specified in Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. In that connection he drew 
attention to the list, in paragraph 5 of the Committee5, s report, of Members 
1/ 2/ 
already designated by the Board—' or elected by the Conference^ . Rule 79 
of the Rules of Procedure provided that the olections should be by secret ballot 
and that thore should be no nominations. 

3 it 
the invitation of the President, a member of the delegation of the 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic and a member of the delegation of Finland 
acted as tollers. 

1/ GC(VI)/193. 
2/ GC(V)/R3S0LUTIOJ}JS, decision number GC(v)/DEC/9. 


GC(VI)/OR.72 
page 3 

4. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of Africa and- the Middle—East. 5* 
A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as followss 

Ballot papers returned* 68 
Invalid votes: 3 
Abstentions; 0 
Valid votess 65 
Required majority? 33 
Votes'obtained^ 


Iran 37 

Morocco 27 

United Arab Republic 1 

6. Having obtained the required majority, Iran was elected a Member of the 
Board. 
7. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of South East Asia and the Pacific. 
8. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was aa follows^ 
. Ballot papers returned; 68 
Invalid votess 1 
Abstentionss 4 
Valid votes? 63 
Required majorityi 32 
Votes obtained; 


Indonesia 60 
Afghanistan 1 
Burma, 1 
Hew Zealand 1 


9. Having obtained the required majority, Indonesia was elected a Member of 
the Board. 
10. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to proceed to fill the throe 
other vacant seats on the Board. 

GC(VI)/GR.72 
page 4 

11, A vote was taken by secret ballot., the result of which was as follows; 

Members to be elected; 3 
Ballot papers-returned; 68Invalid 
votes; 2 
Abstentions; 9 
Valid votess 193 
Required majority; 33 

Votes obtained^ 

Mexico 61 
Brazil 60 
Italy 60 
Cuba 2 
Austria 1 
Chile 1" 
Ghana 1 
Iceland 1 
Morocco 1 
Romania 1 
Sweden 1 
Switzerland 1 
Tunisia 1 
Venezuela 1 

12. Having obtained the required majority, Mexico, Brazil and Italy were 
elected Members- of the Board. 

13. The PRESIDENT declared the, elections completed and recalled that, 
under Article VI,D of the Statute, the Members just elected would hold office 
from the end of the sixth regular session of the Conference until the end of 
thvs eighth regular session. He congratulated the new Members on their 
election and thanked the tellers. 

14. Mr. AZAD (Iran) thanked the delegates for the honour they had done 
his country in electing it to the Board? he hoped the atmosphere of goodwill 
which had characterized the sixth regular session would continue to prevail 
in the Board, 


GC(VI)/OR.72 
page 5 

AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PP0C3DUR3 (GC(VI)/2l6) 

15- Mr. HAD I (Indonesia)9 Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 

Committee, introduced the Committee's report on Amendment of the Rules of 
Procedure (GC(VI)/2l6). 

16. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VI)/2l6, paragraph 2, -TSS 
adoptod unanimously. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

17. Mr. ZOHRAB (New Zealand), speaking on behalf of the delegations from 
the countries of the British Commonwealth, congratulated the President on the 
firm and understanding manner in which he had discharged his duties. The 
harmonious atmosphere of the meetings had in no small way been the result of 
the wisdom and discretion displayed by the President. 
18. Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) said that he could not conceal his 
strong feeling of disappointment at the outcome of the election of Members to 
the Board for his area. 
19. Nevertheless, he had the honour, on behalf of the countries of his area, 
to congratulate the President on his unanimous election -a clear indication 
of the important role which the developing countries were beginning to play and 
on bringing the work of the Conference to a successful conclusion. 
20. He also expressed his appreciation of the manner in which the Director 
General and the Secretariat had discharged their duties. 
21. Mr. PBRSRA (Ceylon), on behalf of the delegations from the Asian 
countries, joined in congratulating the President on the able manner in which 
ho had directed the discussions. It was a matter of pride and satisfaction to 
all the Asian countries that an African had been elected to guide the work of 
the sixth regular session. . 
22. The discussions had been characterized on all sides by goodwill and 
understanding, . a happy augury for the Agency's future activities. 
23<• Ho expressed the thanks of all delegations, including his own, to the 
Director General and the Secretariat for the manner in v.hich they had carried 

out their onerous duties. 


GC(vi)/Ofi.72 
page 6 

24. Baron. RAMBL (Sweden) said that the Agency could be proud of the outcome 
of the General Conference, which had dono efficient and useful work. Ho 
expressed the gratitude of the countries of 'tfestorn Europe to the President, 
to whoso wise guidance the success of the Conference had largely been due. 
He also.thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for their contributions 
to the work of the session. 
25* Mr, EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that, on 
behalf of the countries of the socialist community, he would like to express' 
his gratitude to the President of the General'Conference, ffit>. Baffour, 
representative of the African Republic of Ghana. ' Although the Conference had 
been a complicated affair and the problems confronting it had been in every ' 
respect difficult ones, from both the scientific and the political points of 
view, Mr. Baffour had discharged the tasks laid upon him in splendid fashion, 

26. It gave him particular pleasure to congratulate Mr. Baffour on the success 
of his work at the Conference because the Soviet delegation had recommended 
him as candidate for the post, and was glad to find that it had not been 
mistakon in its choice. 
27. He wished Mr. Baffour further success in his noble work for the welfare 
of mankind and co-operation amongst the nations. 
28. Mr. ORTIZ TIRADO (Mexico), speaking on behalf .of the delegations from 
the American continent, extended his sincerest congratulations to the President 
both on his appointment and on the skilful manner in which he had guided the 
discussions. Ho also thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for 
their tireless efforts. 
29- The PRESIDENT expressed his gratitude to all delegates for their 

co-operation in making the session a success. Much of the credit for the 

smooth Tunning of the Conference belonged to the Director General and the 

Secretariat. 

30. Following the tradition of his country, he wished to recount a fable on 
which delegates might ponder after their return home. In the far-distant past, 
all the animals created by Nature had lived in a beautiful garden, where oach 
had his own fruit-tree or meadow to provide food. Then, through ill-will and 

GC(VI)/OR.72 
pago 7 

perversion, the animals had developed a taste for their neighbours' food, and 
had begun to prey on each other. One day. Nature had returned to' explain 
that her intention had been for each to enjoy his own food, without interfering 
with the liberty of his fellows. Afterwards, peace had reigned again. 

31. Howeverj one bright day by the side of a big lake, an elephant and a 
rhinoceros wore basking in the sun. The elephant suddenly turned to his 
neighbour and mischievously said that the rhinoceros was without doubt the 
ugliest beast in the whole world. Infuriated, the rhinoceros denied the 
charge: there could be no-doubt, said he, that of all God's creatures, the 
elephant was the most repulsive. A quarrel thereupon arose, which quickly 
developed into a fight. 
32. The other animals ran in terror to a quiet corner of the forest and there 
held counsel. The lion's opinion was that when the two biggest animals fought? 
the lesser ones ought to take sides. He and the tiger aligned themselves with 
the elephant, while the hippopotamus- and the alligator stood firm behind their 
friend the rhinoceros. Finally, they decided to send the spider, noted for 
his wisdom, and the monkey, famous for his diplomatic tricks, to intercede. 
Unfortunately, the two enemies were in no mood for peace-making, and the mission 
failed. 
33. Finally, up spoke the mosquito. Though neither wise nor strong, ho had 
a plan. So; as a last resort, the animals sent him. Arriving at the scene 
of combat, ho flow straight into the elephant's car, where ho began to buzz. 
The elephant grew frantic at the noise. He tried to blast the mosquito out 
with his trunk, but only forced him further in. Ho boat his oar against a troe 
till it bled. But all to no avail. Eventually, in a state of exhaustion, ho 
agreed to listen to reason, stopped fighting and stood in silence. Meanwhile, 
the mosquito repeated the performance with the rhinoceros, til l he too was 
reduced to silence. Then the mosquito addressed them both. 
34. When inside their ears, ho said, he had seen their brains. Both were 
white. So were their hearts, so v/ere their intentions. Though different 
in appearance, they were the same underneath. Whatever a person's size? his 
body covered only one soul and each had an equal right to live free and 
unmolested. 

GC(VI)/0H.72 
page 8 


35* The President hoped all delegates would think about that primitive fable. 
The cloak, the mask and the frightening hat with which a scarecrow was adorned 
represented political considerations. Underneath, all were brothers of a 
single nation, a single people and a single creation. Ho earnestly hoped that 
the cordial spirit in which the General Conference had met would be an omen for 
the future, and that politics would be laid aside for the good of mankind. 


36. In accordance with Rule 48 .f "the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
37. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
38. The PRESIDENT then declared closed the sixth regular session of the 
General Conference. 
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m. 



