International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VII)/OR.73 
30 December 1963 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

Seventh regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 24 September 1963, at 10.45 a.m. 


Temporary Presidents Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) 


Presidents 
Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
provisional 
agenda* 


1 
Opening of the session 1 -4 


Statement by the delegate of South Africa 5-8 
2 Election of the President 9-16 
3 Credentials of delegates to the seventh 


regular session 


(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 17 - 18 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 19 - 22 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 23 - 26 
6 Applications for membership of the Agency 27 - 36 
7 Statement by the Director General 37 - 69 
- 
Statement by the Representative of the 70 - 75 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 
* GC(VII)/226. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2. 

63-7967 


- GC.(VII)/OR.73 
p afro 2 
OPENING OF THE SESSION 


1, • ' The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared open the seventh regular- session of 
the General Conference. 


2; •• In- accordance-with-Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
Conference to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 


3. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
4. The TEMPORARY, PRESIDENT, welcomed the delegates of Member States, the 
observers from other States, and the representatives of the United Nations, the 
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. 
Ho thanked the Federal Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor of Austria, 
the members of the Austrian Government and senior Austrian officials for 
attending the meeting. 
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF SCUTH AFRICA 


5 . " Mr. SOLE (South Africa) said he had a point of order to raise before 
the formal proceedings of the Conference began. Requests had been' made- 'during 
recent months at various international,conferences for the withdrawal or 
exclusion of South -African- delegations, , and the possibility of a similar request 
being made at the present Conference was apparently being mooted. His delegation 
had consistently opposed the airing of political issues in the Agency in 
the belief that such discussions were prejudicial to the interests of the 
Agency - probably the most scientific and technical of all the United Nations 
organizations. He therefore earnestly hoped that all'delegations would 
respect the intention of the Statute, concentrate oh the important scientific 
and technical objectives which the Agency had set itself, and put aside the 
political differences that might divide Member States in other forums. 
6. The TEMPORARY'PRESIDENT-said that,., in his capacity as Temporary 
President, he was bound to support the appeal just made, however profound his 
personal disapproval, no doubt shared by others, of the racial policies of 
certain countries. The Agency's concerns lay outside politics, its task' 
being to exploit what was perhaps the greatest scientific discovery now at the 
disposal- of humanity. To that-end all countries must pool their resources . 

GC(VII)/OR.73 
page 3 


in a spirit of co-operation and good will .and he therefore asked for restraint 
in the expres-sion of political opinions. He hoped that the Conference, mindful 
of the' 'Agency's purpose, would work towards its accomplishment. 


"7- Mr. DADZIE (Ghana) reserved his delegation's position on the point 
raised by the delegate of South Africa. Compliance with the Temporary 
President's appeal should not he taken as meaning that his delegation condoned 
the- atrocities' which had been, and were still being perpetrated against the 
African peoples by the Government of South Africa. 


8. Mr. N'DIAYE (Mali) also reserved his position. His delegation 
could not regard itself as being on the same footing as one representing a 
Government that practised criminal discrimination. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


9. Sir Soger MAKINS (United Kingdom) proposed Mr. Perera (Ceylon) for 
the office of President of the Conference. Mr. Perera had had a long and 
distinguished career of public service at home and abroad, and had represented 
his country at many international conferences and on the Board of Governors. 
10. • Mr. EMSLYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that his 
delegation was most happy to support the nomination of Mr. Perera, whose 
services as a diplomat were highly esteemed, and whose knowledge and experience 
could not but further the work of the Conference. 
11. He paid tribute to the work of Mr. Baffour, President of the sixth 
regular session of the General Conference. 
12. Mr. SSABORG (United Stat'es of America) also supported the nomination. 
13. Mr. Perera (Ceylon) was elected, by acclamation, President of the General 
Conference for its seventh' regular session. 
14. Mr. PerS'ra (Ceylon) took the Chair. 
15. The PRESIDENT thanked delegates for the honour they had done to his 
country and the region he came from. The world was faced with vast problems 
created by-man's growing mastery over nuclear energy and his first flights 
into space. The moral, economic and political implications of such progress 

GC(VII)/OR.73 
p age A 

were, far-reaching, and the Agency had the difficult task of trying to ensure 
that great potentialities were used for mankind's benefit and"riot for its' 
destruction. In its endeavours to serve the cause of peace in an' unobtrusive 
hut effective manner,, the Agency had sought to harness all available scientific, 
technical' and managerial skills„ ' fts growing membership bore witness to. therecognition 
it had won throughout the world. • -. • 

16, He appealed to all delegations to help ensure the success of the seventh 
regular session of the Conference. 


CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TC THE SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 


( a) APPOINTOR OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 
17- The PRESIDENT proposed that a Credentials Committee should be 
appointed in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure,, and that'it 
should consist of the following nine Membersj • Afghanistan, Argentina, 
Australia, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, France, Philippines, the Union 
cf Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America and Venezuela. 


13. The proposal was adopted unanimously. 
The meeting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.35 a.m. 


ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 


19. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the eight posts of Vice-
President of the Conference, 
20, Mr.i DARUSKAN (Indonesia) proposed the delegates of the following 


States3 'Colombia, France, India, Japan, Now Zealand, the United Arab Republic, 


the Union of Soviet .Socialist Republics and the United States of America. 


21* Mr. TIRADO (iiexico) seconded the proposal,.


22. The delegates nominated wore declared elected- .to the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


2 3. •- The PRESIDENT poinfed out that under Rule 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure the General Conference was required to elect four additional members 
to the General Committee. He invited nominations. 

GC(VTl)/OR.73 
page 5 


24.' -Mr. PSTRZELKA (Czechoslovakia) nominated the following States? 
Canada, Congo (Leopoldville), Hungary and the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland. 


25. Mr. TGRKI (Tunisia) seconded the nominations. 
26. The States nominated were declared elected to the General Committee and 
the Committee itself duly appointed in compliance with the provisions of 
Rule 40 of the Rules of'Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(VII)/225, 237, 244) 


2 7. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider the recommendations 
of the Board of Governors concerning the applications for membership of the 
Agency made by the Republic of the Ivory Coast (GC(VII)/225)> by the 
Federation of"Nigeria (GC(VII)/237) and by the Gabon .Republic (GC(VII)/244). 
As would be seen from the documents, the 'Board had determined that, each of 
the three States in question was able and willing to act in accordance with 
th:'e purposes-and principles of the United Nations Charter," and-had-accordingly 
submitted for consideration by the General 'Conference the draft resolutions 
set out at the end of each document, recommending in each case that the 
application be approved. He suggested that all three applications be dealt 
with together. 
28. Mr., AZAD .(Iran) supported the applications for membership which, he 
said, testified to the growing interest of African States 'in the Agency's 
activities. 
•29. 
Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said his 
delegation supported the Board's recommendation to accept the., applications .for 
membership of the Gabon Republic, the Republic of the Ivory Coast and the 
Federation of Nigeria. In the three years of their independent development 
and their presence in the United Nations, those young African countries had 
won a well-deserved place' among, .the freedom-loving peoples of. the world and 
were actively contributing to- the solution of important international problems 
by supporting peaceful co-existence, a relaxation of international tension,' 
anU the elimination everywhere of the shameful colonial system. They ha6 

GC(VII)/OR.73 
page 6 


taken another important stop by signing the Moscow treaty that' partially banned 
nuclear weapons tests. Through participation in the Agency's work they would 
no doubt make a useful contribution to the application of.atomic energy for 
the benefit of all countries. .. 


30. • Mr. TJLEHLA (Czechoslovakia) welcomed the Federation of Higeria, the. 
Gabon Republic .and the Republic of the Ivory Coast to membership of the "Agency. 
He hoped they would make their contribution to the Agency's work and.help soTve 
the political and scientific questions that were closely bound up with"the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy,- and.that membership of the Agency, in-. 
turn, would help them to develop their national economies and raise.their 
standards of living. The entry of such countries demonstrated great confidence 
in the Agency, but at the same time it placed an obligation on the other Member 
States to look even harder for ways and moans, within the Agency's possibilities, 
of giving comprehensive aid to the developing countries. 
31. ' Mr. BSRGMAM (Israel) welcomed the three new applications for 
membership'and considered that the Agency! s policy must largely be determined-, 
by the needs of developing countries.• ' • • 
32. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) endorsed the Board's recommendationss 
a growing membership would do much to extend and enrich the Agency's 
work to the general benefit of all countries. 
33* Mr. DADZIE (Ghana) was" gratified that States which-had recently ' 
acquired independence were joining the Agency. In a short space of time they 
had shown themselves capable of a rapid pace of development. 


34. Mr. B'DIAYE (Mali), supporting the applications-for membership, said 
that the States concerned were signatories of the Moscow test ban agreement 
and, being interested in the peaceful' application of atomic energy, would be 
able to make a valuable contribution to the Agency's work. 
35• The draft resolutions were unanimously adopted. 


36. • The PRESIDENT declared that, in accordance with Article XXI.C of the 
Statute, the Republic of the Ivory Coast, the Federation of Nigeria and the 
Gabdn Republic -would become Members of the Agency as soon as their respective 
instruments of acceptance of the Statute had been deposited with the United 
States Government. 

GC(VII)/0E.73 
page 7 


STATiliMT BY TE3 DIE^CTLE GEU3RAL 


3 7. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that he would not attempt to summarize the 
Board's report—', but would try to identify the discoveries and developments 
of the past year which might have special importance for the future. First 
of all? there was the remarkable progress made in molecular biology in defining 
the structure of those nucleic acids which both carried genetic instructions 
and used those instructions in forming special proteins. True, that advance 
was something that was outside atomic energy proper, but tools which had been 
made available through the development of atomic energy had played an important 
part in solving some of the special problems involved. Neutrons wore being 
used more both for diffraction purposes and for activation analysis, and 
activation analysis was at present undergoing an' extraordinary expansions" for 
those purposes extensive use might be found for research reactors,, even of 
modest capacity. 
38. New particles were still being discovered, and the total number of what 
had once been called elementary particles had now reached the order of one 
hundred,^ increasing the embarrassment of the theoretical physicists and forcing 
the experimentalists to ask for still more expensive facilities in the form of 
huge accelerators. 
39- The development of power reactors was best demonstrated by the fact that, 
since September 1962, eleven power roac.tors with a nominal power of 650 MV7(o) 
had become critical. , At present 50 power reactors with a total nominal output 
of 28OO MW(e) were in operation in ten Member States. In addition, 35 more 
nuclear plants with an aggregate capacity of 69OO 107(e) were under construction 
and should bring .the nuclear oa/pacity to the 10 000 MW(e) mark by the end of 
1968, Among the technical features of now power reactors, special mention 
should be made of the organic-moderated and fast-breeder systems put into 
operation in the United States and of the Swedish reactor designed for steamheating 
of a whole residential area, as well as for producing power. 


40. That,nuclear power was still in a developing stage was evident from the 
continuous discussion of the fundamental question whether long-term interest 
should be focused on the converter or breeder type of reactor. 
1/ GC(VII)/228. 



GC(VII")/OR..73 
page 8 


41, An interesting development was taking place in transmission-line 
techniques. In the Soviet Union, in addition to an already existing network 
of 50C kV lines, a 700-750 kV line was being designed and, in the United States, 
a 1100 kV line, The consequences for nuclear power might he twofold; a 
decrease in transmission costs in the case of conventional power stations 
located far from oustomers, who othorwise might have opted for a nuclear station 
constructed in the immediate vicinity5 and low transmission costs which would 
allow nuclear stations to he located on remote isolated sites, thus eliminating 
the safety problems which arose in densely populated areas,. 


42* Much effort was going into research and development work on different 


typos of energy" converters, fuel cells, magnetohydrodynamic converters, -and so 


on. From'a theoretical point of view the possibility of achieving higher 


efficiency in that way constituted a challenge, and the practical problems 


seemed to be surmountable. How large the forces at mankind's disposal were 


and how small the globe had become was evident from a bold suggestion that had 


been made to send, for the short period necessary for the passage of a manned 


space vehicle, a large pulse'of current through the oceans around the world 


in order to influence the magnetic field of the earth and thereby also the 


altitude of the radiation belts, thus ensuring that space travellers would be 


less exposed to radiation. That might sound like a utopian idea? it was 
nevertheless another example of the overriding importance of access, now and " 


in the future, to energy in all its forms. 


43- Although progress in controlled fusion was reported, nobody as yet seamed 
able to predict whether or not it would eventually find practical application. 
The Agency had been invited to arrange a conference on the subject, and one 
was to be held in the United.Kingdom early in 1963 as a follow-up to the 196I 
Salzburg meeting. .. 


44- He extended a welcome to the delegations of the six now Member States? 
Bolivia, Liberia, Libya, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Uruguay. 
In addition, the' General Conference had just approved the applications for 
membership of Nigeria,- Gabon and the Ivory Coast. It was therefore most 
opportune that the amendment to the Statute providing for better representation 
of Africa and the Middle East on the Board of Governors would take effect 



GC(¥II)/OR.T3 
page 9 


during the current session. The approval of a relationship agreement with• 
the Commission for Technical Co-operation in Africa represented a further-step 
towards the Agency's close collaboration with the African countries. 


45• Ho expressed appreciation for the support given by the United Arab 
Republic to the Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab 
Countries which had been established in Cairo under the Agency's auspices in 
early 1963. The Centre had already to its credit a successfully completed 
training course. The importance of that type of regional co-operation could 
not be over-emphasized, and he hoped that the Agency would be able to make 
full use of the extensive training opportunities available at Lovanium 
University in the Congo for English-speaking and French-speaking countries of 
Central Africa. 


46„ A first regional study group on the utilization of research reactors had 
met in Bangkok dn December 1962.' A follow-up meeting would b-e convened in 
Manila in December 1963- A similar study group for Mediterranean countries 
had just mot in Athens, and another would be convened at Sao Paulo in November, 
At a regional meeting of the Asian and .Pacific countries held in Tokyo in 
March 1963, at which the Agency had been represented, the need for close 
contacts between the expanding nuclear centres in the region and the Agency, 
and the general value of regional projects, had again been stressed. A 
specialist in nuclear technology had just ~been appointed to serve as a regional 
officer covering Asia.and the Far East^ he would be stationed in Bangkok so 
as to have the benefit of the co-operation of the Economic Commission for Asia 
and the. Far East. At the end of his term he would be replaced by an expert 
in another branch of atomic energy. By such rotation, the diverse needs of 
the region would be met in successive stages, 

47.. Young scientists from developing countries would be able to study and 
widen the circle of their interests.at the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste which was to start operating in the first .half of 1964. 
The necessary agreement between the Agency and the Government of Italy had 
recently been approved by the Board. A warm tribute was due to the Italian 
authorities for their generous contribution towards the-capital costs involved 
in putting the original idea for such a centre into effect. 



GC(VII)/OR.73 
page 10 


48. 
Long-term planning of the Agency's activities called for special atten2/ 
tion. . The long-term programme before the General Conference—' would cover 
the crucial period in the Agency's growth during which the utilization of 
nuclear power would substantially expand and spread also to the developing 
countries. In itself the programme was but a broad and general guide5 
detailed projects and programmes to be carried out within its general framework 
would be submitted for approval every year or two years and its content 
would'have to be revised at regular intervals so as to take account of new 
technological developments and of experience gained by the Agency. Such 
further elaboration of the Agency's programme would be reflected in the annual 
budgets. The process of re-examining the premises on which the Agency's work 
was based, the paths it was following, and the relative emphasis to be accorded 
to each of its activities had been most useful. A considerable effort had 
gone into that work and its completion in a relatively short time had been 
largely due to the generous participation in it of Governments. In the same 
context, he paid a tribute to the excellent work which Mr. Karol Kraczkiewicz 
had done before leaving the Secretariat. 


49* The long-term programme had certain consequences for the structure of the 
Secretariat. Taking into consideration views expressed both in the Board 
and the General Conference, he had intended to make changes in the Secretariat's 
structure which would serve to concentrate in one Department all the various 
services involved in giving technical assistance to Member States. The 
Agency should thereby be enabled to respond more effectively and economically 
to the needs of developing countries. He would particularly like to record 
his thanks to the five former Chairmen of the Board for their constructive 
advice. 


50, The' staffing of an organization was normally a complex problem. A 
certain' reduction of administrative staff had been carried out in 1963 and 
further reductions proposed for 1964? without affecting the technical 
programmes. Mindful of the international character of the Secretariat, he 
favoured as wide a geographical distribution as possible in the recruitment 


2/ GC(VII)/227, Annex. 



GC(VII)/OR.73 
page 11 


of staff and once again asked Member States to help by nominating candidates 
of the highest calibre only, by accepting the principle that a vacancy in the 
senior ranks would not automatically be .filled by an incumbent of. the same 
nationality as before,, and by respecting the concept of an. international civil 
service and the impartiality it imposed, • Developing Member .States might also 
consider the potential usefulness of seconding to the Agency for a year or 
two some of their young scientists or administrators to serve at a junior 
level. The formative experience thus acquired would, he was sure, prove of 
benefit to the individuals and to their home countries. 


51. In regard to laboratory activities, he was glad to be able to announce . 
that the agreement with Monaco—' to pursue the work already started there would 
be prolonged for another five years, 
5 2, At Seibersdorf, a start had been made,, in close co-operation with the 
Oosterreichischo Studiengesollschaft, on a now form of joint activity relating 
to the long-term training of fellows and special research projects for students 
from developing countries. The work proper of the Agency's Laboratory was. 
becoming more widely known and appreciated^ 1200 standardized radionuclides : 
had been distributed to 42 different Member States, 


5 3. His special thanks were due to the Austrian Government for its continued 
close co-operation. The latest instance was the transfer to the Agency, the 
previous week, of now meeting rooms and facilities for the Board of Governors, 
54- The introduction of offset printing was enabling the Agency to publish 
reports of proceedings and abstracts in four languages within the short space 
of four to five months after the holding of a meotingf the speeding up ,of 
publication thus achieved was appreciated by scientists generally. The 
Agency's Atomic Energy Review would be glad to receive contributions from the 
developing countries. 


55° The Agency's regulatory work was making progress. The Agency had taken 
the initiative - in collaboration with other international bodies concerned in 
drawing up conventions on the liability of operators of-nuclear ships .and 
on civil'liability for nuclear damage caused-by land-based nuclear installations. 
The first had boen adopted at a diplomatic conference-held in May 1962, and the 
second in May 1963. 


3/ INFCIRC/27. 



GC(V2I)/0H.73 


page 12 


56. The past year had seen 'several important developments in the safeguards 
programme, including the extension of'the existing system to cover reactors 
of a thermal capacity above 100 MW. That extension had been approved hy the 
Board without dissent in June 1963 and was now before the General Conference 
for consideration-^-, ' The Board had also decided that it would he opportune 
to undertake a general review of the safeguards system in 1964 in the light 
of past experience* 
5 7- Of greater significance was the fact that the application of the system 
was being extended. The agreement whereby the Agency would assume responsibility 
for the safeguards now being applied by the United States to.certain 
reactors in Japan—' had been signed the previous day. The agreement also 
provided for safeguards to be applied to any special fissionable material that 
might be produced and transferred to the United States. Thus, 'the first stop 
had been taken in the transfer to fully international safeguards of the control 
functions hitherto provided for in bilateral agreements, in that way fully 
guaranteeing, for the entire international community as well as for the 
supplying. State, that nuclear assistance, given for peaceful purposes would. • 
not be diverted, and at the same time giving the recipient State the assurance 
that the necessary controls would be exercised fairly and uniformly so as to 
preclude interference with its efforts to develop peaceful nuclear energy 
programmes. The Japanese Government, which had already requested the Agency 
to enter into consultations concerning the application of safeguards in 
connection with its bilateral agreements with Australia, Canada and South 
Africa, had recently joined with the United Kingdom in making a similar proposal 
with regard to the bilateral agreement under which the Tokai-Mura power reactor 
of 160 MW(e) was-being constructed. Earlier in the year?. India.and the• 
United States had concluded a bilateral agreement.covering the construction 
of the Tarapur power reactor, in which provision was also made for the 
application of. Agency safeguards. 


58. In regard to the future, it followed from his earlier remarks that he 
viewed the long-term programme as the basis on which the budgets for 1965 and 
subsequent 'years should be prepared. It should be noted, however, that-a 
4/ GC(vIl)/235. 
5_/ The text of the agreement is reproduced in document IHPCIEC/47. 



GC(VII)/OR.73 
page 13 


number of Agency projects came within the priorities selected by the Economic 


and Social Council of the United Nations (SCOSOC) for concerted action under 


the United Nations Development Decade - priorities which wore also given 


particular attention by the United Nations Conference on the Application of 


Science and Technology for the Benefit of the Less Developed!. Areas-^. In 


view of the importance of that Conference, he had kept the Board regularly 


informed of the follow-up action the United Nations organizations were 


contemplating and had had the benefit of its guidance at its latest meetings. 


One of the main problems was, through training and through stronger research 


institutions, to build up a scientific infrastructure in the developing 


countries. He had suggested that the research reactors and allied insti


tutions already existing in many developing countries could help to form the 


nucleus of a new generation of technicians and scientists not only in atomic 

energy but also in related sciences. It was essential, of course, that 


co-operation should be as close as possible between the universities and the 


atomic energy centres in preparing programmes of training and research., and 


the Agency looked forward to co-operating with the United Nations Educationaly 


Scientific and Cultural Organization in that direction. 


5 9* Other activities to which the Agency should continue, in accordance with 


the long-term programme and the recommendations of ECOSOC and the Geneva 


Conference already mentioned, to give particular consideration included co


ordinated research programmes on rice and maize in the tropical areas| the 


control by radiation methods of insect posts, particularly the Dacus fly? the 


locust and the tsetse fly; and the establishment of standard methods for 


measuring water resources by the use of stable and radioactive isotope 


techniques in regional or international laboratories, 


60. The Agency could best help to meet the growing need for fresh water 
supplies in many developing countries by studying the use of nuclear energy , 
for salt or brackish water conversion. One such study, covering the 
possibility of using a reactor for the dual purpose of distilling sea-water 
and'supplying power, had already started in Southern Tunisia, 
"/ Held in Geneva from 4 to 20 February 1963. 



GC(vii"y/bR.73 ; page 
14r '-'-' --•/ . ' 


61,. •
•• In.,regard_to power reactors and power'development, it would be recalled 
that; in view of the important role power was destined to play in the 
industrialization of the developing' countries,, ' a closer co-operation between 
the Agency and other organizations concerned had been advocated. Expansion 
of power supplies was obviously a matter of prime importance for most developing 
countries, but action was hampered -particularly as far as the building of. 
nuclear power stations was concerned -by high capital costs and the drain : • 
on foreign exchange reserves.-Each such country must therefore weigh carefully 
the relative merits of nuclear and conventional sources of energy as -"•potential 
ways of meeting its particular needs. Both the United Nations and 
the Agency had been at pains to ensure that advice given on the possible ' • 
choic© should be sound and fully co-ordinated. An example of the result of 
such co-operation-was provided by the recent United Nations Special,-Fund preinvestment 
study on power,'.including nuclear power,-in Luzon in the Philippines, 
for which the Agency was acting as Executing Agency. ' The most recent 
developments in nuclear power from both an economic and a technological point 
of view would be reviewed by the Third United Nations Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, which was to be held from 31 August to 
9 September 1964? with the co-oporation of the Agency. ' '..',. 


62. As to the provision of technical assistance, delegates might be 
interested to know that requests totalling over #2,5 million had been received 
for the provision of experts and equipment out of the Agency's own resources 
in 1964? i.o. an increase of over 50/% as compared with 1963. Hitherto it had 
been possible to moot about half the requests made for technical assistance, 
but the funds available for 1964 were likely to cover only a quarter of the 
total. Even with additional help under the United Nations Expanded Programme 
of Technical Assistance, there would still be a noticeable gap between requests 
and resources and it was vital that ways and means of bridging that gap should 
be found. 
63. Prom his remarks it would be obvious that'atomic energy encompassed more 
than science alone5; in fact several different disciplines were involved. In 
some sectors, such as medicine or agriculture, it had become difficult at 
times to define the exact responsibilities of.all .the organizations concerned, 
especially in border-line cases where activities overlapped. Conscious of 

GC(¥II)/0E.73 
page 15 


' -7/ 
those difficulties, &GQSOC, at its last session, had adopted a resolution-^ 
which should go a long way toward fostering co-ordinated co-operation within 
the United Nations5 it was his own intention to start negotiations with the 
Pood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the i;7orld Health 
Organization to facilitate the process. 
64* An event of world-wide significance, which could not fail to have a 
hearing on the Agency's future, had been the conclusion of the treaty between 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America in Moscow, on 5 August 
1963, whereby nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under 
water wore banned. Within the Agency, thoughts had inevitably been directed 
to the responsibility devolving upon it under the Statute of devoting the 
beneficial results to be expected from the treaty to the "development and 
practical application of atomic energy for peaceful purposes,'including the 
production of electric power with due consideration for the needs of the 
under-developed areas of the world"—' . 
65• Men of greater and more direct competence had made authoritative comments 
on the significance of the treaty, which had now been endorsed by almost 100 
nations1 expectations were that it would serve to eliminate the growing 
dangers from the fall-out of nuclear explosions, to slow down the arms race 
in general and the race in nuclear weapons in particular, to limit the development 
of new weapons of mass destruction and to increase the possibilities of 
using atomic energy_for peaceful, constructive ends. 

66. It was the Agency's specific duty to examine the present situation with 
care and a sense of its own responsibility in the light of those expectations. 
A fair and realistic assumption would be that, in time, human and material 
resources would gradually be set free for use in peaceful pursuits. Although 
the immediate practical possibilities might be limited, the Agency had to be 
prepared to act when the time came, so that Member States would find it ready 
to assume its full responsibilities in accordance with its statutory obligations. 
7/ ECOSOG Besolution 986 (XXXVl), reproduced in document INFCTRC/48. 
8/ Article III.A.2. 



GC(VII)/0E.73 
page 16 


67- In that same context, the Agency was keeping under constant.review the 
potential effects which an agreement on general and complete disarmament could 
have on nuclear energy development. A paper on the matter had been transmitted 
to the Secretary-General of the United nations for inclusion in his report to 
the General Assembly at its current session. 


68. Should future developments lead to the establishment of a system "of 
strict international control";, as mentioned in the preamble tc the test ban 
treaty, the Agency should be in a position to give assistance in line with the 
statutory provisions concerning its safeguards and with the principles governing 
its relationship with the United Nations. In that connection he would remind 
the Conference that, in the words of the Statute, the Agency had to 
"Conduct its activities in accordance with the purposes and 
principles of the United Nations to promote peace and inter-• 
national co-operation, • and in conformity with policies of the 
United Nations furthering the establishment of safeguarded . 
world-wide disarmament and in conformity with any international 
agreements entered into pursuant to such policies 5"9/. 


69* In conclusion, he hoped that his remarks would be accepted as an expression 
of his wish to share with delegates his preoccupations and thoughts about the 
Agency's work and future. 


STAT3MENT BY THE R5P RES.OPTATIVE OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL L'P THE UNITED NATIONS 


70. The PRESIDENT welcomed Mr. Spinelli, Representative of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, and invited him to address the Conference. 
71. Mr. SPINELLI (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) said that he had, for- the first time, the pleasant duty of conveying 
the Secretary-General1s best wishes to the Conference for the success of its 
deliberations. Dr. Bunche, who in previous years had usually transmitted the 
mes,sage of the Secretary-General, was prevented from doing so in 1963 by 
pressure of work at the General Assembly. 
72. The agenda and documents submitted to the Conference were evidence of the 
progress made by the Agency during the past year under the guidance of its 
Board of Governors and Director General. He noted with satisfaction that a 
9/ Article III.B.l. 



GC(VII)/OR.73 
page 17 


parallel development had taken place in the Agency's working relationship with 
the United Nations. The Agency had, for example, participated in the work 
of the Conference on the Application of Science and Technology for the Benefit 
of the Less Developed Areas; it was contributing to the work carried out 
during the United Nations Development Decade and had prepared its long-term 
programme in conformity with the spirit, aims and timing of that work? it 
continued to provide scientific and technical support to the United Nations 
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, and the Director 
General and his staff had participated in all the meetings of the Administrative 
Committee on Co-ordination and its Preparatory Committee. 


73. The Agency was keenly interested in co-ordination in matters concerning 
power development, to which the United Nations attached groat importance. 
He was satisfied with the first results achieved and drew attention to 
Resolution 986 (XXXVT) on the Co-ordination of Atomic Energy Activities 
adopted by 3C0S0C at its last session. He warmly welcomed the steps taken 
by the Director General to co-ordinate the Agency's activities with the 
intensified efforts being made by the United Nations to solve the crucial 
problems of power development and electrification. In that connection he 
recalled, first, that the Agency, in consultation with the United Nations, was 
including conventional power experts as well as nuclear power exports in its 
missions to Member States; secondly, that it had also posted a staff member 
to United Nations Headquarters to promote co-operation in matters relating 
to the economics of power;; and, thirdly, that it would participate in the 
meeting on Electric Snergy to be held in Addis Ababa from 21 to 23 October 
under the auspices of the Economic Commission for Africa. Special Fund 
projects also provided opportunities for fruitful co-operation. 
74* The United Nations and the Agency would co-operate, in particular, in the 
preparation of the Third Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Snergy, to 
be held in Geneva in 1964- The Secretary-General had issued invitations to 
the Conference and transmitted to the Governments concerned a provisional 
agenda prepared by the United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee with the 
co-operation of the Director General of the Agency. The United Nations would 


"GG(VII)/C!?-73 
pago 18 


havo a special interest in certain items of the agenda concerning over-all 
energy requirements and the integration of power from different sources within 
existing networks. On the other hands many items on that agenda would he of 
primary concern to the Agency. After his experience in making certain, 
preliminary arrangements for the Conference, ho had no doubt that close.pooperation 
with the Agency would continue. 


75* He thanked the President for inviting him to address the Conference and 
. requested him and the Director General to convey his deep gratitude to the 
Austrian Government, for its hospitality. 


The meeting rose at 12.55 P.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VII)/OR.74 
30 December 1963 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

Seventh regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 25 September 1963, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraph 
agenda* 


8 Adoption of the agenda and allocation 1-2 
of items for initial discussion 


9 Closing date of the session 3-4 


10 General debate and report of the Board 5 - 90 
of Governors for 1962-63 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United States of America 5 - 24 
Yugoslavia 25 - 32 
South Africa 33- 40 
Afghanistan 41 - 45 
Belgium 46 - 63 
Australia 64. - 72 
Portugal 73 - 80 
Italy 81 - 90 

* .GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2, 


63-7971 



GC(VII)/OR„74 


page 2 


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AID ALLOCATION OF. ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(VII)/226, 226/Md.lj 226/Add.1/Mod.1, 246) 


1* The PRESIDENT proposed that the Conference accept the recommendations 
made by the General Committee in regard to the agenda and the allocation of 
items for initial discussion (GC(VII)/246). 


2. The recommendations of the General Committeo were accepted}and the agenda 
was thereby approved,, 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 


5. The PRESIDENT- announced that the General Committee recommended that 
2 October 1963 be tentatively set as the closing date for the session. 
4. The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted, 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1962-6J 
(GC(VII)/228,243) 


5. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) praised the constructive 
international work of the Agency and said that progress recently made - and 
particularly the signing of the limited test ban treaty, even though that was 
external to the Agency itself - would do much to improve the climate in which 
its work was carried out. 
6. His visits to many Member States and the contacts he had made through 
the Agency had strongly reaffirmed his faith in the valuable contribution 
which science could make to international understanding. For example, he 
had visited a number of atomic energy installations in the Soviet Union and, 
during his visit? a memorandum on co-operation in the utilization of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes between the Soviet Union and the United States 
had been signed, which provided inter alia that copies of all scientific 
reports exchanged under the terms of the memorandum would be forwarded to the 
Agency. He had also taken part in opening an "Atoms for Peace" exhibition in 
Belgrade and visited the Boris Kidric Institutef the contacts he had made 
had further confirmed him in his belief that the work done by scientists 
could promote understanding. His optimism was based largely on the fact that 
the Agency's efforts had been consolidated and intensified; and that it was now 
in a better position to meet the needs of Member States and contribute to the 
general welfare of the international community„ 

GC(VII)/OR.74 
page 3 


7. The Agency's long-term programme—' was well conceived, and he welcomed 
in particular the increased emphasis placed on the development of nuclear 
power which, together with the "concomitant development of safeguards, was the 
most important area for expansion of the Agency's activities. In a report 
submitted to President Kennedy by the United States Atomic Energy Commission 
(USAEC), it was predicted that economic nuclear power was so close at hand that 
with a modest additional incentive from the Government United States utilities 
would use it to an appreciable extent in the near future. With some additional 
support for the power demonstration programme, and programme adjustments to 
give added emphasis to advanced converter and breeder reactors, the continuation 
of USAEC's present work would enable nuclear power to compete with conventional 
power throughout most of the country during the 1970's and would make breeder 
reactors economic by the 1980's. Thus it was estimated that by the end of the 
century nuclear power would meet all requirements for increased electric 
capacity and provide half of the energy generated. He recalled, in that regard, 
that the United States was a low-cost power area, 
8. It was further noted in the report that six sizeable reactors of the more 
highly developed types were operating on utility grids? seven small and 
a ^ew


medium-sized reactors would be completed by the end of 19&7 an(^ others 
were under construction or about to be constructed. The report suggested that 


seven or eight prototype power reactors - approximately half of which would be 
advanced converter reactors and the rest breeder reactors - might be constructed 
and commissioned during the next twelve years, while the public utilities 


industry might build ten to twelve full-scale power plants. Programmes for 
developing more advanced reactor types, especially breeder reactors, were also 


suggested. The programme outlined would facilitate the technological 
development, in co-operation with other countries, of a number of reactor types 
designed to meet power requirements throughout the world. Eleven prototype 


power reactors were operating in the United States, with an aggregate net 
electric capacity of almost 1000 MW, and the' construction of eleven more with 
a net electric capacity of about 2800 MW had been either started or approved. 


Plans for two more reactors with a capacity of about 1000 MW had been announced 


and tenders were being sought. 


l/ GC(VII)/227. 



GC(VII)/ORc74 


page 4 


9. ' In an interview published in International-Science and Technology in 
July 1963, Professor Emely'anoV had said he agreed in general with the USAEC 
repor't and pointed out, with respect 'to nuclear power, that people had at 
first been optimistic, ' then pessimistic, and were now realistic:; he had 
further stated that lie expected the Soviet Union would develop breeder' 
'reactors for large stations and other reactor types for smaller stations. 


10. Many other countries, including developing countries like India and 
Pakistan, were planning to increase their efforts to develop and construct 
power reactorso All the activities planned showed how important it was for the 
Agency to play an active part in developing nuclear energy throughout the 
world. It would probably be requested to send an increasing number of consultants 
to advise on the practicability of nuclear power and its cost as compared 
with conventional power, and on the location and design of power plants. 
11. The Agency also did useful-work in the.establishment .of standards of 
measurement, the development of health and safety criteria to be applied in 
the operation of nuclear installations and the shipping of nuclear material, 
and in the dissemination of information on reactor technology. It should 
continue to disseminate information on the recycling of plutonium, and study 
developments in the use of thorium and the applications of process heat from 
reactors, particularly for water desalination, 
12. - His Government's offer to,make enriched uranium available,on a long-term 
basis•to meet fuelling requirements was maintained. During the year, 
President Kennedy had agreed to. increase the allocation .for distribution to 
other countries from 65 000.to 150 000 kilograms of U contained in uraniumf 
it could be procured through the Agency by Member States.. 
13. The Agency's safeguards played an';important part in ensuring that nuclear 
material would not be diverted from'peaceful uses. 'His Government had decided 
to negotiate for the transfer' of its bilateral safeguards" responsibilities to 
the Agency, and Japan had been the'' first country to conclude an agreement under 
which, initially, five research reactors'and one power'demonstration reactor 
purchased from the United States, together with other facilities and related 
2/ 


nuclear material, would be placed under the Agency's safeguards—'. Discussions 


2/ The text of the agreement is reproduced in document INPCIRC/47. 


GC(VII)/OR.74 
page 5 


wore being held with several other Member States with a view to making similar 
arrangements. In a recent agreement in connection with the proposed Tarapur 
atomic power station, India and the United States had agreed in principle 
to request the Agency to apply safeguards to the station at a suitable time, 
after the Agency had adopted an expanded system which was consistent with 
the safeguards provisions in the agreement. In the meantime the usual bilateral 
safeguards would apply. He was certain that those arrangements were the first of 
many to be made in recognition of the importance of the Agency's safeguards 
system, and urged Member States to support the system's expansion. The Agency 


-should consider, in due course? further extending its safeguards procedures to 
cover fuel fabrication-facilities and chemical processing plants. He was 
pleased .that inspection of the four United States reactors placed under Agency 


3/ 


safeguards-7 had proceeded satisfactorily -and understood that it had provided 
Agency safeguards personnel with valuable experience. Ho hoped that most 
countries would eventually agree to the application of Agency safeguards to 
their nuclear power plants and would obtain their special nuclear material 
through the Agency, 


14, The Agency could also do useful work in connection with research reactors. 
About 45^ of its Member States had such reactors and he was glad to note that 
the long-term programme suggested many ways in which the Agency could assist 
them in developing research reactor programmes, not only directly but also ~bj 
fostering co-operative relationships between new centres and more advanced 
institutions. The work of the regional study groups on reactor utilization 
was .useful and he-was pleased to know that such meetings were to be held 
regularly! his country would continue to send experts to attend them, 

15. 'The United States was renewing, for 1964s its offer to donate up to 
$50 000 worth of special nuclear material for use in Agency projects relating 
to research and medical therapy, 
16, Further efforts should be made to work out uniform safety codes and 
practices for application to research reactors so as to facilitate international 
collaboration in their use. High priority should be given to the part of the 
Agency's programme concerning health and safety, and the Agency' should take 
advantage of the work done by other organizations, such as the International 


3/ See document IFPGIRC/36, 



GC(VII)/OR.74 
page 6 


Organization for Standardization, in developing criteria and standards for 
safety in nuclear installations. It should also continue to assist and 
encourage Member States to prepare laws, codes or regulations for the 
protection of scientists and other workers, and the general publicf It might 
offer to arrange visits by inspection teams to evaluate the application of 
health and safety regulations and suggest corrective measures. Member States 
could be invited to provide lists of qualified and available consultants 
who Yirould advise, for a limited period of time, on health and safety5 the 
Agency could then speedily arrange visits by inspection teams or consultants. 


17= It could also help to draw up and apply safety standards for shipments 
of radioactive materials between different countries. The Agency's Regulations 
for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials-" were a helpful step in that 
direction and were being incorporated in the United States regulations. He 
was pleased that the Agency was establishing a group of•consultants to advise 
Member States on the safe shipment of irradiated fuel, and hoped it would 
continue to work out practical and effective standards to ensure the safe 
packaging and shipment of radioactive materials. 


18. He was encouraged to see that under the long-term programme increased 
efforts were to be devoted to projects designed to solve urgent, practical 
problems of radioactive waste management. He hoped the Agency would publish 
an international registry of sea disposals and continue to study their effect 
and the possibility of drafting internationally acceptable codes and practices. 
It was even more important that international or regional waste burial grounds 
should be defined, and that task would be particularly appropriate to the 
Agency. In regard to waste management, generally, the Agency should expand 
its technical assistance and training activities and reduce the number of 
conferences, symposia and panels on the subject. He was pleased to note that 
it would convene a group of experts to study and prepare a manual on 
techniques or systems at present used to prevent atmospheric pollution by 
nuclear facilities. 
19. The Agency should continue to expand its assistance to developing . 
countries in the application of isotopes in medicine, agriculture, hydrology 
and industry and should co-ordinate those efforts with the work done by other 
international organizations. Its resources were limited and he hoped that 
other organizations could provide funds to finance such projects. 
4/ STl/RJB/40. 



GC(VZi:)/OR.74 
page 7 


20. He welcomed the continued emphasis on training in the long-term programme 
and the steps taken to ensure that more fellowships were awarded to developing 
countries. The United States would continue to provide training opportunities 
for Agency fellows. 
21. The Director General should he supported in his efforts to reorganize 
the Secretariat so as to ensure that the long-term programme could be 
effectively implemented. In the administration of technical assistance 
activities, projects should he properly integrated and the training programme 
should come under the same direction as the other main technical assistance 
activities, namely the provision of experts and equipment, 
22. Decisions regarding the financing of the Agency's activities would have 
far-reaching effects on its work. Since appeals for voluntary contributions 
had not evoked the required response? a budget financed from assessed 
contributions? as recommended in the United States resolution approved by the 
5/ 
Board in June 1963 , offered the best means of carrying out the long-term 
programme and fulfilling the Agency's.responsibilities in technical assistance 
and training. The proposed modifications in the Financial Regulations would 
enable the developing countries to pay a part of their assessed contributions 
in local currencies. The Agency could be proud of its contribution to 
international scientific co-operation and it should continue to play a notable 
part in fostering mutual understanding. He thought, therefore, that it should 
receive financial support from its Member States in the form of assessed 
contributions. 

23. During the past few years he had spoken on several occasions, at home and 
abroad, of the great benefits that could accrue to mankind from sincere, 
continuing efforts to foster an open international scientific community. 
The past year had seen several interesting new developments, and in that 
context the Agency, with the enthusiastic -support of its Member States, could 
play a significant role as mediator and mentor. It was a role that the United 
States believed the Agency should seek and should play. 
24. He welcomed the plans to hold the Third United Nations International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in 1964. He was sure that 
3/ Reproduced in document GC(VII)/236. 


GC(VII)/OR.74 
page 8 


the Conference would make a major contribution to the development of atomic 
energy, and particularly to the development of nuclear power. Plans for 
United States participation were already being made. ' 


25. Mr. NAKICENOVIO (Yugosl avia) welcomed the countries which had become 
Member States of the Agency during the past year3 the fact that they were all 
developing countries was a reminder of the need for the Agency to intensify 
its efforts to promote the economic advancement of such countries, :' 
26. The efforts made to safeguard world peace and accelerate economic and 
social progress had an important bearing on the Agency's work, which had often 
been impeded in the past by the prevailing international tension. He therefore 
welcomed the conclusion of the Moscow test ban treaty and was sure it would have 
a profound effect on the Agency's future work. The enthusiastic manner in 
which that treaty had been greeted constituted an appeal to all States, and to 
the nuclear Powers in particular, to take further steps to consolidate peace, 
e.g. the discontinuance of underground tests and measures loading to general 
disarmament. A turning point had been reached in international relations and 
the efforts to-'achieve peaceful co-existence were being crowned with success. 
That development was bound to promote international co-operation, particularly 
co-operation within the United Nations, and to enable the Agency to expand its 
activities. 
27. The political and economic emancipation of the developing countries was 
clearly in the interest of all countries| it was a vital task of international 
co-operation, and affected those forms of co-operation with which the Agency 
itself was concerned. He realized the Agency had tried to provide effective 
assistance to developing countries but thought the procedure used should be 
adapted to changing conditions. It should be borne in mind that an increasing 
number of countries were already using nuclear energy or were about to do so. 
The implementation'of complex technical assistance projects was now feasible 
- and those projects should make it possible to carry out work of urgent 
importance within the' framework of national1 programmes§ they should incorporate 
the various existing forms of technical assistance, providing for the exchange 
of experts and professors, the supply .of, laboratory equipment and materials, 
the placing of research contracts, the organization of courses, and so on. 

GC(VII)/QR.74 
page 9 


An example was provided by the- institute for the application of nuclear energy 


in agriculturej veterinary science and forestry, established in Yugoslavia 


under an agreement signed with, the Agency and the United Nations Special Fund. 


The choice of such projects would have to ho made by the Governments concerned, 


but the Agency should offer constructive advice so that appropriate decisions 


could be taken. It could also help to mobilize the necessary human and 


financial resources, in particular by summoning assistance from other United 


Nations bodies. 


28. In order to provide more comprehensive assistance to the developing 
countries the Agency should expand its activities. It had already dealt 
adequately with the application of isotopes in agriculture and medicine but 
had lagged behind in other important activities, notably in the use of nuclear 
power and technology; more attention should be devoted to those subjects 
as many countries had made considerable progress and had reached a stage where 
they urgently nseded the Agency's assistance. The long-term programme should 
therefore provide for a new approach to that problem. He suggested that 
countries should pool their resources and work together under the Agency's 
auspices in the application of nuclear technology, which required large-scale 
international action. The Director General might explore the possibilities 
of joint ventures requiring large accelerators, a high-flux reactor, international 
demonstration power stations, reactors for the desalting of water, 
etc. His country would make the maximum possible contribution to that work. 
29, There should be closer co-operation in the exchange of scientific 
and technical experience. Symposia and similar scientific meetings accomplished 
useful work and his delegation would support the Agency's programme for future 
meetings. He urged Member States to provide participants at such meetings, 
particularly the Third United Nations Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy, with more information than hitherto on the most recent developments 
in nuclear technology, 


JO. The improvement in international relations would doubtless facilitate 


the adoption of international rules governing the use of nuclear energy. He 
welcomed the progress made with regard to safeguards and hoped that work on 


juridical questions concerning the use of nuclear energy would be more 


successful in future. 



GC(VH)/OH.74 


page 10 


31. His delegation's attitude to the financing of the budget was based on its 
desire to ensure that the Agency's activities should he expanded. The Agencyshould 
concentrate more on scientific and technical work and, with that end 
in view, the1 Secretariat should he appropriately reorganized. There must he 
an agreed solution 'of the problem of financing the Agency's activities, since 
a solution imposed by some Member States on the others would impede its work. 
32. Although, in the past, the Agency had had to operate in unfavourable 
conditions, it had succeeded in doing much useful work and the efforts of the 
Director General and Secretariat were largely responsible for that success. 
33. Mr• SOLE (South Africa) remarked that, with the prospect of the 
partial nuclear test ban treaty entering.into force in the immediate future, 
the General Conference w.as meeting under much happier auspices than in 1,962. 
While over-optimism should be avoided, it.was legitimate to hope that the 
ending of testing, other than underground testing, would divert certain 
resources of manpower and materials to more peaceful channels and that,' in the 
long run, the resources and activities of the Agency would benefit accordingly. 
34• Safeguards, the subject of one item on the agenda, had at least an 


indirect connection with the Moscow achievement. South Africa had always felt 


that the Agency approached safeguards from the wrong end of the plutoriium


cycle. It attempted to control the distribution of source material almost 


from the mine itself, whereas, in practice, control could most effectively 


start to operate at the testing and chemical reprocessing stages, and should 


be restricted to special fissionable material. The South African views had 


been borne out by events, and although South.Africa, always-willing to • 


co-operate in constructive international efforts in the interests of world 


peace, had supported the original Agency safeguards system and had applied its 


provisions to all sales of South African source material for peaceful 


purposes, there would now - especially in view of the Moscow treaty - seem •. 


to be every reason for liberalizing the Agency controls applicable to source 


materials. The existing system was due for review in 1964 and South Africa 
hoped then to' submit detailed proposals for liberalization, particularly 


where the source material was to be acquired for stockpiling rather than for 
immediate use. ' Sooner or later, uranium would cease to be in over-supply as 



GC(VII)/OR.74 
page 11 


it was at present, and such liberalization now might help to prevent the. 
occurrence of a shortage in the future, 


35° South Africa also had reservations about the Board's proposal to extend' 
the safeguards system to reactor facilities of over 100 Wh-^. - not because 
there was anything wrong with the objective in view but simply because the 
efficacy of the existing system had not been demonstrated by actual working 
experience. Despite the encouraging example of Japan? the history of recent. 
bilateral negotiations gave no reason to believe that the system could command 
the widespread practical support essential to its success. South Africa 
had consistently held that it was impossible to set up a watertight system of 
guarantees against diversion to military purposes and was concerned to secure 
instead the establishment of procedures which would act as a reasonably 
effective deterrent. It had accordingly suggested a somewhat different 
approach, not based on an extension of the existing system? unfortunately, 
however, 'the -proposals had been regarded as outside the terms of reference 
of the expert working group and, consequently, had not been given detailed 
examination, 

36, Considerable progress had been made during the past year in putting into 
effect principles he had enunciated at the previous session as appropriate 
guidelines for the Agency for the five years to come. The Board, leaving 
political differences aside, had concentrated on .technical problems. The 
Director General had elaborated proposals for a reorganization .of the Secretariat, 
based partly on consultations with the ex-Chairmen of .the Board, Hehad 
been happy to assist in that work. The South African proposal for biennial 
programming would be implemented, if the Conference approved, from 196" 5 onwards 
and would, he was confident, prove an important step towards simplifying 
General Conference procedures. The Board had reached full agreement on longterm 
planning/ first proposed by the Polish delegation. It was a source of 
considerable'satisfaction to him that South Africa had helped to remove the 
discussion' of that" subject from the contentious ideological atmosphere that 
had at first surrounded it. The fact that the final outcome had been 


6/ GC(VII)/2'35. 



GC(VII)/03„74 


page 12 


unanimous agreement served to sho;? that? provided political suspicions were 


put aside, the Agency offered magnificent opportunities for international 


co-operation in technical planning, '• 


37• In contrast, it was a matter for regret that the Board had been unable to 
reach full agreement on proposals for improving the Agency's financial 
situation. The draft amendment to the Statute now before the General 


•7/ • ' •


Conference-^ was opposed by a group of States whose co-operation was vital to 


the Agency's successful functioning. For that reason mainly; South Africa, 
which had taken the lead in initiating an examination of the Agency's 
financial problems? was unable to associate itself with the amendment5 if 
additional time had been given for further consultation and the examination 
of alternative formulas, a solution acceptable to all might well have been . 
.. 
found, 


38. It was gratifying that the Director General would probably be chosen as. • 
the scientific head of the next Geneva Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy. South Africa did not agree that, because of the Director • . . 
General's responsibilities to the Agency, such an arrangement was undesirable. 
On the contrary, the role he could play at the Geneva Conference would do much 
to underline the Agency's rightful position as the premier international 
organization in nuclear matters and publicize its potential for the years 
ahead -particularly from 1970 onward when nuclear power would probably 
become competitive with conventional. The Agency should concentrate on the 
essential's and, in particular, should avoid any slackening of its work on 
nuclear power, where considerable scope was offered for expansion and for 
the recruitment of additional staff in preparation for the role it would be 
expected to play when a break-through was achieved. 
39. .With regard to nuclear power and its relation,to technical assistance, • 
he recognized,that technical assistance was naturally determined by the 
wishes of the recipient country. However, South Africa's own experience as 
an industrially developed nation had made.clear the crucial importance of 
power-generating capacity as a key to progress and prosperity. He accordingly 
believed that developing countries with a great industrial potential would be 
well advised, in their requests to the Agency for technical assistance, to 
2/ Reproduced in document GC(VII)/236. 



GC(VII)/0E.74 
page 13 


concentrate on what was needed for establishing the infrastructure of trained 
manpower necessary to the development of nuclear power generation} as soon as 
that should become economically feasible. 


40, He trusted that he would be pardoned for concluding his remarks on a 
more personal note, for it was likely that his future duties in-South Africa 
would prevent him from attending any further sessions of the General Conference, 
He had been closely associated with the Agency since the inception of the 
first talks on the drafting of its Statute and had served continuously on 
the Preparatory Commission and the Board. He might therefore be presumed to 
be in a position to judge as to the Agency's state of health. He had seen 
the Agency overcome two major crises of confidence and believed that it was 
in better shape now than ever before. Its further growth would command 
increasing respect' and admiration and he would always be grateful for having 
had the opportunity of contributing to its well-being in the formative years. 
A long way still remained to go5 large-scale nuclear' power was not yet 
around the corner. But by travelling' hopefully the Agency would undoubtedly 
arrive. 


41• Mr. KAKAR (Afghanistan) said that the Moscow test ban treaty, to 
which his Government was a signatory? marked an important step towards peacefi 
co-existence. He looked forward to complete nuclear disarmament, and the 
utilization of the vast resources of atomic energy for peaceful purposes only, 


42. Afghanistan greatly appreciated the assistance it had received from the•• 
Agency, without which it could not have made such good progress in the .•-" 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy? but much more help would be needed 
in the future. 
43. A nuclear physics laboratory had been set up-as part of the Science 
Faculty of Kabul University with equipment supplied by the Agency. Research 
laboratories were needed to study radioisotope applications in medicine, 
agriculture and industry. A project whose purpose was to extend the existing 
nuclear physics laboratory for work on medical applications had been submitted 
to the Agency for consideration under the 1964 regular programme. The Agency 
had already provided the services of an adviser on nuclear physics. He hoped 
the Board would approve the recommended extension of the adviser's contract 
for another year and agree to supply some equipment required for the proposed 
extension. 

GC(VII)/OR.74 • 


page 14 


44• Under a bilateral agreement recently concluded with the Soviet Union, 


Afghanistan would receive a sub-critical assembly which was expected to be 
ready by the middle of 1965-That would create a need for further experts in 


different radioisotope applications in 1965-66, and he hoped that requests for 


such services would be given favourable consideration. The Atomic Energy 


Commission was being reorganized in view of those developments and the Agency 
would be duly informed of the .changes introduced, 


45° Afghanistan would continue to take part in-Agency conferences and symposia 
and hoped to act as host to one -in the near future, 


46. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) said he hoped the seventh regular session would 
be a turning point in the Agency's history, as it was taking place shortly 
after the conclusion in Moscow of the test ban agreement. That agreement was 
merely a first step, which must be_followed by many others if the use of atomic 
energy for anything other than peaceful purposes was to be banned, Nevertheless, 
the Agency's future seemed to hold the promising -and, it was to be 
hoped, not too distant -prospect of scientists, materials and capital being 
made available to deal with the many problems it would have to face in 
carrying out its 'programme. • -•
•• • 
47• Guidelines must accordingly be drawn up now for the Agency's future work, 
and a programme established which could be undertaken with existing resources, 
but easily expanded should additional men and capital be freed in the world of 
the peaceful atom. 


48. The programme should be conceived in the light,of the Agency's basic 
responsibilities and adapted to the general scheme of activities undertaken 
by international organizations. Overlapping, duplication and overdiversification 
should be avoided. The resolution recently adopted by the 
United Nations Economic and Social Council-^ was accordingly welcome, calling 
attention as it did to "the primary responsibility of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency ..,-, for work in the'field of atomic energy" and to the need for 
"ensuring that no proposal in which more than one 'agency may have an interest 
is approved by the governing body of'any particular-agency without a clear 
8/ ECOSOC Resolution 986 (XXXVl), reproduced in document INFCIRC/48. 



ec(vn)/ofe,74 
page 15 


statement of the steps which have been taken to collaborate at the formative 
stage with the other interested agencies"„ 


49• The resolution voiced the Agency's own concern about the so-called atomic 
activities of various international organizations. The Agency must ensure that 
the atom was not used as a pretext for the creation, without any real need, of 
new and increasingly ambitious machinery. The Agency's scientifi-c and 
technical services would certainly always be ready to help other agencies in 
carrying out any of their programmes that had a bearing on nuclear energyf 
but each agency should deal only with the matters that specifically concerned 
it, in order to avoid conflicts of responsibility and duplication that were 
always costly. 


50. So far as its resources permitted, Belgium had always endeavoured to 
contribute to the progress of science and technology. Nov/ that the Agency was 
establishing a long-term programme, the moment seemed appropriate for a 
summary of Belgian nuclear achievements, for the Agency would have to take 
account of the experience of each of its Member States in each of its proposed 
areas of development in order to benefit to the full from what they had already 
achieved„ 
51• Belgium's nuclear activities were many and varied% fundamental and 
applied research, the production and utilization of radioisotopes, the 
production of fuel elements "and other nuclear materials, the development and 
manufacture of instruments, the construction of reactors and participation in • 
many international projects. 

520 Without going into details, he wished to mention some of the major 
technological achievements. The BR-2, a materials-testing reactor (highlyenriched 
uranium fuel (90$), light-water moderator and coolant, beryllium 
reflector), was the most powerful of its kind in Western Europe and one of the 
most modern in the world. At full power, its thermal neutron flux reached 


6.2 x 1(T4 n/cm7sec and Its fast neutron flux 2.4 x 10 n/cra /sec. It had 
gone critical in July 196l and since 1 January 1963 bad been operating at 
17 MW„ Several experiments, including the testing of a loop for the Dragon 
project, samples of plutonium fuel elements, graphite, radioisotope targets, 
and so on, had been conducted in the reactor. A new series of tests was to 

GC(VII)/OR.74 •*' 


page 16 


tring the reactor to its nominal power of 50 MW. It would be brought into 
normal operation at full power before the end of the year and would he at the 
disposal of many users, Belgian and foreign, 


53= The BR-2 was operated jointly by Belgium and the European Atomic Enevgy 

Community (EURATOM) hut was available to all countries, and - a point worth 
noting - many bodies outside EURATOM were already among the users. As the 
Agency would continue to encourage international collaboration in the 
utilization of high-flux research reactors and act as intermediary between 
States for.that purpose, it was well to know .that Belgium's BR-2 reactor still 
offered many facilities for neutron irradiation. 


54• The Vulcain project was now receiving priority under the Belgian nuclear 
programme. It was a 20 W variable-moderated reactor which could be used for 
ship propulsion or in power stations. Its economic future was very brightf 
it might become competitive even with low-power conventional plants, as the 
kWh would cost between 6 and 7 mills if the reactor went into large-scale" 
production. 


55* The joint development of the reactor' by Belgium and the United Kingdom 
involved neutron studies, work on instrumentation and fuel elements, and the 
study of a prototype. A critical assembly was due to go into operation very 
soon at the Mol Centre in Belgium. 


56. Since 1956, Belgium had been especially interested in the plutonium 
cycle and fast reactors. A large-scale research programme undertaken by 
Belgo-tiucleaire and the Centre d1 etudes nucleaires,-with support from EURATOM, 
had led to the establishment of a plutonium fuel element laboratory at Mol. 
It was now possible to manufacture mixed PuO?-UOp oxides on a pilot scale and 
the first such fuel assembly would be loaded in the BR-J reactor before the 
end of the year,. Belgian industry had also decided to construct a first plant 
for the large-scale fabrication of plutonium fuel elements. With regard to 
fast reactors, Belgian engineers had participated at the various phases of 
construction of the Enrico Fermi breeder-reactor in the United States. As a 
result of such experience, a Belgian firm had been selected as industrial 
designers for the-HARMONIE reactor and the MASURCA critical assembly under 
construction at Cadarache in France, under the co-operation agreement between 

GG (¥11) /OR.74page 
17 


the French' Atomic Energy Commission and EURATOM. Belgian industry had also 


carried;.: out several- studies on fast reactors, including one for-use in space. 


Recently Belgium had undertaken a study for an original' reactor (the Briseis) 


to tost fuel-element materials. . ' 


57° His country also attached great importance to the processing of 
irradiated fuels. Thanks to its participation in Eurochemie, it could follow 
the progress made with aqueous methods. However, it seemed that non-aqueous 
methods might prove more, economic? especially in small installations. Research 
was concerned mainly with the treatment of ceramic fuels hy fluorination. 
Stress had-recently been laid on problems'associated with plutonium recovery, 
and an interest had also been taken in 'chlorination, followed by fluorination, 
of the enriched-uranium/aluminium alloys employed in materials-testing 
reactors. 


58, Having thus surveyed Belgian nuclear activities, he wished to refer to 
certain general principles that should not be forgotten. 


59° Assisting the developing countries was a major responsibility of the-
Agency, but not its only one. Training in the widest sense of the word was 
no doubt the fundamental objective of the long-term programme before the 
General Conference, but its success would require something more than simply 
providing technical assistance - something that could only come from contacts 
between peoples, irrespective of who they might be or of their degree of 
development. It was impossible to overstress the need for such understanding 
and for such human contact on the international plane. 


60. Nuclear science had an increasingly important role to play in.the world 
of the future and the Agency must see that it developed as widely and as soon 
as possible in all countries, especially the less developed. However, not 
all its applications were of immediate interest to countries with limited 
resources. Economic and social development must come first, and the 
applications of nuclear science, as of the other branches 'Of 's'Cience 'and 
economy, had to remain secondary to that overriding requirement. That was why 
Belgium suggested that the Agency should set up an advisory committee, in 
addition to the Scientific Advisory Committee, to deal with the economic and 
social aspects of technical problems. 

GC(VII)/on.74 
page 18 


61. A.question which had given rise to a great deal of discussion in the 
past was the Agency's role in research. The Belgian view - shared by many 
others - was that the Agency'had not the means necessary for direct research 
on any significant scale. It must confine itself to a limited number of 
subjects. On the other hand, it could and should promote scientific research 
within Member States, co-ordinate national activities and make.the results 
public. 
62. In its regulatory work the Agency had enjoyed some outstanding successes 
during the previous two years, in collaboration with the Governments of Member 
States and with other international organizations. Examples which suggested 
themselves immediately were the Convention on the Liability of Operators of 
Nuclear Ships, the Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the 
international Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials. 
Such work would probably expand as the applications of atomic energy expanded. 
It was to be hoped that the Agency would always maintain the closest contact 
with other international organizations interested in the same problems, and 
that it would proceed cautiously. A convention would work only insofar as it 
commanded the assent of the countries which had to apply it. 
65. He hoped his remarks would not be considered too restrained. He could, 
of course, have paid tribute to the remarkable long-term programme submitted 
to the General Conference for approval, but had thought it better to recall 
certain principles which, without detracting from what the programme very 
rightly aimed at doing, might keep it prudently realistic. As he had 
stated earlier, it was a good omen for the Agency's future work that the 
appearance of its first long-term programme should coincide with the Moscow 
treaty' that was now opening up wide horizons and would no doubt release new 
resources to strengthen international scientific collaboration and assist the 
peaceful development of countries and nations. 
64. Mr. McKNIGHT (Australia) said that it had been his delegation's 
consistent view that the General Conference ought to be shorter so as to enable 
the Secretariat to proceed with the Agency's growing scientific work. In 
1962 it had suggested that a major Conference, at which a general debate would 
take place, should only be held biennially and that in alternate years the. 

GC(VII)/0H.74 
page 19 


Conference should be a minor one to carry out the duties laid down in the 


Statute. The purpose had .been to offer a compromise between the view of. some 
Member States, notably the Netherlands and Pakistan, that biennial conferences 
would suffice and the desire of others to observe strictly the provisions of 


the Statute,, His Government, like many others, was anxious to reduce the 
administrative costs of the numerous international organizations in existence. 
The direct costs of the Agency's General Conference exceeded $250 000 annually 
and accounted for approximately 3.3$ of its administrative budget. Without • 
for the moment' expressing a final opinion, he strongly supported the Director 


General's suggestion, that the question be studied with- a view to its being 
considered by the Board in 1964. ' ' ' 


55. Commenting on some of the important items before the Conference, namely 
items 15> 19 and 18, he expressed support for the long-term programme as a 
framevork for the preparation of the Agency's periodic programmes and budgets, 
whether they were to be annual, biennial or a mixture of the two, and also 
favoured the safeguards system being extended to large reactors. As far as 
the financing of the Agency's activities was concerned, his delegation could 
not subscribe to the proposed amendment to Article XIV of the Statute. 
66. Australian scientists considered the Study Group Meeting on Utilization 
of Research Reactors, held in Bangkok in December 1962, and the Conference.of 
Countries in Asia and the Pacific for the Promotion of Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy, convened in Tokyo by the Japanese Government in March 1963, "to have 
been highly successful and had welcomed the opportunity of meeting scientists 
from Asian countries. One problem which had come to the fore during the 
discussions had been the lack of modern scientific textbooks and journals in 
many countries, which were indispensable to nuclear studies and without which 
other forms of Agency assistance would be ineffective. He therefore welcomed 
the provision included'in the technical assistance programme to assist nuclear 
science libraries in developing countries. 
67. His delegation approved of the Director General's plan to create a new 
Technical Assistance Department, in which the Secretariat's technical 
assistance activities would be co-ordinated and centralized. The now arrangement 
should lead to an improved knowledge and understanding of receiving 
countries1 needs. 

GC(VII)/OR„74 
page 20 


68. As the countries of a region were usually faced with many similar 
problems there was increasing room for regional co-operation in technical 
assistance matters., and it was therefore gratifying that the director General 
should have appointed a regional representative in Bangkok, 
69. On. the question of experts,, he said that it would he of mutual advantageto 
scientists in the host country and to the expert if the latter were to make 
a follow-up visit some time after completing his mission. 
70. Mentioning a point which he considered to he of particular interest to 
countries of Asia, the Pacific and La'tin American regions, he said that in 
May 1965 a cargo of highly radioactive nuclear material from the Australian 
materials-testing reactor HIFAR had been shipped to the United Kingdom, In 
terms of distance, including a long overland haul in Australia, length of 
voyage and size of cargo, the shipment had made history. Throughout, the 
Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials had been 
complied with. The universal acceptance.and application of those regulations 
were essential to the safe and speedy development of atomic industry everywhere, 
and he believed that if revised they stood a far greater chance of being 
accepted. The Agency was to be commended on the leading and appropriate part 
it had played in bringing the regulations into being. Within five years there 
would be a great need for transporting irradiated fuel elements from the 
growing number of reactors, and if the experience gained from the shipment he 
had described could be of any help to other Member States, information would 
be most willingly supplied. 
71. As the delegate of a country at the end of a long sea route, he noted with 
satisfaction that agreement had been reached on a final text of the Convention 
on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, which would greatly facilitate the 
international transport of nuclear and particularly of fissionable materials 
provided it were ratified by many countries in all regions of the world. 
Authorities in his country were carefully studying'that text'and he urged 
other Governments to give the matter priority, 
72. In conclusion he thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for the 
solid and worth-while work accomplished for the benefit of Member States 
in the region to which Australia belonged. 

GC(VII)/OR.74 
page 21 


73. Mr. de SIQUEIRA ffREIRE (Portugal) recalled that the GeriGral ' 
Conference was required to discuss various important questions, including the 
long-term programme. The delegation of Portugal approved that programme and 
wanted to congratulate the Board? the Director General and the Agency's 
Secretariat for preparing it. The programme, which was more in the nature 
of a guide than a rigid plan? contained no completely new features and proposed 
no revolutionary methods5 nor did it represent a change of direction with,. 
regard to past activities. Instead, it aimed at giving, .for the years 
1965-1970? general directives involving procedures similar to those which had 
been applied so far. In the formulation of the programme, account had been 
taken of the fact that the five years in question would be a transition period, 
characterized particularly by the increased construction of nuclear power 
stations for the production of electricity on a competitive basis, 
74 • Neverthele ss, Portugal was convinced that the Agency's main effort.should 
bear on the training of scientific and technical personnel. By sustaining 


those efforts, the Agency would really help in shaping the most valuable 


capital, human capital. The training of scientific and technical personnel 


should therefore continue to have priority, 


75° In that connection, he noted with satisfaction that the Board had finally 


approved the establishment of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 


and he hoped that it would fully live up to what many countries were expecting 


of it, especially in regard to scientific training. He wanted to emphasize 


the decisive part played by the delegation of Pakistan, and in particular by 
Mir. Usmani, Chairman of the Board, 


76. With regard to the financial implications of the long-term programme, he 
pointed out that since that programme related to a transition period, and in 
view of the nature of .the Agency's basic activities, t-here would not 
necessarily be a continued, substantial increase in the annual budget. . He 
wanted to make certain reservations regarding the estimates which had been 
submitted to the Board, 
77• On the proposed amendment to Article XIV of the Statute,, an amendment which 
aimed at strengthening the financing of- the Agency's activities, he stated that 
the need to place financing on a more stable footing was one of the reasons why 



GC(VII)/0H.74 
page 22 


Portugal had been interested in the/original-proposals- submitted by the 
United Kingdom. The.desire to secure a mqre reasonable distribution of 
financial burdens connected with the operational programme was an added 
justification for Portugal's position. 


78. In the light of the debates which'had'taken place'at the' sixth regular 
session and subsequently} Portugal considered that there was no reason to 
change its attitude and would give its support to the draft amendment to • 
Article XIV of the Statute, approval'of which had been recommended by the 
Board. • • ' ' 
79° He wanted to express his satisfaction at the excellent co-operation 
which had been kept up during the year between the Agency's Secretariat and 
the Portuguese Atomic Energy Authority and other institutions in Portugal. In 
particular, he wished to mention the assistance granted for training and 
research'"activities in Portuguese laboratories, and more particularly the . 
award of a new research contract for a study of schistosomiasis' using radio- isotopes. 


80. He sincerely hoped that those studies would give positive results. In 
any event.* they represented a type of activity which was directly connected 
with the Agency's technical functions and which Portugal welcomed with 
pleasure and deep interest'. 
81. Mr. MICHELI (Italy) stated that, since it was world-wide in character 
and brought together all the persons responsible for nuclear energy activities, 
the General Conference provided the best opportunity for an annual summing-up 
of the progress made with regard to atomic energy and its various applications. 
However, that summing-up was not the only object of' the Conference, because 
past experience and the discussion it' evoked gave birth to new ideas which 
could often have a decisive influence on the direction of future nuclear 
energy activities. During the preceding year the Agency's activities had 
made considerable progress, and they were constantly increasing in number. 


82. The decision of the Board to establish an International Centre for 
theoretical Physics at Trieste was an event-of great importance and proved 
that all' political and ideological barriers could be overcome in the cause of 

GC(VII)/OR.74 
page 23 


science, Italy had always realized the importance such a centre could have . 
for the development of the Agency's future activities and had welcomed.with 
pride and enthusiasm the decision to establish the Centre at Trieste, The 
Centre would, in particular, help in providing specialized training to persons 
from developing countries. On returning home those experts would constitute 
highly specialized groups, indispensiblo to the development of nuclear 
activities in their own countries. The establishment of the Centre at Trieste 
was a very important step whose results and advantages would not be long in 
making themselves felt, Italy would collaborate to the full in order to ensure 
that the Centre could start to operate as quickly as possible and develop in 
the most favourable circumstances, 


83, The amendment to the Statute, which had just come into force and which 


ensured wider representation of the area of Africa and the Middle East on the 


Board, must be regarded as equitable in view of the great changes that had 


taken place in that region. In that' connection, his country had noted with 


satisfaction the opening of a Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre at 


Cairo, 


84° Italy would always approve of action taken to help developing countries, 
because that was one of the Agency's most important responsibilities, but 
care should be taken to keep a step ahead of the needs of countries which were 
just beginning to tackle nuclear science. The long-term programme thus 
appeared to be very useful, The Agency's experts and officials should be given 
directives which would allow them to work in a quiet and peaceful atmosphere 
and to achieve good results, .. 


85, The delegation of Italy supported the proposal to abolish the distinction 
between the Regular Budget and the Operational Budget, The present system was 
certainly not satisfactory and efforts should be made to secure for the Agency, 
as far as possible, the resources which it was needing more and more. He 
pointed out, incidentally, that the budget was very modest compared with 

those of some other organizations, which was not logical in view of the 
Agency's important and sometimes very costly activities, 


86, Italy also supported the extension of safeguards to reactors whose power 
exceeded 100 MW, The safeguards system had been carefully studied and approved 
and there was no reason for not adapting it to new requirements5 in that way 
the work already carried out could be improved and rendered more useful. 



GC(VI)/OE.74 
page 24 


87. In Italy, two nuclear power stations had been put into operation during 
the year. The SIMBA power station, at Latina, had become critical in 
December 1962. It was equipped with a graphite-moderated natural uranium 
reactor cooled by carbon dioxide§ six heat-exchangers produced the steam to 
feed three '70 MW turbo-alternators, which would supply the grid with 200 MW(e) 
at 150 and 220 kV. Approximately half of the installations had been supplied 
by Italian industry, which had thereby acquired valuable experience. That 
power station had started to supply the grid with power on 30 May 1963= 
88. The SEOT nuclear power station situated at the mouth of the Garigliano, 
near Naples, was equipped with a 150 MST(e) boiling-water reactor using enriched 
uranium dioxide5 it had become critical on 5 June 19&3. 
89. In conclusion, he stated that Italy would give' full support to the 
Agency's activities, and confirmed the award of 20 fellowships for specialists 
who wanted to complete their studies in Italy. It would likewise assist in 
finding staff and the necessary financial means for carrying out the technical 
assistance programme. The Italian Government was studying the possibility of 
offering a substantial voluntary contribution, 
90. He had every confidence in the Agency's future and hoped that the present 
session would mark a step towards achieving the envisaged goals, so that 
nuclear energy, freed from the incubus of its tragic beginnings, could assert 
itself as a factor in human progress and welfare. 
The meeting rose at I.5 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(VII)/OR.75 

31 December 1963 


GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 


Seventh regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 25 September 1963, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


10 Genoral debate and report of the Board of 1 - 110 
Governors for 1962-63 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Israel 1-10 
Nigeria 11 - 14 
Argentina 15 - 26 
Colombia 27 - 47 
Mexico 48 - 56 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic 57 - 78 
Switzerland 79-8 9 
Netherlands 90 - 110 

GC(VII)/247. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2. 


63-7975 



GC(VII)/QR.75 
page 2 


GENERAL. .DEBATE AID REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1962-63 
(GC(VIIJ/228,'243) (continued) 


1. Mr. BERGMAHN (Israel) expressed his appreciation of the support, his 
country had received from the Agency.' At the present-time the Agency's most 
important function was to give advice to the developing countries, which could 
make a start with some of the applications of atomic energy that did not immediately 
require large and costly installations. Young people could then he 
trained in the''necessary•' techniques, so that they, could' look,forward with confidence 
to the installation of a research reactor. The training of their own 
scientific staff was one of the most important tasks.facing the developing 
countries. 
2. He was convinced that atomic power could eventually he the answer to the 
global prohlem of energy supply, hut he did not think it would become a common 
cenmodity as soon as the founders of the Agency had originally hoped. One reason 
was that"'ohi'y"'very large installations appeared to be economically sound at present 
and they would not he suitable for most of the developing countries unless another..:* 
large-scale use was found for the energy produced. ".One such use could he th.3 
desalination of sea-water. His country was particularly interested in that 
subject and he was very glad that a group of experts was to study it. 
3. Between the training of scientific staff and the building of atomic pewor 
stations came the period of the research reactor. .It was an essential stage, but 
it was, expensive and could only be justified if the reactor was fully utilized. 
The Agency had been wise to-'hold regular'conferences pn;,the subject and Israel 
had been glad to take part in thorn and share it's experience, as a country wiih 
limited manpower and financial resources, with other countries in a similar 
position. 
4. He then gave an account of the work done in Israel with a research react /r-, 
which had become one of the centres of scientific life in the country and had 
greatly encouraged fundamental research. A new research group was working on the 
theoretical physics of elementary particles and work was also being'done on nuclear 
chemistry, radiochemistry and radiation chemistry. Interest in fundamental 
research had "not", 'However;' led'his country to neglect- the applications. of .atomic 
energy. It was providing short-lived isotopes for"use in'research, in hospitals, 
in agriculture and in industry, and the results obtained by thoir use in water 
planning had been most satisfactory. 

GC(VII)/GEU75 
page 3 

5. Some work had also been done on the use of radioactive fall-out for 
meteorological studies and he thought it would he useful if the \Agejncy could 
co-ordinate all the work on that subject. 
6. A considerable amount of work was planned on radiobiology and the applications 
of atomic energy to agriculture. A group had been formed to study the 
preservation of food by ionizing radiation - a process which was of particular 
importance to tropical and sub-tropical countries* That was another field in 
which the Agency might well perform a central co-ordinating function, 
7. Israel's research reactor was now being used for 8C$> of the total working 
time and he believed that within a year or eighteen months it would be fully 
utilized. It would then be necessary to carry on all additional activities at a 
new research centre. 
8. Israel was particularly interested in promoting international co-operation in 
the uses of atomic energy and he was glad to be able to announce that his Government 
would again offer fellowships for 60 man-months to enable scientists from 
other countries to work in Israel. A course for high-school teachers had recently 
been held in Israel, which had been attended by teachers from several Asian and 
African countries. It was particularly important that high-school students 
should learn something about nuclear energy, but unfortunately the high schools, 
particularly in the developing countries, did not usually have the facilities 
necessary for such instruction. It would be helpful if a unified syllabus could 
be worked out and simple equipment devised which, when produced in sufficiently 
large quantities, would be within the reach of even the poorer countries. 'He 
hoped that the Agency would devote some attention to that problem. 
9. He welcomed the fact that the Agency had agreed to sponsor the second 
international course in radiobiology which was to be held in Israel in April 1964. 
His Government also wished to propose that an international symposium on radiation 
chemistry should be held in Israel towards the end of 196510. 
In conclusion, he said that the General Conference was meeting under the 
happy auspices of the Moscow treaty on the partial discontinuance of nuclear 
tests1 he hoped that that treaty would free the nations of the world from the 
mutual suspicion which had porsoned their relations and give a new impetus to the 
spirit of international co-operation. 

GC(VII)/OR.75 
page 4 


11. Mr. PATIKA (Nigeria) expressed his appreciation of the unanimous support 
given to his country's application for membership in the Agency. Nigeria had 
always strongly advocated the restriction of atomic energy to peaceful uses and 
he was therefore very happy to welcome the agreement reached at Moscow on a partial 
nuclear test ban. 
12. The Director General, in his statement, had referred to the trend towards a 
regional approach in certain of.the Agency's activities? it was to be hoped that 
the Agency would consider the establishment of a regional training centre for the 
African countries and that favourable consideration would be 'given to the proposal 
that a study group on reactor utilization should be organized for countries in 
Africa. 
15. He also hoped that during the current session the Agency's Statute would be 
amended to provide for better representation of the African countries on the 
Board of Governors. As the representative of a new Member, he did not wish to 
enter into a detailed discussion on the working of the'Agency? nevertheless, he 
could not but note with regret the continued representation of South Africa on the 
Board of Governors. His country felt very strongly that South Africa, while 
pursuing its inhuman policies of apartheid, had no moral right' to representation 
on a body which had to consider issues of vital concern to developing countries in 
Africa. He hoped, therefore, that the Agency would, as soon as possible, take 
appropriate steps to exclude South Africa from the Board'of'Governors. '• •' 
14. The developing,countries were very conscious of their lack of experienced 
scientists and technical staff and they welcomed the offer of secondment of young 
scientists and administrators to the Agency. They also hoped that experienced 
African scientists and administrators would be given opportunities for service in 
senior posts on the Agency's staff. 
15. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said that the entry of new Members into the 
Agency was an auspicious event. The Argentine Republic was particularly gratified 
by the admission of Bolivia and Uruguay, neighbouring'countries with which it had 
always collaborated, and hoped that its co-operation with them would now be 
extended to nuclear science. 
16. Referring to technical assistance activities during the past year, he 
expressed his thanks for the assistance received, which had made it possible to 
bring various projects in the Argentine nuclear research programme to a successful 

OC(711)/OR.75 
page 5 


conclusion. Thanks to technical assistance, Argentine research workers and 
technicians had been able to improve their knowledge of various branches of 
atomic science. Argentina, in its turn, had been able to help other Latin 
American countries, taking advantage of the•comparatively short distance that 
separated them. Argentine experts had collaborated, for instance, in the work 
of the mobile laboratory. ' 
'' 

17. Turning to the question of better utilization of teohnical assistance, he 
referred to the problem of defraying fellowship holders' travelling expenses, 
which were a burden for States faced with economic difficulties and situated far 
from the usual countries of study. In many cases they had to decline the fellowships 
offered by the Agency or by -Member States because they could not meet those 
expenses. The policy followed by the Agency, which was to examine each individual 
case and pay travelling expenses where it was considered necessary, was, in his 
opinion, adequate5 hence-as he had maintained during the discussions of the Board. 
of Governors, no alteration should be made in that procedure. 
18. Referring to other activities of the Agency, he praised the good sense with 
which they had been carried out and the spirit of collaboration with other organizations 
related to the United Nations, which made it possible to avoid a duplication 
of work in many'fields. 
19. Progress in the field of nuclear power had not been as rapid as had been 
expected at first, but it was to be hoped that the work done would soon begin toshow 
resultsj he therefore thought it appropriate to give priority to the Agency's 
studies, reports and work on that subject. 
20. He was not entirely in agreement with the importance assigned in the budget 
to the development of laboratory work, but he trusted that the sound judgement of 
the Secretariat would ensure that it did not become detrimental to other activities 
that deserved higher priority. 
21. With regard to the-long-term programme, he considered it essential in the 
present age of planning and was certain that the fixing of immediate and longterm 
objectives--would appreciably increase the-Agency*s efficiency. He was convinced 
that, once certain financing difficulties had beenlovercome, the programme 
would prove beneficial/ particularly for the developing-countries. • For that 
reason, among others, Argentina had decided to support the amendment of 

GC(VII)/OH„75 
page 6 


1/ ' " • 
Article XIV of the Statute-7 .f for there was no doubt that the success of the 
programme would largely depend on a precise knowledge of the sources and amount of 
funds to he allocated to it. He confessed that although he had studied the matter 
very carefully, he had not been able to find a more satisfactory solution, 

22. Biennial programming within the framework of annual budgets would have 
definite financial advantages and, if approved, would make it possible to plan the 
utilization of resources carefully and obtain a better return from them. Among 
means of effecting economies without prejudice to other fruitful activities, such 
as technical assistance, he mentioned the possibility of the General Conference 
meeting only once every two years. The urgency that had made annual meetings 
advisable no longer existed, and in Various other international organizations, 
such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and 
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the new system had 
given entirely satisfactory results. It would not be difficult to make the 
necessary amendment to the Statute, and the present was a favourable time to do so, 
25- He considered that the principle underlying the proposal for reorganization 
of the Secretariat, submitted by the Director General, was sound; the proposed 
changes would simplify the Secretariat's structure and make it more flexible and' 
efficient. At present, the allocation of fellowships, the supply of equipment and 
the provision of experts came under separate Departments, the activities of which 
were difficult to co-ordinate. The amalgamation of those separate Departments 
would result in increased efficiency in the services they furnished to Member 
States, He understood that, in view of the importance of the duties he would havet 
to perform, the official responsible for all matters appertaining to technical 
assistance was to.hold the rank of Deputy Director General, and that he was to be 
a national of one of the developing countries, so that he would have a thorough 
knowledge of their problems, 


.24. He then referred to the effective efforts made by the Agency to secure international 
legislation on nuclear energy. Following the studies on civil liability 
for nuclear damage carried out by the panel of experts vrtiich had been set up in 
1958? and had met in i960 and 1961, and the work of the Intergovenmental Committee 
that had prepared the preliminary draft ol a convention on that subject, the 
Agency had, in April 1963, convened the International Conference on Civil Liability 


1/ GC(VII)/236. 



GC(VII)/0H.75 
page 7 • 


for Nuclear Damage. The Convention adopted by that Conference represented a most 


important landmark in the history of modern legislation. Parallel, with that 
valuable legal work of the Agency, studies had been carried out with a view toestablishing 
legal norms for the discharge oi .radioactive- waste into the sea. The 
Argentine Government had given special attention to possible extensions of the 
Brussels Convention on the Liability of Operators of Nuclear Ships, to bilateral 
and regional agreements concerning nuclear accidents and to other matters of a 
similar kind, 


25. In conclusion, the Argentine delegation did not wish to miss the opportunity 
of referring to an event that gave cause for courage and hope for civilization the 
conclusion of the nuclear test ban treaty, .which marked the beginning of 
agreement between two great Powers, the United States of America and the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics. The importance of that agreement had been shown by 
the fact that nearly all the nations of the world had acceded to the treaty. 
26. While the future was uncertain and there were factors that might still cast a 
shadow on the scene, he considered that the test bah agreement meant the attainment 
of a modus Vivendi which could banish the terror of a nuclear war5 he hoped 
that an atmosphere of reduced' tension, of. understanding and.comprehension would 
henceforth prevail and that sincere collaboration between-all,nations of the world 
be established. He hoped, too, that the Agency would play its part in that 
collaboration and strengthen the trend recently shown' in the speeches cf the 
President of the United States and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the.Soviet 
Union at the United Nations General Assembly.;-" 
27. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia) said that the problems which had existed in'' 
1957 when the Agency had been se't up were gradually being solved? there were now 
83'Member States interested in the peaceful utilization of -atomic energy. Atomic 
energy was no longer the exclusive privilege of very advanced countries, for even 
the least developed were trying to train experts, build laboratories and create, 
a real interest in atomic energy among their own scientific communities. 
28. Thus, since 1956, Colombia had had a Nuclear Institute which prepared and 
carried out nuclear studies, encouraged the use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes and, in doing so, complied with the applicable international agreements. 
The Institute had large and well-equipped offices and laboratories, a dilution 
tank for contaminated water, an insect-breeding centre where experiments on 

OC(VII)/OR'.75 
page 8 


pe'st eradication were carried out, a hothouse, a-machine shop, a stabilized 


electricity service, and air, water and gas installations. Its technical.staff,• 


which included chemical and electronics engineers,•chemists, physicists, 


'agronomists, doctors and auxiliary staff, was Colombian! some had been -trained 


in the Institute; itself hut most had. pursued their advanced studies at American, 


and European centres. •., • 


29. Like almost all countries in Latin America;,' Colombia was primarily agri-•. 
cultural. It was the second largest producer of coffee (its main source of 
.foreign-currency) 'on the South American continent. 
Cotton cultivation had 
increased 'rapidly':in recent years— from 85 000 hectares in 1955 to 180 .0Q0 in 
1962 •* with a. production of. approximately 221 870 tons of cot-ton,,seeds; cotton 
exports, second inimportance amongst the country's.exports, had been worth.., 
$18 million in 1962. However., pests which, threatened the crop-affected not only 
production costs hut also the-quality and quantity of the harvest. Amongst 
such pests the worst was the. Colombian pink grub (Sacadodes Pyralis), which 
.destroyed 30$ of the. crop, representing a value of some 35 million Colombian pesos. 


•30.' In view'of the importance .of cotton cultivation and the danger represented by 
Sacadodes Pyralis,'- the Nuclear Institute was considering the possibility of 
eradicating that pest-with gamma, radiation. In the insect-breeding centre, which 
provided conditions- "of temperature -and humidity similar to. those in which the 
insect' flour-i'svhed, the radiation dose -which could sterilize the male, insect . 
Without "affecting its: sexual viridity, longevity and mating habits was being 
investigated, together with the chrysalis age at which the irradiation would. 
have maximum effect, 
•31. The "gualpa" or coconut beetle--(Hhinchophorus Palmarum) .was .one of the most 
•terrible of palm tree pests because of its-speed of reproduction, ...the difficulty 
"of controlling it and the gravity of the, damage it usually caused. In the South, 
along the Pacific coast, whole plantations had been destroyed, and unless a vast 
eradication caftipaign.-wa.fevundertaken the pest would shortly: infest the.whole 
Pacific.coastline. The.main problem, however, was that it might attack the 
African.palm, who,se cultivation was being intensified in Colombia in order to 
remedy-the- deficit in vegetable oil production which now stood at 45 million 
kilograms and might .reach 100 million kilograms unless adequate measures were 
taken. To deal with the present problem and the problem which might arise iti 


GC(VII)/OR.75 
page 9 


the future, the Institute, in collaboration with companies cultivating the African 
palm and the country's agricultural faculties, intended to undertake research on 
that little-known coleopteron. It was a difficult task, hut the use of radioisotopes 
would undoubtedly yield excellent results. 


32. Various studies of tuber preservation by means of ionizing radiations had 
been made. Potatoes irradiated in 1962 at 10-15 krads were physically and 
chemically in perfect condition. A comparative study was at present being made of 
the effect's of various chemical 'inhibitors and of gamma irradiation on potatoes of 
different varieties and qualities. In collaboration with experimental farms and 
agronomy faculties, soil phosphorus, A-values and the influence of fertilizer 
types and phosphate fertilizer applications on barley crops were being studied? 
methods of using labelled fertilizers in fertilizer tests, and phosphorus 
translocation by barley in hydroponic cultures, were also being investigated. 
33° The possibility of using radioactive sources for X-ray fluorescence excita


tion in chemical analysis was being studied. Proportional counters, operating on 
a mixture of argon and methane and intended for the spectrometry of characteristic 
X-rays of the 3 keV to 8 keV energy range, were nearing completion. A solid


state scintillation counter for thermal neutrons had been constructed and a 


series of experiments performed on different luminescent boron compounds in an 
attempt to obtain high efficiency and low gamma-sensitivity. The counter consisted 
of a fine layer of boron nitride bonded with collodion and extended over 
a support. Certain characteristics - viz. efficiency for thermal neutrons, 17$? 
and for the gamma rays of cobalt, 0.01$ - were known. Such counters would be used 
in constructing beryllometers and in studies on soil and coffee moisture. 


34. A small reactor (10-100 kW) for training and research had been donated by the 
United States Government and would go into operation in 1964* A neutron howitzer 
containing an Ra-Be source, built at the Institute, was at present being used to 
determine the Fermi age, diffusion length and migration area of Ra-Be neutrons in 
water and other liquids, and the reflection coefficient of polyenergetic neutrons 
in water. 
35- The Institute had concentrated its research in medicine and biology on the 
problem of endemic goitre, which affected 52$ of the population of Colombia. 
I ^ was used for that purpose. The basic clinical studies were being made on the 
numerous patients of the Department of Endocrinology and Radioisotopes of the 



GC(VJI)/QR.75 
page 10 


National Cancer Institute (e.g. thyroid uptake of•the radioisotope, excretion in-• 
the urine, conversion factor for the thyroid hormone in the blood,' and so on). 
Special procedures were being used', to investigate the distribution of thyroid 
hormonal products in human plasma'. 


36. Such studies had acquired'immense importance since Stanbury in the United 
States and McGirr in.England had described enzymatic deficiencies of the thyrgid 
gland as a possible cause of goitre and of serious pathological changes. Such 
deficiencies fell into four main groups? (a) deficiencies in the incorporation 
of iodine.and organic molecules (mainly the tyrosine group)5 (b) tyrosine coupling 
deficiencles.| (c) deficiencies, in partial deiodification of the tyrosines 
accompanied by disturbances\'Of internal tyrosine circulation and their passage 
into the general circulation? and (d) presence in the plasma of an abnormal 
iodated protein, ' ' 
31••• Research had been concentrated on the last types of deficiencies. In the 
first- place$ .paper chromatography studies had been made with a view to identifying 
the various r.adioiodine-bearing amino acids, in the plasma? but that work had been 
preceded by a painstaking standardization of chromatography techniques and a 
careful analysis of the exchange reactions leading to in vitro synthesis of the 
amino acids and their subsequent identification by chromatography. 

58. A chromatography analysis had then been made of the amino acids which could 
be extracted with butanol from the plasma of persons who had received adequate 
dose's (l mc or more) of I 5 its purpose had been mainly to determine the 
tyrosine -thyronine ratio in enough cases to permit an analysis of the pathological 
observations.""" " 
39• As to the presence of abnormal iodated proteins, the globulin zones which 
carried 'the'radioactive thyroid hormones in the same patients had been identified, 
during the last two years, by zonal electrophoresis on paper. The most frequent 
type of normal migration had thus been established. 

40. Another project, undertaken at the same time as the research on thyroid 
physiopathology, was the recuperation of radioactive iodine from the urine of 
patients already'treated for use again in other persons. In view of the high cost 
of the radioisotope and the difficulty of shipping it from United States reactors 
to Bogota, that project was of considerable social and economic "importance. The 

GC(VTl)/OR.75 
page 11 


number of treatments (especially in hyperthyroid cases) and diagnostic doses that 
could be administered to patients free of charge was limited by the ability of the 
hospitals to obtain the material* Moreover, since thyroid cancer patients treated 
with doses of the order of 100 mc could eliminate 50$ to 60fo of the dose through 
the urine within 48 hours, the active iodine recuperated could be administered in 
five or more therapeutic doses of 6 - 8 mc each (as in hyperthyroid cases). 

41. Accordingly, a slight modification had been made in the Purves method, the 
radioactive urine being passed through a column of silver chloride crystals and 
eluted from it in the form of an iodate by means of bleaching liquid.. Up to now 
, 131 
95* bad been recuperated3 and the recuperated I was beginning to be employed 
for diagnostic purposes, with perfect tolerance on the part of the patients, 

125 


42. A way of using I in the diagnosis of thyroid affections was being studied. 
For that purpose the design of scintillation counters for the detection of lowenergy 
photons (approximately 30 keV) emitted by I was being studied in 
collaboration with the Environmental Radiometric Study Section. The radioisotope 
would be convenient to use, not only because of its longer half-life (60 days) 
but also because the biological dose received by the patient was lower. 
43• Another project of major interest had been started% the labelling with 
radioisotopes of the reduviids which carried Ghagas' disease and were prevalent 
in some of the lowlands. The labelled insects were to be released from an 
experimental station which had been planned in collaboration with the National 
School of Public Healthy an ecological study of the insects would then be possible, 
and their migrations would be recorded. Venezuelan research workers applied a 
Co solution under the elytra? the Colombian experts had preferred endogenous 
32 


marking studies, incorporating P in the skeletons of insects that had previously 
been fed with the blood of rodents labelled with the radioisotope. Endogenous 
labelling had the advantage of being more persistent. 


44- In its nuclear policy, Colombia hoped to be a.moral power, a faithful 
defender of the principles of .the United Nations, prepared to collaborate in 
applying atomic energy for the peace, health and prosperity of the entire world. 
It was for that reason that Colombia had signed a bilateral agreement with the 
United States concerning the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, . 
which had since been approved by Congress and ratified by the Government. Under 
the agreement the United States would provide Colombia with an experimental reactor 
which would be installed and put into operation with the technical assistance of 
the Agency. 



GC(YII)/OR.75 
page 12 


45• In common with Venezuela, Colombia had also announced its intention of 
encouraging nuclear disarmament and signing the recent Moscow treaty which tanned 
nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water.' The 
Heads'of State of both countries had declared that to be the first step towards 
effective international measures which would eventually load to total nuclear 
disarmament, an objective fully in consonance with the stand they had consistently 
taken in' the United Nations, and with the proposals of various Latin American 
Governments in regard to the prohibition of nuclear weapons in Latin America. 


46. The President of Colombia, Dr-. Guillermo Ledn Valencia, had reiterated those 
principles and insisted that nuclear disarmament should be really universal, so 
that no country wduld-'run the risk of falling unarmed into .the hands of its 
enemies. '' '' 47• 
In concluding, he emphasized the need to ensure that all activities involving 
atomic energy should be peaceful-* constructive and fruitful. Fellowships should 
be provided and technicians, officials and laboratory staff trained to make up 
for any deficiencies. For that purpose the Agency's procedures should be speeded 
up-'and the system of awarding technical assistance revised. The resources 
released by the ending -of the "cold war" should be placed at the disposal of the 
Agency so that'it oould help countries which needed help, .combat the use or even 
the testing of means of destruction, and replace such activities by research, 
training and the teaching of the nuclear sciences. That would be the best way of 
contributing to the United Nations Development Decade. 


48. Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) said that, for Member.States, the Agency's-, 
seventh year would unquestionably stand out because of the evidence it afforded of 
international'co-operation, and of the benefits that humanity would receive from 
the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. 
49. Mexico, having been represented at all the previous sessions, saw with 
pleasure that the number of Member States was increasing, and that, in a wide 
spirit of international co-operation, the noble ideas which had led to the Agency's 
creation were still prevailing.v Despite all difficulties, its work continued to 
be helpful to all, and especially to the developing countries. 
50. Turning to the Agency's technical assistance to Mexico, he wished to mention, 
in particular, the expert sent to help with the programme for using radiation in 
industry, the valuable assistance of a geologist in aerial prospecting for 

GC(VII)/OR.75 
page lj "" ' 


radioactive ores, and the reactor expert who had advised on the selection of a 
reactor type and the preparation of possible research programmes. The latter two 
experts had been furnished hy the Agency, under the United Nations Expanded 
Programme of Technical Assistance (EPTA). The Mexican National Atomic Energy 
Co'mmission aimed' at producing nuclear energy for industrial purposes and had set 
up the necessary laboratories. With a view to increasing the uranium ore reserves, 
radioactive ore prospecting and development and experimental metallurgy had also 
received due attention. 


51. The national programme of education and training was continuing to provide 
courses on basic' radioisotope and nuclear instrumentation techniques and also on 
important aspects'of nuclear medicine, radiobiol'ogy and radiochemistry. 
52. An intensive course on the industrial uses of radioisotopes had also been 
initiated, a new laboratory having been constructed for the purpose,, 
53• The Government of Mexico had decided to establish a new nuclear centre which, 
to begin with, would be provided with two main pieces of equipments a 1 MW nuclear 
reactor and a 12 MeV tandem-type Van de Graaff accelerator. The new reactor would 
be used for the training of scientists and technicians, for the production of 
radioisotopes and for scientific, technological and industrial research„ A request 
had already been submitted to the Agency for the supply of nuclear fuel for the 
reactor. The accelerator would be devoted to research on the energy levels of 
atomic nuclei. While the preparations for the centre had been going on, more than 
120 Mexican experts had received training in the various branches of knowledge 
connected with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Those experts would'help in 
setting up the centre. His delegation thought that it was a magnificent'idea to 
bring together a distinguished team of technicians to study the desalting of water 
with a view to obtaining supplies of drinking water. The problem was one of great 
importance for areas suffering from alarming droughts and water shortages. .His 
own country was particularly interested in that question because 6ofo of its area 
was arid or semi-arid.' Since the cost of nuclear power fell sharply as the size 
of the reactor increased, in the future huge reactors would be used to, convert 
sea-water into water for irrigation and drinking. With that end in view, /the 
Mexican Atomic Energy Commission had made a de'tailed survey of studies published 

'by the United States Atomic Energy Commission on the use of- large amounts of 
nuclear energy for the desalting .of sea-water. 



GC(VII)/OR.75 


page 14 


54• The proposal to establish an international centre for theoretical physics 
under the Agency's auspices had been supported by his country, from the very 
beginning, Firstly, the proposed Centre would help create a scientific tradition 
in the developing countries, since it was illusory to believe that a country could 
reap the benefits of the nuclear age with just a few technicians in nuclear 


subjects. Secondly, of all the branches of physics, theoretical physics was the 


least costly. Talent was available in all countries and the real problem was to , 
develop it. Thirdly, the proposed centre could serve as a suitable forum for 
many of the scientific meetings sponsored by the Agency and normal Agency fellow


ships could be used to give the centre greater impetus. Lastly, the study of 


theoretical physics was in keeping with the objectives laid down in the Agency's 


Statute, For all those reasons, Mexico would vote for the proposal to set up the 


centre at Trieste, 


55• In addition to the meeting on the use of nuclear'energy for the desalting of 


sea-water, his country had followed with great interest the conferences, panels 


and'symposia sponsored by the Agency, A Mexican delegation had likewise attended 


•2/ 
the Bombay symposium on the siting of reactors.—' Mexico welcomed the entry into 
force of the amended text of Article VI.A.J of the Statute, having been one of its 
sponsors in the Board of Governors, The amended version would enable new African 
Member States to participate i'n the work of the Board, 
56, In conclusion, he wished to give expression to the great hopes which Mexico 
placed in the nuclear test ban treaty. He was confident that it constituted a 
first decisive step towards a future in which humanity would use nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes only. 


57. Mr. NEIIMAM., (Czechoslovakia) said that,-the. seventh, regular session of 
the General Conference was taking place in the wake of a significant event in 
international life -.the signature of a .treaty banningtnuclear weapons tests .in 
the atmosphere, in space and under water. The. treaty had been,.welcomed, by peaceloving 
people throughout the world. It removed the. danger of the atmosphere,, 
rivers, oceans-and space becoming contaminated by radioactivity, and was. a substantial 
contribution to reducing international tension. Signature of the test 
ban treaty would be the first specific step towards.general and complete disarmament, 
as the result of which war would be eliminated and all the achievements of 
2/ Symposium on Criteria for Guidance in the Selection of Sites for the Construction 
of Reactor and Nuclear Research Centres held in Bombay from 
11 to 15 March 196J. 



GC(VII)/OE.75 
page 15 


science and technology, including those in nuclear energy, would be applied 
exclusively for the benefit and well-being of humanity. The Czechoslovak 
delegation therefore considered that the International Atomic Energy Agency 
should give greater support to the struggle for general and complete disarmament 
than it had hitherto done. 


58. He recalled that a resolution, GC(7l)/RES/l30, had been unanimously adopted 
at the. sixth regular session of the General Conference, requesting the .Director 
General to collaborate with,the United Nations in keeping under review the basic 
aspects of economic and social consequences of disarmament and the problems 
arising therefrom on the national and international plane. Unfortunately, the 
Agency had as yet taken very little action in compliance with those instructions. 
For obscure reasons, the implementation of Resolution GC(VI)/RES/l30 had been 
entrusted to only a few officials of the Secretariat and Member States had not 
been invited to help at all. Thus, the task of demonstrating the prospects for 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a world free from war and armaments had 
not been fulfilled„ ' 
59• The seventh regular session of the General Conference should correct the 
situation by taking steps to ensure early consideration of the possible consequences 
of disarmament for the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 


60. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic was one of the countries for which . 
peaceful co-existence was the main principle of foreign policy, and it considered 
that international organizations, such as the Agency, were the best 
medium.for putting that principle into practice.. 
61. Regarding the Agency's activities, the Czechoslovak delegation was of' the 
opinion that it had achieved certain successes, since its creation and had taken, 
a positive part in achieving peaceful co-existence and strengthening international 
co-operation. 
62. He considered that the Agency's main work in that direction should consist 
in training, organizing scientific conferences, and exchanging scientific and 
technical information. . The Czechoslovak de-legation also attached great importance 
to seminars and symposia organized by the Agency itself or with its participation. 
Most of those scientific meetings had been of a high standard. 

GC(VII)/OR,75 
page 16 


63. His delegation regarded the Agency's work in the exchange of scientific and 
technical documentation, scientific literature and films as very important. The 
Agency was granting a large number' of research contracts to scientific institutes 
and workers in various countries. However, it should make more persistent efforts 
than in the past to conclude cost-free contracts, especially with advanced 
countries, or to obtain free of charge the results of scientific research already 
carried out in Member States. 
64. On behalf of the Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Commission, he announced that 
Czechoslovakia was placing at the Agency's disposal, for use by Member States, 
complete documentation on sensor elements for the automatic control of reactors. 
65. His. delegation was pleased to note the establishment of a long-term programme 
for the Agency s work, which it approved in principle, especially the parts on 
training, the exchange of scientific data, documentation, and so on. On the other 
hand, it had reservations regarding those activities which it had already 
repeatedly opposed but which continued to occupy a prominent place in the Agency's 
long-term programme. He was thinking of the constantly expanding research in the 
Agency's Laboratory on the disposal of radioactive wastes into the sea, a method 
of disposal which was highly dangerous for man and should be prohibited, 
66. He noted that the Agency had obtained some good results in its technical 
assistance to the developing countries. At the same time, however, his delegation 
considered technical assistance the perfect example of an activity in which the 
Agency had hidden reserves, awaiting the removal of various shortcomings before 
they could be fully tapped. His delegation also supported the Agency's 
regulatory activities, although in that connection it still felt some misgivings, 
which it had expressed at the previous session of the General Conference.. 
67• In approving the Agency's activities over the past seven years, he was 
pleased to note that it had secured a firm place among the organizations of the 
United Nations family, as was shown, in particular, by the steady growth in its 
membership. 


68. He nevertheless had some critical comments to make about certain of the 
Agency's activities, which reduced its positive contribution to the achievement 
of peaceful co-existence. 

GC(VII)/OR.75 
page 17 


69. The Agency and its Secretariat had not adequately realized, in the past, the 
need to recognize the existence of three social forces in the modern world, 
possessing equal rights and represented in the international arena by three groups 
of States. Instead of pursuing a policy of negotiation and mutual concessions as 
a means of solving problems, the Agency sought to impose decisions by a mechanical 
majority of votes. In recent times, there had, unfortunately, been a number of 
such cases. 
70. For example, the Board of Governors had adopted a recommendation calling for 
a change in the manner of financing the Agency's activities. That recommendation, 
which had been adopted despite the opposition of certain States, was essentially 
of a discriminatory nature and directed against the States not in agreement with 
the proposed change in the Agency's Statute. 
71. His delegation also disapproved of the decision taken at the Board's June 
meetings regarding a so-called modification of the prooedure for the award of 
fellowships. By that decision, Type I fellowships would be granted exclusively to 
developing countries receiving technical assistance under SPTA? that meant that 
none of the other Member States could receive Type I fellowships, a rule wb-ioh the 
Czechoslovak delegation could not accept. 
72. The proposed change in the procedure for awarding fellowships would of 
necessity lead to a reduction in the fellowship programme if there were not enough 
candidates, and just such an insufficiency was to be expected in view of the 
natural potential of the developing countries. His delegation wished moreover 
to stress that, despite all the importance which it, as much as any other, 
ascribed to technical assistance to the developing countries, it could not view 
the question of training under Agency auspices merely as a form of technical 
assistance to the developing countries, since all Member States should be 
interested in exchanging scientific experience and in training their scientists, 
as provided in Article III,A.4 of "the Statute. 
73° Tbe Czechoslovak delegation hoped that the present session of the General 
Conference would take steps to change that irregular situation, taking into 
account the interests of the developing countries. 


74° Regarding the equitable geographical distribution of posts in the Secretariat, 
he pointed out that the majority of posts in the Professional category were 
occupied by nationals of the Western countries, whereas the socialist and neutral 



GC(VII)/OR.75 
page 18 


countries were inadequately represented. The situation was all the more unjust 
in that most of the senior posts were occupied by nationals of Western countries 
holding permanent contracts. That meant that the numher of post's subject .to the 
principle of geographical distribution was even further reduced. The Czechoslovak 
delegation therefore could not agree to the so-called principle of rotation being 
applied to new appointments to the Secretariat. There could he no rotation in a 
Secretariat where 25^ of the posts were filled by officials holding permanent 
contracts and were not subject to rotation,, The policy of rotation meant in 
effect that States inadequately represented in the Secretariat would lose the 
posts which they had hold so far. The idea of rotation night have been good had 
it involved not only the loss of a certain number of posts but also the assignment 
to a Member State of the same number of equivalent posts| and also if, in 
establishing quotas for each of the three groups' of States now existing in the 
world, account were taken of the number of permanent contracts held, 


75° Turning to the reorganization of the Secretariat, he thought the positive 
feature of the existing Secretariat structure'was that it was based on a unanimous 
decision by the Preparatory Commission. Any review of that structure, if it were 
not to give rise to unnecessary difficulties from the very beginning, had first 
to be agreed upon by Member States, particularly the main nuclear Powers, 


76. Discussing Czechoslovakia's contribution to the Agency's work, he stated that 
his Government had made available to the Agency the sun of 200 000 crowns for the 
purchase of equipment, a cobalt gun which, by decision of the Board, had been 
transferred to the Atomic Energy Commission of the United Arab Republic, and 15 
fellowships to a value of $315 000. In addition, it had provided the Agency with 
scientific films and, in co-operation with the Agency, had organized scientific 
symposia in Czechoslovakia in i960, 1961, 1962 and 1963, together with a summer 
school on theoretical physics in the Tatra Mountains in 1962, Desiring to give 
further active support to the Agency, Czechoslovakia had decided to propose 
holding another joint symposium in Prague in 1964° 
77• The.Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, together with the other socialist coun


tries, was also participating in the project - which had been submitted to the 


sixth regular session of the General Conference - for the establishment of 


medical and physics centres which might become the focal points of nuclear 



GC(vn)/OR.75 
page 19 


energy research in the developing countries. The implementation of that programme 
might constitute a new and important stage in the promotion of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. In spite of the fact that the proposal of the socialist States 
had been made a year previously, the programme was still on paper. His delegation 
noted with regret that the. Western Powers had still not been able to give their 
support to the programme and participate in financing it. The attitude of the 
Western.Powers was regrettable because precisely that programme would enable the 
Agency to pass, in the field of technical assistance, from the small projects 
which it had so far undertaken to large-scale projects for the construction of 
medical and physics, centres, the provision c-? which sight mean real and farreaching 
support for the developing countries in their efforts to use atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,.like all the 
socialist countries, was ready to carry out its part of the programme. 


78. In spite of its criticisms of certain aspects of the Agency's activities,, 
the Czechoslovak delegation was in principle favourably disposed towards the 
Agency's work. His delegation hoped that the. Agency would succeed in overcoming 
its weaknesses and in raising the standard of its activities. Czechoslovakia 
would make its contribution to the attainment of that goal. 
79* Mr. HQCHSTRASSER (Switzerland) said that remarkable progress had-.been 
achieved during recent years in the peaceful applications of atomic energy, 
particularly in the accumulation of data on the construction and operation of 
nuclear power stations. The results gave reason to believe that competitive 
nuclear power would soon be within reach in certain areas. For Switzerland, 
atomic energy would provide a particularly valuable source of power once the 
entire hydro-electric potential of the country had been harnessed, as would soon be 
the case. That being so, Switzerland intended to redouble its efforts in the 
sphere of reactor development, so as to be able to make its contribution in that 
important field. 


80. In view of the far-reaching influence of the first two Geneva conferences on 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, Switzerland was looking forward hopefully and 
eagerly to the third conference, which would perhaps contribute decisively to 
securing the recognition of nuclear power stations as an economically viable means 
of generating electricity. The Swiss authorities concerned would do everything 
in their power to ensure the success of the conference, 

GC(VII)/OR.75 
page 20 


81. The Agency's progress brought it fresh responsibilities. His delegation was 
fully conscious of the unremitting efforts of the Director General and the 
Secretariat to encourage and assist Member States to reap the benefit of the 
enormous potentialities offered by atomic energy. The Agency had always done 
useful work in the spheres of scientific training, research and practical applications. 
In that connection, his delegation was happy to see, that for some time 
past a serious effort had been made to study the needs of the developing countries, 
and that there had been genuine attempts to reduce staff engaged on purely 
administrative tasks, so as to release more funds for meeting requests for 
assistance. Precisely because its activities were so varied, the Agency should 
take appropriate organizational measures and should be cautious about accepting 
fresh responsibilities, 
82.. The competition which small industrial countries had to face in the field of 
science and technology, if they were to maintain their positions, called for the 
commitment of ever larger resources% even for the richest of countries, the 
financial burdens and manpower requirements were such .that it would be impossible 
to satisfy all requests simultaneously and in. full measure. It was therefore 
essential to exercise a judicious selection and introduce an order of priority. 
That TSB.8 why long-term planning was so very opportune. 

85• The long-term programme before the Conference outlined the various functions 
which the Agency could undertake. Switzerland fully approved the general aims of 
the programme. However, it seemed clear that with the available resources it' 
would not be possible to carry out large-scale activities simultaneously in all 
the fields in question. On the other hand, any substantial and regular increase 


in the Agency's budget would probably very soon overtax the financial capabilities 


of many Member States. It was therefore to be hoped that the policy of prudence 
which had hitherto been followed would continue. 


84• Regarding basic research, Switzerland believed that the Agency sho/uld confine 
itself to a judicious co-ordination of work already in progress. Proposals for 
further projects involving joint training and research establishments should 
originate from the scientific circles directly concerned. There would thus be 
some guarantee that such new undertakings met a definite need. 


85. A large part of the available resources was to be devoted to assistance to 
the developing countries. As it was scarcely possible to satisfy all requests 
at the same time, each country would have to assign priorities to the projects 

GC(VII)/OR„75 
page 21 


for which, it required assistance. That being so, the Swiss Government believed 
that all assistance to the developing countries should he granted within the 
framework of EPTA. That view had not so far been accepted, however, and 
Switzerland was quite prepared to participate, under the present system, in 
promoting the peaceful applications of atomic energy in the developing countries. 
For that reason the Federal Council had fixed its voluntary contribution for 1964 
on the basis of its assessment under the Regular Budget, 


86. In addition to making a voluntary contribution to the General Fund', the 
Swiss Government was ready to finance the training of experts from the developing 
countries, and fellowships would be granted for that purpose after consideration 
of the applications received. The number of requests for fellowships submitted by 
the developing countries had increased in recent years. The Swiss Government 
recognized that they, should be given priority and would therefore not nominate 
any .candidates of its own for Type I fellowships. 
87. In view of the need to keep the Agency's total expenditure at a more or less 
constant level, Switzerland welcomed the proposal to adopt biennial programming. 
In that way-the General Conference oould be held every two years, and the savings 
thereby achieved devoted to assistance programmes and fellowships. Similarly, 
expenditure on meetings of the Board of Governors could be reduced by widening the 
powers of the Director General. Those matters should receive careful study 
during 1964° 
88„ The General Conference had to take a number of decisions which might have an 
important bearing on the future development of the Agency. The Conference should 
therefore endeavour to make a constructive and objective study of the problems 
lying within its competence, i.e. problems of a technical and administrative 
nature. There could be no doubt that the presence among the delegates of men 
responsible for national atomic energy..programmes would prove to be most valuable, 
in view of the need for close co-ordination and continuous support of the Agency's 
activities.. His delegation once again appealed to all participants to avoid 
purely political discussions. 


89. Switzerland hoped that the decisions taken by the General Conference at its 
seventh regular session would make the Agency's future work more fruitful still, 
and that the Agency's activities on behalf of its Members, and particularly of the 
developing countries, would be even more effective and valuable than in the past. 

GC(VII)/0E.75 
page 22 


9°- Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) said that the world had now entered the 
third decade of the utilization of atomic energy. It was very fortunate that 
that period had been marked by the signing of the test ban treaty, 


91, In the first years of its existence the Agency had naturally, been confronted 
with unknown problems§ its activities had been more or less experimental! and the 
expectations entertained when the Statute had been drafted had not always been 
borne out by subsequent events, 


92. Certain activities initially regarded as secondary had - for the time being 
at least - become main objectives. On the other hand the Agency's functions in 
regard to such fundamental tasks as the development of nuclear power, the supply of 
nuclear material and the application of safeguards had been in abeyance and were 
only now gaining momentum, 
95- After a period requiring a predominantly pragmatic approach, during -which 
emphasis had gradually been shifted and priorities had been established to bring 
the scope of the Agency's programme into line with the financial means available, 
ib now seemed possible to look into the future and base the programme for the 
next few years on a well-considered evaluation of prevailing medium-term and 
long-term plans. That was a highly satisfactory state of affairs, 


94° The Board-of Governors, the Director General and his staff were to be 
congratulated on the joint memorandum on long-term-planning—' which constituted 
an excellent general guide and a sound basis for the expanding activities of the 
Agency, 


95. His delegation was glad to note that the Agency was focusing its attention 
increasingly on the various forms of assistance it could provide for the developing 
countries, and that a, new Department of Technical Assistance would shortly be set 
up in the Secretariat. Interest in the peaceful uses of atomic energy in those 
countries was constantly growing. That afforded the Agency a unique opportunity 
of carrying out its functions and allocating its resources "in such a manner as 
to secure efficient utilization and the greatest possible general benefit in all 
areas of the world, bearing in mind the special needs of the under-developed • 
areas'1 - an obligation of particular relevance within the framework of the 
United Nations Development Decade, 


3/ GC(VII)/227. 



GC(VII)/ORo75 
page 2J 


96. However, the Agency's financial resources had proved disappointingly inadequate. 
In order to meet the increased demand for technical assistance, a sounder 
system of financing was needed. Promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
in the developing countries was a responsibility shared by all Members of the 
Agency. Both donor and receiving countries were partners in a common endeavour^ 
and a' more rational way of financing activities, by fusion of the Regular Budget 
and the Operational Budget into a single assessed budget, would therefore seem to 
be in the interests of all concerned. 
97° The Agency should, he thought, receive an increasingly large share of EPTA 
funds. As the possibility of using commercially competitive nuclear power in 
certain regions drew nearer, Member States would be able to apply to the United 
Nations Special Fund for their pre-investment requirements, with the Agency serving 
as Executing Agent. A resolution on biennial programming had been submitted to 
the Conference which would bring the Agency's programme into closer relation with 
the two-year cycle of EPTA programming. His delegation continued to favour, in 
principle, the system of,biennial budgetings As to the advisability of reducing 
the frequency of sessions of the General Conference, it would be glad to consider, 
that question. 


98. The study of world power problems was of primary importance, and his delegation 
welcomed the fact that the.Board and the Director General were responding to 
the resolution adopted at the sixth regular session of the General Conference 
calling for closer co-operation with other members of the United Nations family—'. 
The need for closer co-operation between the governing bodies of various organizations 
was manifest, and it was gratifying, in the light of the resolution.on the 
co-ordination of atomic energy activities adopted by the Economic.and Social . 
Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC) at its last session,—' that the Board and 
the.Director General and his staff were doing their.best to ensure adequate 
co-ordination, including the concentration and integration of activities,, in order 
to minimize conflicts of competence, duplication and waste of money,. .The ECOSOC 
resolution on evaluation of programmes—' should be called to the attention of the 
specialized agencies and the Agency. He hoped that the Agency would be willing to 
4/ 'GC(VI)/RES/128. 
^J ECOSOC Resolution 986 (XXXVI), reproduced in document INPCIRC/48, 
6/ ECOSOC Resolution 991 (XXXVI). 



GC(VII)/OE.75 
page 24 


co-operate with BCOSOC's Administrative Committee on Co-ordination in evaluating 
the over-all impact of the combined programmes of the United Nations family on 
the development of the' developing countries,, 


99. There was a similar need for co-ordination with organizations outside the 
United Rations with which the Agency had relationship agreements. The Director 
General? in his review of technical assistance provided in 1962, had dwelt 
extensively on questions of co-ordination between the Agency and the Governments 
or competent authorities of Member States receiving assistance. 
100. Activities not directly connected with aid to developing countries should also 
he vigorously pursued. 
101. It might he advisable for the Agency to concentrate its efforts on one type 
of work, such as training in the applications of radionuclides in medicine and 
agriculture, rather than spread its activities over too many projects. 
102. The Netherlands delegation was in favour of continuing the studies of comparative 
oosts which the Agency had already undertaken for various nuclear projects 
in Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom. Studies of various reactor 
types for the generation of electricity, process-heat, desalination of sea-water 
or other purposes might usefully he included in that work. 
103. Another function of the Agency which was of vital importance to all Member 
States was the application of safeguards. The Netherlands Government had always 
been in favour of full implementation of the relevant articles of the Statute, and 
welcomed the resolution adopted by the Board of Governors to extend the safeguards 
system to reactors with a capacity of over 100 MW(t). Safeguards were already being" 
applied to certain Agency projects, and it was most encouraging that an agreement 
on the application of safeguards to the bilateral agreement between Japan and the 
United States had been signed in Vienna on the opening day of the present session.-" 
There were already indications that other Member States were willing to follow the 
same•procedure. 
104. In 1963 the Netherlands Government had offered three Type II fellowships .for 
training in the Netherlands, and it was considering increasing the number of 
Type II fellowships for 1964* His delegation agreed that it might be advisable to 
The text of the agreement is reproduced in document INPCIRC/47" 



GC(VII)/OR.75 
page 25 


receive fellows in small groups and not as isolated individuals, so that they could 
benefit from an exchange of experience and would he able, after returning to their 
own country, to apply their nev/ly acquired knowledge together, for instance in the 
same laboratory


105. The question of constructing a nuclear power station had been under active 
consideration in the Netherlands the previous year, and. it had now been decided 
to construct a 50-MW station. 
106. A few weeks previously, the Netherlands had been host country to the Symposium 
on Exponential and Critical Experiments—^, which had been attended by over 200 
participants from 29 countries and three international organizations. The Netherlands 
would be glad to act as host country for Agency scientific meetings on 
future occasions. 
107= The International Conference on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage held in 
Vienna in 1963, although not satisfactory in all respects, had nevertheless 
managed to provide a basis for world-wide co-operation. As the nuclear industry 
would develop further, and international relations bearing on nuclear science 
would multiply, efforts must be made to amend and supplement the text. 


108. The Western European countries, which were parties to the relevant Paris and 
Brussels Conventions, should first'ascertain whether and how far those Conventions 
needed to be adjusted to the provisions of the Vienna Convention, That would also 
determine their Yfillingness to sign and ratify the Vienna Convention. 
•109. His Government attached great importance to the Third United Nations International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, to be held in the 
autumn of 1964. The Agency, as the organization primarily r3sponsible, would 
undoubtedly play an important part in preparing the conference and in making it a 
success. He noted that, in view of those special circumstances, the Agency's 
programme of scientific meetings in 1964 might be somewhat reduced, 
110. In the joint memorandum on long-term planning by the Board of Governors and 
the Director General it was stated that the next few years should be regarded as 
a period of transition and preparation from the Agency's point of view. A course 
had been mapped out, and he was sure that the Agency would gradually develop, to 
the benefit of all Member States, along the lines contemplated. 
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m. 


8/ Held in Amsterdam from 2 to 6 September 1963. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(VII)/OR.76 

30 December 1963 

GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

Seventh regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 26 September 1963, at 10.40 a.m. 

Presidents Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


Statement by the delegate of Ghana on behalf 1 -7 
of the Afro-Asian delegations 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 8 - 106 
Governors for 1962-63 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Finland 8 - 14 
United Arab Republic 15 - 25 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 26 77 
Pakistan 78 - 90 
Romania 91 - 106 


* GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2. 


63-7979 



GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 2 


STAT^,L;HT BY TILii JDELSJGATE OF GHANA ON BEHALF OF HTJ AFRO-ASIAN- DELEGATIONS •' 


1. Mr. BAFPOUR (Ghana), speaking on a point of order, said ho had;-been 
asked to make a statement on behalf of the- Afro-Asian delegations' in order to 
dispel any uncertainty that might exist regarding their attitude to the presence 
at the Conference of certain delegations and, at the same time, to explain in 
unequivocal terms their position on the issue involved. 
2. Although the General Conference was not the appropriate forum in which to 
discuss the political significance of the situation obtaining in South Africa, 
that situation nevertheless had important consequences for, and repercussions 
on, the Agency's activities. Regardless of the country to which they might 
belong, delegates to the Conference were called upon to foster the progressive 
development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy for the benefit of all mankind, 
irrespective of race, colour or creed. All, therefore, had the right to 
participate on the basis of absolute equality, each contributing to the measure 
of his ability, and benefiting according to his needs. Presumably, therefore, 
every Member State represented should be prepared to make such equal representation 
possible. 
3. The Government of South Africa, by its policy of racial discrimination 
based on colour distinction, rendered all Afro-Asians, scientists or not, 
unacceptable on South African territory, and hence unacceptable as participants 
in any' seminar, organization or institution within that territory that was 
designed to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It thus deprived them 
of the opportunity of benefiting from such activities. 
4. It therefore followed, as a consequence of that discrimination towards 
Afro-Asians participating in the Conference, that the position of South Africa 
in the Conference was unacceptable. Its continued participation in the 
Conference and in the Board of Governors was wrong. Members present would, 
he was sure, agree that that analysis of the situation was sound and irrefutable. 
Accordingly, the Afro-Asian countries, which had come rather late into the 
Agency, would like all Member States to note the very serious view they took of 
the South African racial .question, and the effect that that situation had on the 
usefulness of the Conference. 

GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 3 


5. Furthermore, the Afro-Asian Member States constituted a majority of the 
less-developed countries of the world and had perhaps the greatest need of 
what the Agency could offer. It v/as primarily because of their awareness of 
having so much to gain from participation in the Conference that they had 
agreed to content themselves with the statement he was now making on their 
behalf5 had that net been so, they would have demonstrated their views in a 
much more forceful manner,, 
6. They were also anxious that the Conference should consider amending the 
Statute in such a way as to permit more active participation of the Afro-Asian 
group in the Agency. 
7. Finally, he wished to assure the Conference of the intense interest the 
Afro-Asian delegations took in the Agency's future success. In taking their 
present stand, they were merely working for the ^ood of all nations and for 
the equality and justice which all mankind expected to' reign. If those 
objectives could not be attained within an organization such as the Agency, 
then they would have to look elsewhere 
G.17ERAL DEBATE AM) REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1962-63 
(GC(VII)/228, 243)(continued )l/ 


8. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) said that, since the idea of establishing the 
Agency had first been suggested - during the first Geneva Conference - many 
interesting developments in nuclear science and technology had taken place. 
Above all, public understanding on the subject had radically improved, and 
that change of climate was reflected in the Agency's discussions of the many 
difficult problems that had come up for consideration in the Board and in the 
General Conference. Finland had not taken part in the actual setting up of 
the Agency, but had been the first Eember State to be elected after its 
establishment. 
9. Although Finland, like other countries, might have availed itself of 
bilateral arrangements in building up its nuclear establishments, it had 
deliberately chosen to rely on the Agency's ability to fulfil one of its most 
important responsibilities - that of supplying fissionable material - and had 
not been disappointed. Two lots of enriched uranium fuel elements had been 
l/ GC(VII)/OR„75„ 



GG(>:II)A^O76 

page 4 


supplied through the Agency and were Toeing put into use, one in the FIN-1 


reactor and the other in a second sub-critical assembly that was under construc


tion. Thanks were due in the first place to the original suppliers, the 
United States and the Soviet Union, but the Agency's role in the transaction 


proved its usefulness as an intermediary in procuring the fissionable material 


and nuclear devices required by Lomber States, 


10. The study of nuclear power prospects in Finland, carried out jointly by 
the Agency and the Finnish authorities, had been another noteworthy example of 
the value of Agency co-operation.; • it had. in fact constituted a pilot investigation 
of the problems of integrating nuclear power into a national power 
system,, 
11. The fact that the application of the Agency's safeguards system to such 
transactions had not given rise to any difficulties was in itself no proof of 
the validity of the system, rather had it been duo to the r-easonable and 
realistic way in which the Agency's inspectors had carried out their duties. 
Finland believed that the system must be radically revised before the era of 
full-scale power reactors arrived. The extension now under consideration 
offered a practical way of avoiding unnecessary delays in putting-full-scale 
power reactors into operation. Finland's experience indicated, however, that 
the system should be completely revised as soon as possible .and reconstituted 
solely on a -technical basis. 
12. Finland had made an active contribution to the Agency's work, providing 
experts to serve on panels, scientific committees and symposia, and incidentally 
the' first Director of the Konaco Laboratory. The scope of its contribution 
would bvj further enlarged, through more immediate technical assistance to the 
developing countries, in the form of providing more opportunities for scientists 
and students from those countries to study and train in Finland. 
13. The Director General's statement clearly showed that the Agency's work was 
in competent hands and that it was not only growing quantitatively but improving 
qualitatively. Its tremendous complexity was due not only to the diversity of 
scientific and technical problems involved but perhaps even more to the fact . 
that the "peaceful uses of atomic energy" was so ill-defined a concept5 that 
would account for some of the overlapping between the various agencies in 
borderline cases. 

GC(VII)/0E.76 
page 5 


14. On the general principle that the United .Nations was itself responsible 
for handling international questions of a political nature and that the 
specialized agencies were there to deal with the world's technical problems, 
questions connected with energy production must obviously be the Agency's main 
concern; with the emphasis on "energy" rather than on "atomic",, The matter 
was by no moans simple, out the united Nations might perhaps consider 
inviting the Agency to handle general problems connected with energy resources 
and power production, with a much closer degree of collaboration, or even 
fusion, between the Agency and the 'world Power Conference, His delegation did 
not feel competent to suggest in any detail how that might be done in practice. 
It was encouraging, however, to note that the importance and complexity of the 
problems involved were fully appreciated by the Secretariat. The Director 
General could be assured of Finland's full' support in his difficult task, 
15. Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Eepublic)" fully supported the attitude taken 
by the Afro-Asian States with regard to racial discrimination. At a time when 
the world was finding solutions to the problems of war and peace, it should also 
end such discrimination throughout the world. 
16. On behalf of his delegation, he congratulated Nigeria, the Ivory Coast and 
Gabon on their admission to membership of the Agency. 
17. All Member States should realize that the advanced countries could go a 
long way towards closing the gap betv/een themselves and the developing countries 
by supplying the.latter with technical assistance, especially in the allimportant 
field.of nuclear power, through the intermediary of the Agency. The 
developing.countries, too, must play their part. The United Arab Republic was 
doing its best to expand its atomic onjrgy potential for the benefit of its 
people. The past year had seen the completion of the Atomic Energy Establishment's 
geology and raw materials department (with facilities for testing, 
analysing and processing nuclear raw materials), plasma physics laboratory, new 
engineering and scientific instrumentation laboratories, nuclear chemical research 
laboratories and radioisotope production units, Stops had also been taken to 
construct a nuclear power plant of about 150 - 200 iifl(e), site selection studies 
had been made, and technical and economic studies of various reactor systems were 
under way with a view to preparation of the final specifications. 

GC(7II)/OR„76 
page 6 


18. The United Arab Republic's continued co-operation with the Agency during 
the past year had led,-in particular,, to the establishment of the Middle 
Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab Countries, inaugurated in the 
presence, of the Director General on 18 March 1963= The inauguration ceremony 
had.been- attended by representatives of the Federation of Nigeria, Somalia and 
Mali, who-had expressed the desire thjt the Centre's services be extended to 
African countries,, The following day representatives of Algeria', Iraq, Kuwait, 
Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Sudan and'Tunisia, as participating States, the 
United'.Arab Republic, as host State, and the Agency had elected Tunisia, Sudan 
and Iraq to the governing body of the Centre, 
19. The'first training course held at the Centre, from 1 June to 26 July 1.963* 
had dealt with the general applications of radioisotopes. Nineteen candidates 
had been selected from among the thirty-seven applications received from 
Algeria, Iraq, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia and the United Arab Repub-lic-. - Technical 
reports on the course, which had dealt with-both the theoretical and the 
experimental aspects of'the numerous and varied topics covered, had been most 
satisfactory and the course had been adjudged a success. The second training 
course, which was to be devoted to the application of radioisotopes, in 
agriculture, would open on 5 October 1963- Again 19 participants had been 
selected from among the 30 applications received from Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco, 
Sudan, Syria and the United Arab Republic. 
20o The experience so far gained made it clear that the Centre was rendering 
vital service to scientists in the Middle Eastern .area* Thanks were due to 
the Director General for his sympathetic understanding of the Centre's needs. 
For that reason it was all the more alarming to find that the Agency's 
financial support for the Centre was to be reduced in the budget for 1964, when 
in fact support on an increasing scale was required to enable it to discharge 
its obligations to the area where it was located and fulfil-its scientific aims 
and objectives. 


21. His .Government realized that its research programme should be complementary 
to'the Centre's training programme, and indicative of the future needs it should 
be designed to meetj it was already engaged in research into., for example, the 
movement of water currents' and silt in the Suez Canal, the efficiency' of certain 
fertilizers, the irradiation o'f insect pests and problems relating to sheepfarming. 

GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 7 


22. The Agency had also co-operated with his country in advising on the most 
suitahle site for its proposed now power reactor, as well as providing experts 
and equipment of various kinds. His Government for its part had offered the 
services of two distinguished scientists to states Members of the Agency and 
would continue to offer fellowships to African and Arab countries., It was 
also prepared to make its research reactor and. laboratory facilities available 
to scientists from Member States for research on neutron problems, and so on. 
The Department of Health and Safety had applied the -.relevant Agency regulations 
to shipments of radioactive material passing through the Suez Canal, 
23" In the coming year his Government would continue to support the Agency's 
activities and would pay its annual contribution of £^35 000 to the Centre's 
budget, as well as making a contribution of £E5000 to the General Fund- It 
welcomed the proposed reorganization of the Secretariat, believing that the 
developing countries could provide the Secretariat with, more staff members, 
including more senior officials and, in particular, that the appointment of a 
Deputy Director General from one of the developing countries would help the 
Agency to serve those countries better. His Government had submitted a list of 
highly qualified scientists as candidates to serve on the Secretariat at 
various levels„ 


24. He also welcomed the long-term programme for technical assistance, .On the 
other hand, he could not support the proposed amendment of irticle XIV of the 
2/ 


Statute—', the aim of which was apparently to stabilize the financial resources 
of the Agency, whereas the main justification for any change in the Statute 
should be that it would result in more assistance being rendered to the 


countries which so desperately needed it. Nor could he agree to the proposed 
extension of the safeguards system to largo reactor facilities^, which was 
designed to create a fictitious feeling of security but would in no way limit 
the ability of the major nuclear Powers to produce nuclear weapons. He 
suggested that the extension be deferred until the whole system was reviewed in 
1964. 


25- The limited test ban treaty-concluded in Moscow on 5 August 1963 was 
indeed of transcendent importance. His Government had endorsed that treaty 
and would continue to plaj^ an active and sincere part in the negotiations which 


2/ GC(vil)/236 and Add.1, 


3/ GC(VII)/235. 



00(711)/Oil.7 5 
page 8 


were being carried on -with a view to complete? disarmament. It hoped that the 
first great.step which had thus been taken on the road to peace would be 
followed by other similar steps and was convinced? that those steps would afford 


the best opportunity for the. Agency to play an ever greater part in bringing 


to fulfilment•the dreams of those who had devoted their lives to harnessing 


atomic energy in the service of mankind, 

26. Mr. EEiBLYllO'V (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), referring tothe 
statement made by the delegate of Ghano,, said that the Soviet delegation 
understood and fully sympathized with the feelings of representatives of 
African peoples. 
27• "The regular seventh session of the General Conference was opening in 


different circumstances from those that had prevailed in previous years, and 


for the first time, after long years overshadowed by the "cold war", the 


Governments of East and west had succeeded in reaching agreement on .one of the 
most vital problems affecting mankind. Two months had elapsed since the 


Governments of the Soviet Union, the United States' and the United.Kingdom had 


signed a treaty in Moscow banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, 


in space and under water. Never before had the most destructive weapon ever 


to have threatened humanity been the subject of an agreement... The treaty had 


so far been signed by more than one hundred States, including some four fifths 


of the Agency.'1 s- Members. For the first time an international agreement 


initially elaborated by the three nuclear Powers had mot with an enormous 


response and support throughout the world. 


28. The treaty had special significance for scientists, the staffs of atomic 
commissions and persons concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
because they knew better than anyone the atom's destructive power and the 
possibilities it could offer if used for peaceful purposes. The relationship 
between the military and peaceful uses of atomic energy had frequently been 
pointed out at the General Conference, as had the exceptionally wide 
opportunities that would be opened up for the Agency if agreement were reached 
on general and complete.disarmament. Just as splitting the atom released 
immense power, so would disarmamoni; make available human energy and resources 
that could be directed to economic development, science, culture, education and 
health, for the benefit of all peoples. 

GC(VII)/OR„76 
page 9 


29. Under its Statute, the Agency was called upon to do everything possible 
to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to conduct, its activities 
"in conformity with policies of the United Nations furthering the establishment 
of safeguarded world-wide disarmament and in conformity with any international 
agreements entered into pursuant to such policies"—1. Signature of the Moscow 
treaty had undoubtedly created a more propitious atmosphere for the work of 
the Agency, and the Agency should, therefore, welcome the treaty, regarding it 
as a step towards a relaxation of international tension and towards the creation 
of more favourable conditions for solving the problems of general and complete 
disarmament that would lead to atomic energy being used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. 
300 His delegation considered that the Agency musty in every way, seek to 


reinforce the success achieved by the conclusion of the treaty and further 


other measures aimed at diminishing international tension^ the Moscow treaty 


had opened up possibilities of agreement on such measures. Naturally, every 


effort must be made to induce Governments, which had not already done so, 


to sign. 


31. Mention had been made during the discussion of the need for the Agency to 
be prepared for the moment when resources would be released by the discontinuance 
of nuclear tests in accordance with, the treaty. 
32. His Government was in favour of those resources, both human and material, 
being used for peaceful economic purposes to raise standards of living. It 
attached great importance to assisting newly independent countries whose 
economies were less duvcloped than its own, and accordingly was providing, on 
a growing scale, a largo number of countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America 
with, economic and technical help so that they could lay the foundations of an 
independent national economy and cast off the heavy inheritance of colonialism. 
33• The Soviet Union certainly did not minimize the significance of an 


agreement banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in space and under water, but 


facts had to be faced. The Loscow treaty did not, of itself, mean disarmaments 
it had not put a stop to the armaments race and understandably could not bring 
about noticeable cuts in military expenditure. A real possibility of that 
burden being removed would only arise when agreement was reached on disarmament. 


4/ Article JII.B.l. 



GC(VII)/0E.76 
pago 10 


and that, regrettably, had not yet been achieved. It was common knowledge that 
in 1959 the head of the Soviet Government, U.S. Khruahahav, had submitted to the 
General Assembly of the United 1'Iations a plan for general and complete 
disarmament under strict international control. If the "western Powers had 
acted upon that appeal, perhaps it would now have only been necessary to take 
the few final steps towards eliminating the remains of the war machine in 
different countries. As it was, a great deal yet remained to be done. 


34. The main task that lay ahead was to strive with, greater resolution towards 
agreement on disarmament and a further lessening of international tension, in 
which task the United Nations, its specialized agencies and the Agency could 
play an important part. 
35• Six years had passed since the Agency had been sot up at the first session 
of the General Conference; a great deal of useful work had been done during the 
intervening period, but even more could be said about.what the Agency had failed 
to do and what was expected of it, 


36. The reason was that the Agency had not elaborated carefully a workable 
programme, and the proposals submitted to it had been examined at length but 
not implemented. He recalled the proposal which had been made by the United 
Arab Republic for establishment of a regional radioisotope centre. Consideration 
of that question had from the outset taken on a political tone, and much time 
had elapsed before the decision to establish the centre in Cairo had finally 
been taken. 
37• The Agency's provision of technical assistance to countries in need of it 
was unsatisfactory and marked by long delays. As was well known, the Agency's 
own resources were made up of voluntary monetary contributions and of gifts of 
kind, in the form of equipment and the provision of experts, fellowships, etc. 
If bold use were made of those resources, the Agency's technical assistance 
activities could be of greater benefit than they were at present. 


38. The Soviet delegation had already drawn the Board's attention to the fact 
that the appropriations for. technical assistance were not being fully used each 
year. What explanation could there be, for example, for the fact that the 
balance of appropriations on 31 December 1962, in other words, the amount that 
had not in fact been used, amounted to more than 64^ of all voluntary contributions 
for 1962? 

GC( VH)/CR„76 
page 11 


39, A further example was offered by research contracts, award of which was 
now regarded as a type of •technical assistance. During its existence the 
Agency had awarded more than 350 contracts. Their subject-matter covered an 


exceedingly broad field, and many of them suffered from their academic 


character and the fact that tb^y had no bearing on the actual requirements of 


the developing countries. To illustrate that point one had only to draw 


attention to the contracts awarded for studios on such subjects as the production 
and destruction of rod colls during the: first year of life in 


premature and full-term infants, an apparently ileitleal extra autosome in 


two severely retarded sisters with multiple malformations, experience in the 
irradiation of chrysanthemums, etc, 


40, For those engaged in such vrork, those contracts weald be of technical or, 
more exactly, financial assistance. But the work in question would be of as 
much use to the Agency's Members as hair on a tortoise's back, 


41, It was therefore not by chance that the Scientific Advisory Committee (-SAC) 
had recommended that in considering the subject-matter of contracts more stress 
should be laid on the practical uses of atomic energy and less on purely 
theoretical research, and that the limited funds available should be devoted 
to topics which v^ero of special interest. It should be noted that SAC' s 
recommendations in that regard were still a dead letter, 


42, The Soviet delegation had already drawn attention to the fact that the 
Agency had spent a great deal of money sending out missions to various countries 
in order to investigate their needs on the spot and determine what type of 
co-operative assistance should be undertaken with them. The Agency had drawn 
no practical conclusions from the information assembled by those missions, 
with the result that the money spent had yielded no rational proposals and the 
States concerned had derived no benefit whatever from the visits of Agency 
missions, 


43. He recalled the difficulties that had arisen in making use of the 
voluntary contribution offered by the Soviet Union, Several years had been 
required to use the funds and to apportion the equipment that could be bought 
with them. In 1962 the Soviet delegation and the delegations of other 

GC(VII)/OE.76 
page 12 


socialist countries had proposed that the developing countries be given 
equipment for radiological centres and physics laboratories, and the Soviet 
delegation had stated at that time that the socialist countries would assume 
responsibility for supplying, free of charge, one third of the necessary 
equipment. But what had been the outcome? Not a single country, including 
those which were presumably in a position to do so, had declared its willingness 
to take part in any way in covering the remaining tv/o thirds of the proposed 
programme. 


44° He would not be entirely frank unless ho vent- on to point out that the 
Secretariat, too, had shown loss initiative than was right* Instead of asking 
the developing countries whether they wished to receive equipment for medical 
and training centres free of charge, the Secretariat had entered into a lengthy, 
tedious and useless correspondence, on the pretext of clarifying certain 
important points of detail regarding that .proposal. The Soviet Union had 
provided exhaustive explanations as to what each centre would comprise, and had 
given all necessary information. Yet little had been done during the past year 
to make the necessary trial arrangements for putting the proposal into effect. 


45° That also served to explain why the Agency had gradually begun to give 
the impression of an organization which was not carrying out its main function, 
that of promoting the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. 


46. If he were to refer to the useful work that had been done over the past 
year, since the sixth regular session of the General Conference, the first point 
to be mentioned should be the preparation of a long-term programme. Prom the 
very outset the Soviet Union had supported the proposal for such a programme, 
which was a matter of great importance. The long-term programme consisted of 
a set of recommendations covering the whole range of the Agency's activities. 
It included basic tasks of a priority nature, which would find their place in 
the annual programmes, and would make it possible to organize the Agency's work 
properly. Lany sections of the programme had been worked out carefully and in 
adequate detail by specialists from numerous countries, including the Soviet 
Union. Other sections were less successful, and the measures recommended in them 
would'require further study before they could be included in the annual 
programmes. 



GC(VII)/CE.76 
page 13 


.47 „ When the Agency had bean sot up, it had been intended that its activityshould 
be directed to the development of work on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in Member States, and it had beon assumed that countries advanced in 
such work would render assistance to the less advanced through the intermediary 
of the Agency, The Agency, however, had begun to pay 'an excessive 


-amount of attention to the establishment of its own scientific basis, as could 
be seen from the plans for further expansion of the Seibersdorf Laboratory, 
the extension of the agreement with the Monaco Laboratory and the establishment 
of a. theoretical physics centre at Trieste. Th.it 'trend was also reflected in 
the' long-term programme. 


480 It had to be stated that the establishment of a scientific basis of its 
own was a task which wont far beyond the Agency's means- It would load to the 
dissipation of its limited resources and give rise to illusions in the 
develcping countries regarding the usefulness of institutions which would in 
fact result in their receiving loss assistance, thus postponing the date when 
they could develop programmes for the peaceful use of atomic energy. 


49. In his statement at the opening of the session the Director General had 
referred to the recommendations of Dr. Chagas, Secretary-General of the 
United Nations Conference on the Application of Science and Technology for the 
Benefit of the Less Developed Areas, who had said that the main problem at the 
present time was to build up a scientific infrastructure in the developing 
countries themselves-^. The Director General had pointed out that U Thant, 
Secretary-General of the United hations, had also emphasized the need for 
training specialists, establishing larger research institutes and helping to 
create a scientific climate in the developing countries themselves. 
50. In his opinion, the Agency's policy of sotting up a scientific basis of its 
own ran counter to those recommendations. 
51o The Agency could not, nor was. there any sense in its trying to, substitute 
its own work for wprk.performed in individual States. To do so would be to act 
like the frog that wanted to- puff itself up tc the size of an ox, and burst -' 
apart in the effort. 


5/ GC(vn)/OR.735 para. 58. 



GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 14 


52= The Soviet delegation had already stated that many of the problems'covered 
by the long-term programme could be solved by national atomic centres. 
Delegates were well aware of the huge amount of scientific research, construction 
and experimental work going on in the Soviet Unions hundreds of thousands of 
Soviet scientists and engineers were striving to place the achievements of 
science and technology, including those of atomic energy, at the service of the 
people. Thus the Soviet Union, in co-operation with other countries, could 
contribute to the solution- of the problems laid dov.n in the long-term programme 
and it was prepared to consider assisting in research of interest to the Agency. 
In its scientific research institutes the Soviet Union could organize experiments 
and carry out investigations on subjects included in the Agency's long-term 
programme - on the understanding, of course, that such work was appropriate to 


the scientific research institutes concerned. That type of international 


co-operation under the long-term programme would not draw on any of the Agency's 
resources since it was assumed that each country would pay for its own share 


of the work. 


53. Progress in the peaceful uses of atomic energy varied greatly from country 
to country. Work in the Soviet Union was very broad in scope5 noteworthy 
developments and discoveries had been made on the theoretical side and important 
results achieved in practical work. In the preceding year, for example, Soviet 
scientists at the Kurchatov Atomic Energy Institute had succeeded in obtaining 
a stable high-temperature plasma with a prolonged lifetime, something that had 
never been achieved before. The plasma had had a temperature of about 
40 million degrees and a density of approximately 10 000 million particles 
por cm . The confinement time of the plasma had been increased to hundredths of 
a second. Hitherto, both in the Soviet Union and in other countries, the most 
successful confinement of a dense, hot plasma had been considered to be one 
lasting only a few hundred-thousandths of a second„ The latest results obtained 
by Soviet scientists represented the greatest achievement in the physics of 
high-temperature plasmas during the last few years. A great step had been made 
towards mastery of controlled thermonuclear reactions,, 
54° Soviet scientists had recently discovered a new type of radioactive decay proton 
radioactivity. Hitherto, scientists had known of five types.of radioactive 



GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 15 


decay of nuclei* Soviet scientists had predicted that there must he still 


another type of decay, in which the nucleus ejected a proton, A group of 


Soviet scientists had recently succeeded in overcoming all the difficulties 


involved and, by dint of delicate and v^ry complicated experiments, had shown 


the existence of a new type of radioactive decay. 


55. Going hand in hand with the theoretical investigations were the successes 
that had been achieved in the practical applications of atomic energy* On that 
subject he merely wished to refer to the operating experience gained with the 
atomic-powered ice-breaker Lenin, which had already completed three voyages and. 
over a three-year period; had sailed 50 000 miles, mostly under difficult ice 
conditions* Its reactors had operated for throe years in succession 
(i960 through 1962) without a reloading of atomic fuel* Nevertheless, it had 
been decided to reload the reactors before the start of the fourth voyage. 
During the voyages all the equipment and machinery had operated magnificently. 
56. Another reason why the present year was a noteworthy one for the Soviet 
Union was that it marked the completion of final preparations for the entry into 
operation of two large atomic power stations, one with a capacity of 210 000 kW 
and the other 100 000 kW. Once they were working at those capacities, the two 
stations vrould be considerably enlarged. In addition, the construction of a 
number of new atomic power stations was planned. 
57° Mention deserved to be made of still another important power project in the 
Soviet Union, viz. a small atomic power station with a total capacity of 
700-750 kW. The station was note\"rorthy because it was constructed in separate 
units and could easily be moved by any type of transport, railway, ship, road 
vehicle or aircraft. The station had already been built and tested and the 
operation of all its parts had proved to be satisfactory and reliable. The 
Soviet-Union would be building that type of station in remote areas where power 
requirements'were small. Such stations might be of interest to many countries. 


58. The Soviet Union was continuing to develop scientific .and technological 
co-operation with other countries in matters relating to nuclear physics and the 
peaceful use of atomic energy. In the period that had elapsed since the 
preceding session of the General Conference, new agreements had b&en concluded 
with the United States' of America, the United Kingdom, Denmark and Afghanistan. 
Successful negotiations were being carried on with a view to establishing 
co-operation with Canada and Italy. 

GC(VII)/0E.76 
page 16 


59o The new agreement with the Unitad States, concluded at Moscow in May 1963, 
provided, among other things, for an exchange of specialists on such important 
subjects as thermonuclear fusion, nuclear power reactors, solid state physics, 
radiation chemistry and the disposal of radioactive waste. Under that agreement 
it was also planned to hold joint scientific conferences, 


60- The scientific community of the Soviet Union had taken great satisfaction 
in the visit of a delegation of American scientists in connection with the 
signing of the agreement„ The delegation had been-headed by Professor Seaborg, 
a scientist whose work on the transuranium elements had been honoured with a 
Nobel Prize, Their visit had served to strengthen contacts between scientists 
of the two countries, Soviet scientists shared the opinion expressed by 
Professor Seaborg at the present session on the usefulness of those contacts. 
The scientists of both countries were confronting great scientific problems, 


the solutions to which should be used for the benefit of all peoples. 


61, A now programme for the exchange of specialists had been drawn up between 


the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom for the year 1963-64, It provided for 


an exchange of scientists and specialists on radioactive waste disposal, 
radioisotope applications, high-energy physics, radiation chemistry, and so on. 


62. Just before the General Conference an agreement for co-operation had been 
signed with Afghanistan, which provided for Soviet scientific and technical 
assistance in connection with the construction of a sub-critical assembly and 
a physics laboratory, and also for training in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The sub-critical assembly would be completed in 1965= 
63° During the preceding year, the Soviet Union had given technical.assistance, 
under existing agreements, to 15 countries in Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa. 
With Soviet help, various atomic installations had been built in. those countries, 
including nine reactorss six accelerators, seven radiochemical and physics 
laboratories, an electrostatic generator and a sub-critical assembly. 


64. Work on the construction of installations of various kinds was continuing 
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea., Indonesia, Ghana and other 
countries. Reactors, and physics, radiochemistry.and medical .laboratories 
Yirore being built and would be completed in 1964 and in 1965* 

GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 17 


65. The construction of nuclear centres in those countries provided the basis 
for an extensive range of scientific work on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
to he carried out by nationals trained in the Soviet Union,, 
66. New forms of collahoration were being developed;; in particular, there was 
a growing trend in favour of joint research projects,, At the nuclear centre 
in Cairo, for instance, Soviet scientists and specialists of the United Arab 
Republic had been working together for several years on an atomic reactor and 
an electrostatic generator in accordance with a programme of work that had been 
planned in joint consultation. A very good team of scientists - most of them 
young theoretical and experimental physicists from the United Arab Republic were 
now working at the nuclear centre in Cairo. Soviet scientists had given 
more than 250 lectures on various aspects of physics. Collaboration would be 
developed along similar lines in other countries with which the Soviet Union 
had signed agreements for scientific and technical co-operation on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
67• In the economically most advanced countries there were various plans for 


the building of largo-scale power stations. Some had already been built, 
others were.under construction. Wide use was being made of radioactive 
isotopes. Isotope techniques offered many advantages which could not be^ 


assessed solely in terms of money; they were of great use in industrial 


automation and control, were extremely valuable to scientists, and often provided 
the best way of diagnosing and treating particular diseases. By making 
available to the Agency the results of their work and practical achievements, 
many countries could do a great deal to help the developing countries in the 
practical use of atomic energy. The Soviet Union, for its part, was making 


available to the Agency free of charge the results of 43 nuclear research 
projects, all of them of practical value in hydrology, agriculture, medicine, 
scientific research and radioactive waste disposal. Expenditure on the 
projects had been over 230 000 roubles (approximately &250 000). He would not, 
however, go into details. A list would be given to the Secretariat' with the 
request that an information document be issued on the subject to the General 
Conference-% If other countries engaged on similar work followed the example 
of the Soviet Union, the Agency could offer real advantages to its Members at 
no additional cost to itself. 


6/ See document GC(VII)/INF/69. 



GC(VII)/OR„76 
page 18 


68. If the establishment of a' long-term programme was a constructive measure, 
the same could certainly not be said of the attempts being mad.e to violate the 
financial provisions-of Article XIV of the Statute,• The problem was not new it 
had already been discussed at the'sixth regular session of the-.General 
Conference. With the supposed aim of Improving the programme-'of technical 
assistance to the developing countries, it had been proposed that the voluntary 
•principle be abandoned and that technical assistance be financed from .the 
assessed contributions of Member States. The proposal had been adopted during 
the June meetings of the Board by only twelve votes out of twenty-three, and a 
recommendation had been made to amend Article XIV of the Statute. 
69. Such an amendment was unacceptable for a number of reasons. 
70o Technical or economic assistance could only be granted by one State 'to 
another on a voluntary basis. That was the general rule and no one questioned 
its validity. Could an international organization force a State to grant 
economic or technical assistance to other States? Clearly, it could not. 
Neither the International Atomic Sncrgy Agency nor any other international 
organization could oblige a sovereign State to grant such assistance on the 
basis of a majority vote. Such action on the part of an international 
organization would be tantamount to direct interference in the internal affairs 
of a State. The'Agency's Statute, like the statutes of other international 
organizations, categorically prohibited interference in the internal affairs 
of Member States. lioreoever, a'decision of the General Conference to accept 
the recommendation of a majority of the Board of Governors to amend Article XIV 
would constitute a complete departure from the voluntary principle underlying 
the granting of technical assistance. 

71. There was another important point to be borne in mind. When a State 
joined the International Atomic Energy Agency it took upon itself certain 
financial.and other,rcsponsilities. At the present time those financial 
obligations were'clearly defined in terms of the proportion of the administrative 
expenditure of the Agency that.was borne by that State. To include technical 
assistance items in the Agency's budget would make the volume of budgetary 
expenditure entirely dependent on the will of the majority of the Agency's 
Members. Such a procedure would open the door to unlimited budgetary increases 

GC(VII)/OR„76 
pago 19 


and the financial obligations of Member States would no longer be clear. 
Member States were in fact being asked to sign a blank cheque, It was hardly


normal practice to expect a sovereign State to undertake certain financial 


obligations when it entered an international organization and then arbitrarily 


to change those obligations by means of a majority vote at a subsequent period, 


No State with any concern fox its independence and sovereignty could possibly 


accept such a procedure, 


72, Although it was opposed to the idea of compulsory contributions, the 
Soviet Union was entirely in favour of the provision of every possible form of 
technical assistance on a voluntary basis, One method of providing such 
assistance had been outlined in the proposal of the Soviet Union and other 
socialist countries to supply the developing nations with the equipment and 
apparatus required to fit out six radiological and six physics laboratories and 
also to make available 300 fellowships to such countries free of charge. The 
socialist countries had agreed to bear one third of the expenditure involved 
and hoped that the remaining two thirds would be met by the industrially 
advanced '..estorn countries. The Soviet Union was helping and would continue to 
help the developing countries by making available its experts and equipment, 
by awarding fellowships, by carrying out research on their behalf, etc. The 
possibilities for enlisting the voluntary co-operation of Ifember States in such 
ways had by no means been exhausted, 


73, The Soviet Union could not, therefore, as a matter of principle, consider 
the proposed amendment of the Statute as a legitimate one. He wished to repeat 
the position of his delegation, which had already been made clear at the sixth 
regular session of the General Conference; if the proposed change were adopted, 
the Soviet Union would not feel obliged to pay that part of its contribution 
which applied to projects hitherto paid for from voluntary contributions. The 
Soviet Union would not pay one cent towards such projects on a compulsory basis. 
Needless to say, it would vote against the proposal of the Board of Governors 
to amend Article XIV of the Statute, 


74, Until quite recently - up to two or three years .earlier - every attempt to 
take action in connection with the problem of disarmament had been turned down 
on the grounds that the Agency was a purely technical and non-political 



GC(VII)/cRc76 
pago 20 


organization. However, the pressure of outside events had made itself felt 
within the Agency and thoso objections had been silenced. A resolution adopted 


at the sixth regular session of the General Conference had requested the 
Director General to give full co-operation to the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations in studying the economic and social consequences of 


7/ 
disarmament-^ The Director General had informed the General Conference of 
a communication he had sent to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the 
possible effects of an agreement on general and complete disarmament on nuclear 
energy development-7! 
75° Strictly speaking, that document, which, was only four pages long, was more 
in the nature of a brief draft than a full report. Nevertheless, even from the 
approximate and tentative data quoted, it was obvious that an agreement on 
disarmament could give an enormous impetus to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. They showed, for example, that the available reserves of nuclear fuel 
which could be switched to peaceful applications would be sufficient to 
operate power stations for a period of 15 years at a capacity approximately 
equivalent to the total capacity of all the power stations installed at the 
present time. The report also dealt with the interesting question of how 
qualified military nuclear experts might be transferred to non-military work. 


76. The problem of disarmament had figured on the agenda of the Economic and 
Social Council of the United Nations (iiiCOSOC) for a number of years past. The 
recent thirty-sixth session of Ju00S(~'C had again examined the problem and had 
adoptod a resolution calling on the specialized agencies of the United Nations 
arid the Agency to co-operate with the Secretary-General of the United Nations 
by directing their efforts towards an international assessment of the economic 
and social aspects of disarmament^. The Soviet delegation hoped that the 
General Conference would clarify the way in which the Agency should implement 
the J3C0S0C resolution. 
77- He wished the Conference every success with its work and said that the 


Soviet delegation would do everything in its power to resolve the questions on 


the agenda in a spirit of mutual respect for the interests of all countries. 


]J GC(VI)/HiJis/l30. 
8/ GC( vTl)/OK.73, para. 67. The communication is reproduced in United Nations 
document E/3736/Add.33 part I. 
2/ LC0S0C Resolution 982 (XXXVI). 


GC(VII)/0K„76 
page 21 


78. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan) wished at the- outset to associate himself with 
the remarks made by thu delegate of Ghana regarding the policy of racial 
discrimination pursued by certain Member States. 
79. When, several years previously, Pakistan had decided to enter the atomic 
energy field, the decision had been prompted by a recognition of stark realities 
connected with its programme of rapid economic development, It firmly believed 
that a developing country like itself, with a population of 94 million and one 
of the lowest levels of national income, could not hope to achieve economic 
growth unless it made the fullest possible use of the means which modern 
science and technology had placed at man's disposal. Abundant power was a 
prerequisite for the growth and development of agriculture and industry, and 
atomic energy offered a promising economic alternative in selected areas of a 
country like Pakistan that lacked the resources for conventional power 
production. In addition, there was vast scope for utilizing radioisotopes, 
the by-products of atomic energy, in solving problems of agriculture, health 
and industry. 
80. It had been realized from the outset that no results could be achieved 
without a corps of scientists and engineers trained in specialized fields of 
atomic energy. An extensive training programme had therefore been launched 
and Pakistan now had nearly 300 young scientists and engineers fully trained or 
under training abroad. By 1965 "tne number was expected to grow to 500. It 
was grateful to the Agency and a number of friendly countries for their help 
in that work. That nucleus of trained personnel was regarded as the country's 
greatest asset'and gave the necessary confidence for proceeding with the work. 


81. During the same period, laboratories and research centres had been planned 
and established, within the country. The Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science 
and Technology was under construction and would have a 5 MIY swimming-pool type 
research reactor.. The first phase of the work would be completed by 1965 
when the reactor was expected to go critical. In addition, there were two big 
centres fully equipped for training and research work not involving the use of 
reactors. The one, at Lahore, where a sub-critical assembly was to be coupled 
with a neutron generator as a pulse source for experimental work, was already 
in operation. The second, to be inaugurated at Dacca in 1964, would have a 

<JU(',II)/OR.76 
pf.jG 22 


3 Me? Van de Graaffaccelerator for low-energy physics work. Two other centres, 
exclusively for agricultural research, had been established at Tandojam and 
Dacca. Throe medical centres - at Karachi, Lahore and Dacca - were using 
isotopes and cobalt in the diagnosis and treatment of disease, 


82,. Studies on the economic feasibility of nuclear power had shown that by 
1968 power gaps in Karachi (v/est Pakistan) and Suoppur (East Pakistan) would 
justify the establishment of a 132 I.F.7 nuclear pov/er plant for the former and a 
70 J'iYv plant for the latter, provided that loans could be secured at less than 
4?&. Nearly all Pakistan's conventional power projects had been financed through 
such low-interest loans from friendly countries.' The authorities were grateful 
to the Director General and his colleagues for the guidance given in regard to 
selection of sites, evaluation of proposals, drawing up of specifications for 
tender and .in-particular for the helpful report on the prospects of nu-clear 
power in Pakistan. ' They were confident that further help would be given 
subsequently in evaluating bids and in preparing a hazards evaluation report and 
a training programme, 


8'),, As to the Agency's work and functions, great headway had been made during 
the past year, thanks to the Director General's leadership and the favourable 
atmosphere and spirit of collaboration obtaining in the Board of Governors. A 
long-term programme had been drawn up which provided a framowork for operations5 
the Secretariat had been reorganized to provide the machinery for smooth 
implementation of the plan, the safeguards procedures had-been approved for 
application to reactors of above 100 3\'IW( "fc) 3 and moves were afoot towards 
unifying the Agency's budget and finances. On the scientific side, in addition 
to the Seibersdorf and Monaco Laboratories, the Agency would have an international 
centre for theoretical physics, primarily intended for the benefit of the 
developing countries, and an isotope centre for the Arab countries in Cairo. 
The scientific seminars and panel discussions organized by the Agency had;:boen 
of high quality and the publications issued were among the best to be found on 
the subjects covered. Any international organization might well be proud of 
such a record, which was due in no small measure to the dedication of the staff 
at all levels of the Secretariat, 


GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 23 


84„ As to the future, the Agency's role should go beyond the long-term 
programme in view of the relaxation of international tension brought about by 
the Moscow test ban treaty,, One of the pillars on which the whole edifice 
of the Agency was built was the prevention of the proliferation of atomic 
weapons through a system of safeguards. It was therefore fitting that the 


great Powers should entrust the enforcement of the treaty to the Agency, 
Unfortunately, the treaty did not ban the production of atomic weapons and it 
was to be hoped that the next step would be in that direction. 


85. In that connection the world, as Pakistan saw it, was divided into three 
main groups of countries- (l) Those able to produce, and at present producing, 
atomic 'weapons (i.e. the United States of America, the United Kingdom, the 
Soviet Union and France) , (2) Those having an industrial infrastructure and 
reactors in operation, and therefore able to develop a weapons technology, 
and (3) Those planning to have power reactors in the future. As a practical 
proposition, countries falling within the second and third categories should, 
as a first step, conclude an international treaty agreeing to refrain from 
producing weapons and to use atomic energy only for peaceful purposes. Sheer 
weight of international public opinion would then induce the four atomic Powers 
to join in and cease the production of weapons'. The Agency, as an international ( 
/


organ devoted to promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy, should convene 
an international conference specifically for that purpose, such action would 
immediately enhance the respect and prestige it enjoyed. 


86. In the same connection, it was noteworthy that, under the Agency's Statute, , 
Members could by-pass its safeguards procedure by getting nuclear fuel or 
nuclear facilities other than through the Agency. It was due to that lacuna 
in the Statute that the reactors of all the advanced countries of Europe countries 
falling within the second category - were outside the purview of the 
Agency's safeguards system. That situation was a temptation to countries in 
the third category to seek also to avoid the Agency's safeguards, and the 
resulting position of helplessness on the part of the Agency might further the 
temptation to divert fissionable material to military purposes. The great 
Powers had a moral obligation and responsibility to strengthen the Agency by 
action rather than words. They should refuse to enter into bilateral agreements 

GC(VII)/OR„76 
page 24 


for the supply of nuclear fuel and facilities unless obtained through, the 
Agency. Further, countries having bilateral agreements, OT having set up 
reactors without seeking the Agency\s assistance, should voluntarily follow 
the excellent ..example of Japan and attach the Agency's safeguards to their 
reactors and nuclear facilities. 

87• A practical way of preventing the diversion of nuclear materials for 
military purposes would he to establish regional reprocessing plants under 
the Agency's auspices. Wherever such plants were being established, as at 
Mol in Surope, they should be voluntarily placed under the Agency's control. 
In Asia, provided the plans of Japan, India, Pakistan and the Philippines went 
through, there might be as much as 2000 MW of nuclear power being generated 
by 1970? a*i<l there was no reason why such countries should not get their fuel 
elements processed at a common reprocessing facility run by the Agency. 


88. It was a matter of deep concern that Member States did not inform, the 
Agency of transfers of source and fissionable material from their territories 
to other countries, with the result that the Agency had no statistical' record 
of the quantity of fissionable materials available in the various countries at-
a given moment. Even if countries falling within the first category were . 
excluded, there was no reason why the Agency should not be the custodian of all 
relevant statistical records of such transfers. Recently, agreement, had been 
reached on the transfer of large quantities of plutonium from the United States 
and the United Kingdom to Prance, without any information on the subject being 
supplied to the Agency, although bilateral safeguards were being applied, such 
action was tantamount to by-passing the Agency. Pakistan believed in 
international co-operation, and if a positive lead were given by the great 
Powers, the path to peace would be ensured. If all Members,joined in buildingup 
the Agency and giving it the backing it deserved, it would be able to go 
beyond the-limited goals of the present long-term programme. 
89. His delegation wished to place on record its disappointment that the 
Agency's major activities were confined to the continent of Europe, The time 
had come when it should establish regional offices in Asia, Africa and Latin 
America. By so doing, technical assistance work could be largely decentralized 
and routine activities in providing fellowships, equipment and experts dealt 

GC(VII)/OB.76 
page 25 


with on the spot, consultation© with Headquarters being confined to matters of 
policy. Regional groups could be encouraged to form organizations similar to 
the European Atomic .Energy Community where problems of common interest could be 
discussed and research on regional problems undertaken jointly, with Agency 
help. In the context of regional co-operation, it might be that a number of 
countries in different regions would be attracted to the Agency if it.were possible 
to get supplies of enriched fuel for power reactors at specially 
reduced prices, in the same way as Member States received for research purposes 
enriched uranium that had been donated to the Agency by the United States. 
Further, under their fuel enrichment policies the Governments of the United 
States and of the United Kingdom - and perhaps of the Soviet Union - could 
accept natural uranium for enrichment at special rates, provided the arrangements 
were made through the Agency„ Such steps would cost little, but would pay 
handsome dividends inasmuch as the Agency would become an international broker 
in the fuel business. 


900 In short, Pakistan envisaged a wider role for the Agency than that implied 
by the long-term'programme. All that was needed was a generous and honest 
approach on the part of the great Powers$ finance would be no problem, as many 
developing countries would be willing to contribute more if they stood to gain 
more. If only one tenth of the funds appropriated by the great Powers for 
atomic weapons could be diverted to the promotion of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy through the Agency, the world would be a happier place to live 
in. 


91= Mr. HULUBal (Romania) said that the seventh regular session was 
starting in an atmosphere more favourable than heretofore to international 
relations and a better understanding among peoples. Any measure, even 
transitional, that served the cause of peace was worth taking. Accordingly, 
the Romanian Government had been among the first tc sign the Moscow treaty a 
great advance towards easing international tension, opening the way to lasting 
peace through universal disarmament, and ending the radioactive pollution that 
was so dangerous for the present and future of mankind, 


92, Under its policy of peaceful co-existence Romania took part in all 
international activities that aimed at solving the grave problems which, faced 



GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 26 


mankind. It sought to make of the Balkans a zone of-peace, without nuclear•weapons 
or rockets, and was taking an active -part in the work of the United-• 
Nations, the Disarmament Commission and all other international bodies. 


93. As part of the United Nations, and by its very nature, the Agency could 
and should play an important part in easing international tension. The 
progressive elimination of the danger of a nuclear flare-up and the utilization 
of the immense existing nuclear potential in the interests of peoples and for 
the benefit of science was one of the main reasons for its existence. The 
climate that could be created at the Agency, and the courses' of action that 
might be found or suggested there, could make a great contribution to the 
peoples' fight against the nuclear danger and to the development of atomic 
energy for the good of mankind. 
94. The Romanian delegation noted with satisfaction the Agency's achievements 
since the sixth regular session, particularly in training, the organization of 
scientific meetings and the exchange of information. The Agency had extended 
its scope, profited from past experience, and increased its usefulness to 
Member States. Under an improved research programme, it was successfully 
tackling problems of more immediate scientific and economic interest. In 
order to make better use of the results, the Secretariat might periodically 
prepare detailed and very precise scientific reports on the activities in 
question. That also held good for the Monaco Laboratory, since the. research 
carried out there could be extremely interesting to Member States if carefully 
followed up. 
95- Those in charge of the centre for theoretical physics that was shortly to 
be inaugurated would have a very difficult task. The interest' of the 
developing countries in theoretical physics was of a rather special kind, and 
experience' of that type of international institution was limited. • The centre's 
success would depend on the extent to which it was able to jroup and co-ordinate 
activities of a highly scientific nature. 


96. His delegation congratulated the Director General and the Secretariat on 
the good results obtained in the circulation of technical and scientific 
information through conferences, symposia and seminars, and on the constant 
improvement in the editing. 

GG(VII)/Oit.76 
page 27 


97. The long-term programme recently approved by the Board was realistic and 
acceptable. He hoped it would stimulate work on such matters of major 
importance as nuclear power, the use of isotopes in industry, agriculture and 
medicine, training and many others of common interest. 
980 The detailed programmes must be prepared in close collaboration with 
Member States and with a special e ye to the requirements of the developing 
countries,, To the extent that thdt was done - due regard being had to 
technological developments - the long-term programme would render very real 
services. 


99° By using available resources more rationally it should soon be possible 
to stabilize the budget and so avoid the constant increases expected up to 
1970•> The socialist countries had made constructive proposals to that end 
at the sixth regular session. The funds allotted to each activity and to each 
Member State could be better distributed and the organization and planning of 
the Secretariate activities better arranged^ that was worth doing. Obligated 
funds should'not be held indefinitely in reserve and outstanding technical 
assistance obligations should be liquidated. Appropriations for the services 
of experts continued to exceed those for equipment1 under that heading, 
savings might be made without prejudice to the services rendered by experts. 

100. His delegation wished once again to emphasize the vital importance of 
training. It did not share the view that the training problem was almost 
solved, at least so far as the Agency was concerned, and was concerned to note • 
that, for the period 1958 "t° 1962, the percentage of fellowships financed by 
the Agency had fallen from 83.876 to 37^0 and that of fellowships offered under 
the United Nations iOxpanded Programme of Technical Assistance from 84$ to 37/^. 
101. Without an adequate number of trained specialists, the Agency's assistance 
would be neither effective nor useful, particularly in the developing States. 
The success of all the Agency's other activities depended on such training, 
and by a more rational utilization of the funds available it seemed the 
problem could be solved, He was stressing that point because, after the 
reorganization of the Secretariat, the Department dealing with training would 
have several other tasks to handle. In that connection he wished to pay tribute 
to Mr. Rylov, the Deputy Director General for Training and Technical Information, 
for the efficient and thoroughly understanding manner in which he had carried out 
his duties. 

GC(VII)/OR.76 
page 28 


102. Incidentally, many of the advanced States to which Resolution GC(VI)/R3S/l31 
was addressed, had not reacted in the spirit of that resolution;, although some 
Member States had been extremely interested in the proposals for technical 
assistance and training which it contained, 
103. The Romanian delegation did not believe that amalgamating the budgets was 
the only way to take care of the technical assistance and training problems. 
It was opposed to the proposed amendment to Article AIV of the Statute as being 
contrary to the Agency's fundamental principles and liable to have an adverse 
effect on the efficiency of technical assistance. 
104. Similarly,.the fellowship regulations the Board had adopted were not likely 
to promote good, understanding, involving as they did pointless discrimination 
against some Member States, and they were incompatible with the very principles 
laid down in the Statute. The various aspects of that matter should be 
carefully reconsidered. 
105. Fundamental research and the peaceful applications of nuclear energy had 
the constant attention of the Romanian Government. Such applications were 
already frequent in the metallurgical and chemical industries, in prospecting 
and hydrological research, and in medicine, biology and agriculture;; they 
would soon be-routine. 
106. He was gratified to see present at the General Conference the delegations 
of six new Member States2 Bolivia, Liberia, Libya, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian 
Arab Republic and Uruguay. He also welcomed the recent admission of Nigeria, 
the Ivory Coast and Gabon. 
The meeting rose at 12.55 P.ra° 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VII)/OR.77 
23 December 1963 


GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference 

ENGLISH 


Seventh regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 26 September 1963, at 5-20 p.m. 


President: Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 1 - 114 
Governors for 1962-63 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Austria 1 -9 
Indonesia If -18 
Mali 19 -26 
Ivory Coast 27 -32 
Poland 

33 -56 

France


57 -75 


India 76 -84 


Republic of Korea 85 -91 


Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 92 -110 


Spain 11 -114 


* GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2. 


63-7983 



GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1962-63 
(GC.(VII)/228, 243) (continued) 


1. Mr. GUDENTJS (Austria) said that the discussions on future tasks 
and aims at the last two sessions of the General Conference had been most 
valuable and the Agency had now reached the stage where its work could continue 
in accordance with generally accepted principles. 
2. The joint memorandum by the Board of Governors and the Director General 
on long-term planning-^ was a very constructive guide for the future activities 
of the Agency and a striking example of how to tackle and overcome difficult 
problems. 
3. Austria hoped that the Agency would devote increasing efforts to the 
practical uses of nuclear energy in science and industry. The Agency's 
studies on nuclear power costs and the use of nuclear power plants would 
undoubtedly be of great assistance to many Member States. The publications 
on reactor facilities and the results of the Symposium on Criteria for 
Guidance in the Selection of Sites for the Construction of Reactors and 
2/ 


Nuclear Research Centres—' had been particularly appreciated in Austria. 


4. A country's decision on the use of nuclear power depended to a large 
extent, however, on the general power situation and, in giving advice to 
Member States, the Agency should be able to call on the highly qualified 
power experts available in other international organizations. It was, 
therefore, desirable to continue the efforts to secure closer co-operation 
between the Agency and other international organizations, including the 
World Power Conference., though it was logical that the Agency should have the 
primary responsibility for questions of investment in nuclear power. 
5. He noted with great satisfaction the Board's recent decision to extend 
safeguards to large reactor facilities.-" It would, however, be necessary 
to review the procedure for the application of safeguards, and he hoped that 
1/ GC(VII)/227. 


2/ Held in Bombay from 11 to 15 March 1963. 


2/ See document GC(VII)/235, 



GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 3 


the study to be carried out in 19&4 would, 'result in a workable and .universally 
accepted system. At a later stage, consideration would also have to he given 
to another important question, namely the extension of safeguards to facilities 
other than reactors.. Austria intended to enter' into negotiations with a view 
to transferring to the Agency the responsibility for applying the safeugards 
provided for in the bilateral agreement between Austria and the United States. 


6. The training programme was another of the Agency's most important 
activities. At the last session of the General Conference, his country had 
announced- that it would place certain facilities at the Agency's disposal for 
that programme and arrangements had now been made for the first training 
course to begin at the Seibersdorf Reactor Centre on 1 October 1963-W wa s 
hoped that the training programme would .be useful to young scientists,. 
particularly those from the developing countries. Austria was also considering 
the possibility of establishing a training centre for the applications of 
radioisotopes in medicine. 
7. Now that atomic energy was coming to be used in so many different ways,it 
was natural that the different specialized agencies should be interested 
in particular branches of the subject. It was most important that all their 
activities should be effectively .co-ordinated and the Agency, which shoul.d 
have primary responsibility in all fields closely related to. nuclear energy, 
was undoubtedly the most appropriate body for that task. 
8. He stressed the importance of the legal work done by the Agency during 
the past year, mentioning in particular the International Conference on Civil 
Liability for Huclear Damage held in Vienna and. the Nordic Mutual Emergency 
Assistance Agreement in connection with Radiation Accidents-^. It seemed 
desirable that other countries should follow the example of Scandinavia. 
9. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the treaty imposing a partial • 
ban on nuclear weapons tests would represent a first significant step towards 
a better understanding among nations. . . 
The text of the agreement is reproduced in document INFCIRC/49, 



GC(VII)/QR.77 
page 4 

10. Mr. DARUSMAH (Indonesia) said that his delegation warmly supported 
the statement made by the delegate of Ghana*^ and strongly urged that the 
Conference should inform the United Nations of the importance attached by 
the new African and Asian countries to the political factor as an essential 
condition of the Agency's success. 
11. Indonesia had made further progress in atomic energy with the acquisition 
of a well-equipped radioisotopes laboratory, a reactor simulator and a library. 
The Triga Mark II reactor being built at Bandung had almost been completed^ 
a sit© had been selected and the necessary preliminary survey and preparations 
made for the construction of a 2-MW research reactor. 
12. During the past two years his Government had been exploring the 
possibility of establishing a regional isotope training centre for South 
East Asia and the Pacific in Indonesia and, in spite of certain delays and 
difficulties, was continuing its preparations, which were at present confined 
to the operation of such a centre on a national basis. A four-week course 
in radiation protection and two four-week courses in radioisotope applications 
would be held in November 1963 an& January and July 1964 respectively, and 
applications were invited from trainees from other Member States. 
15. His Government considered that the Agency's procedure of awarding fellowships 
should be reviewed. Owing to the long waiting period before receipt 
of their grants, the original applicants were in most cases no longer able to 
accept them5 it would be helpful if they could be replaced by other available 
candidates with the same qualifications. Closer co-operation was also required 
between .the Agency, the host Government and the nominating Government. 
14. With regard to the'technical assistance programme, he pointed out that 
many young scientists returning from training abroad could not make satisfactory 
use of their newly acquired "knowledge because of lack of equipment. It was 
therefore highly desirable to stress the provision of equipment, rather than 
experts. The Agency should also improve its arrangements for sending out 
missions, which should visit a Member State only if its consent had been 
obtained. 
5/ GC(VII)/OR.76, paras. 8 to 14. 



GC(VII)/OH.77 
page 5 


15. In principle,, his delegation was opposed to safeguards and believed that 
a rigid control would serve no purpose,' especially as developing nations were 
unlikely to .use their limited resources for military purposes. 
16,• As to research contracts, his delegation fully recognized their importance, 
hut thought that too many had been awarded to technically advanced 


countries5 the funds, distributed on a regional basis, could he better spent 


on partially financing research facilities in developing countries. His 
Government was particularly interested in a research grant in agriculture, 
for which it already possessed the necessary facilities5 Member States were 
welcome to send research fellows to its laboratories. 


17. ' The Agency could promote scientific documentation and the dissemination 
of scientific information by establishing depository libraries in the developing 
countries, with the help of the United Nations Resident Representatives. 
18. His Government appreciated the Agency's policy of organizing as many 
seminars, symposia and conferences as possible in developing countries and 
would be glad to act as host for a symposium5 the necessary facilities would 
be available by the end of 196"4. 
19. Mr. HT'DIAIE (Mali) said that at a time when the three great nuclear 
Powers had just concluded an agreement on the discontinuance of nuclear tests 
on the ground and in the atmosphere, the Republic of Mali placed great hopes 
in the Agency. Everyone knew that Mali had always taken a firm stand against 
such tests, v/herever they might take place and in whatever form. That 
position had been clearly defined on many occasions, both in the General 
Conference and in all .other international assemblies. It had never changed. 
By signing the Moscow treaty, Mali had accordingly expressed, through the 
voice of its President, its satisfaction at being able to associate itself 
actively with a victory in the struggle for general and complete disarmament. 
20. The developing countries were aware of the immense possibilities for 
economic and social-development offered by atomic energy, and they warmly 
welcomed the substantial efforts already made by the Agency. Of course, a 
great deal remained to be done, but the Agency's programme was likely to make 
a large contribution to the improvement of living conditions throughout the 

GG(VII)/OR.77 
page 6 


world, and particularly in the less-developed countries. In that sphere, the 
application of radioisotopes in medicine and agriculture opened up wide 
possibilities, particularly, in the fight against noxious .insects, the preservation 
of foodstuffs such as meat and fish, and the prophylaxis of endemic 
diseases such as malaria and trypanosomiosis. The use of iodine-ljjjl in the 
diagnosis and treatment of thyroid affections, and of cobalt-60 in teletherapy, 
were already available to the developing countries. 


21., ..The 1964. programme should therefore pursue and develop those peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. But there was another use in which Mali was gr'eatly 
interested, namely electric power production. It had been found that for 
the time being, to be economic, power reactors must be of a certain size. 
Poor countries were not able .to finance reactors of that size,, and the Agency 
should therefore promote the study and development of small atomic power 
plants of less than 50 000 kW capacity, which would be within their limited 
financial means. The delegation of Mali considered that that would be one 
of the best ways of extending to the developing countries the advantages 
offered by atomic energy for the generation of electricity. 


22. Leaving on one side questions of equipment and technique, subjects that 
had already been eloquently dealt with by more competent- speaker's-, he would 
like to make some comments of a political character despite the wish expressed 
by an eminent delegate. At the opening meeting of the present session the 
delegate of South Africa had earnestly requested Member States to leave aside 
the political problems that divided them and to. confine themselves to the 
technical questions that fell within the Agency's competence. He had been 
disappointed at that conciliatory proposal, coming as it did from the representative 
of so intransigent a country as South Africaf in view of the total 
contempt for the' black race shown by the South African Government, he had 
'expected its representative to say that the South African delegation could 
not logically sit- side by side with black delegations and-consequently- felt" 
bound to withdraw. He would then have understood its position, and even- have 
appreciated its attitude, since such a gesture would have been in conformity 
with the policy of racial segregation openly practised by its Government. 

GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 7 


23. Unfortunately, it would appear that the views of the South African 
authorities on the racial question varied according as the problems in question 
were internal or external. The South Africans would certainly not expect that 
the coloured people would insult them by demanding their expulsion from the 
Agency? their pride at belonging to the chosen race would no doubir urge them 
to go of their own accord. They could not in a,ny case complain of any 
inconsistency in policy, since the coloured peoples had never ceased to press 
for, and even demand, the expulsion of South Africa from all international 
bodies, in accordance with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, and 
in conformity with those of the Addis Ababa Charter. 
24. The same observations obviously applied equally to Portugal, whose policy 
was closely akin to that of South Africa. The delegates of both countries 
would therefore hot be surprised if the coloured peoples continued to pursue 
a logical policy and demanded that which they had never ceased to demand in 
other circumstances and places, namely the exclusion of South Africa and 
Portugal from the Board and from the General Conference. It was intolerable 
that the Agency should continue to give its moral support to States that continually 
and deliberately trampled underfoot the elementary principles of 
human dignity; the maintenance of an odious system of social segregation and 
the domination by a foreign minority of a native majority were an insult to 
the whole human race. 
25. If the co-operation the Agency wanted was to be candid and effective, 
those who rejected all idea of equality between races, who degraded men, or 
continued to encourage the shameful exploitation of man by man, must go in 
other words, all those whose presence could be nothing but a source pf 
discord and disagreement. It was not logically possible to speak of 
universal disarmament and of the peaceful uses of atomic energy in developing 
countries when it was perfectly well known that in some of those countries the 
moral principles that should govern the relations between peoples and races 
were deliberately ignored. Hence, before considering any other matter, it 
was necessary to have the courage to stamp out an evil that weighed on the 
conscience of mankind by taking up the challenge that Portugal and South 
Africa had dared to cast in the face of the entire world. The independent 
African States had unanimously taken up the glove at Addis Ababa. It remained 
to be seen whether countries that claimed to be partisans of peace and social 
justice would follow suit, follow what no one could deny was the right road. 

GC(VII)/OR.77 
pago 8 


26. Moreover? South Africa's right to ho on the Board appeared debatable, not 
only because of its odious apartheid policy but also because the right of a 
South African Government put into power by a white minority to be considered 
representative was open to question. South Africa and Portugal should fall 
into line with the rest' of the world and respect the fundamental principles 
to which they had subscribed in accepting the United Nations Charter, 
failing which the rest of the world should have the courage to reject them 
so long as they maintained their racialist and colonialist policy. The respect 
due to the dignity of man, regardless of colour or of the social condition 
in which he might temporarily find himself, was at issue. No solution 
aiming at universal disarmament and the establishment of lasting peace in 
the world could be effective until respect for human dignity was entirely 
restored everywhere and freedom was the lot of all. Until those ends 
were accomplished arms would not be abandoned, and all measures to promote 
world peace would prove ineffective. 
27. Mr. AMOS DJORO (ivory Coast) expressed the gratitude of his country 
to the Board for recommending its admission in the first place, and to the 
delegates of the Member States who had unanimously approved its application 
for membership of the Agency. 
28. The Ivory Coast was naturally glad to be admitted to full membership. 
It was an honour to belong to an organization whose main object was to 
develop the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes in medicine, agriculture 
and industry - applications that were of special interest to the developing 
countries. Nationally and internationally, there was a complete identity 
of aim between his country and the'Agency, and joining the Agency was in 
itself an expression of that identity of view. It was in that same spirit 
of working for peace that his Government, hj its signature, expressed its 
approval of the Moscow test ban treaty. 
29. Under those circumstances the potential radioactive ore resources of 
the Ivory Coast could be placed at. the disposal of mankind for its good 
rather than used for its destruction.. 
30. Hence he wished to draw the attention of the General Conference to the 
presence in the Agency of countries which, like South Africa, defied world 
opinion by casting doubt on the potentialities of man, by trampling on his 

GC(VII)/0E.77 
page 9 


dignity, and by making his race and colour a badge of shame. That was not 
only an insult to democracy, it was a grave affront to the very spirit of 
the Agency. 


31. Pending the taking of measures to expel South Africa, he wished to 
stress his delegation's entire support for the views of all delegations 
which considered the presence of representatives of a unique and iniquitous 
regime undesirable in the Board and at the General Conference. 
32. The greatness of the Agency lay in its determination to utilize science 
and technology for the happiness and for the freedom of mankind. 
33. Mr. BILLIG (Poland) expressed his satisfaction at the admission of 
three new African States to membership of the Agency. His delegation 
sympathized with and fully supported the struggle of the African peoples 
against the racialist policy of the South African Government. 
34. The present session of the General Conference was taking place in a 
favourable international atmosphere, thanks to the signature of the Moscow 
treaty banning nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and 
under water. In his view that was an extraordinarily important event and 
the first step towards realizing humanity's aspirations of lasting peace and 
the fullest possible use of nuclear energy to meet human needs. 
35. He recalled that the United Nations Economic and Social Council (r3C0S0C) 
had unanimously adopted at its thirty-sixth session a resolution referring to 
the Agency's responsibilities regarding the peaceful uses of atomic energy—' . 
36. , His delegation attached great importance to the Agency's fellowships 
programme. It was a great achievement for the Agency to improve the qualifications 
of close on 400 scientific workers and engineers annually. Agency 
fellowships were important not only because they improved the qualifications 
of the fellows concerned, but also because they enabled close links to be 
established between the institutes in which the fellows worked, links which 
were often transformed into lasting scientific co-operation. 
6/ ECOSOC Resolution 986 (XXXTl), reproduced in document INPCIRC/48. 



GC(VII)/0E.77 
page 10 • 


37 • The Polish delegation wished also to express its satisfaction at the 
assistance furnished by the Board and the Secretariat in connection with the 
agreement reached between Yugoslavia, Norway and Poland concerning co-operation 
in the field of reactor physics. Although the agreement had been concluded 
quite recently, he thought it could already be said that the type of co


operation involved was most useful and appropriate. Such co-operation,within 
the'framework of the Agency, should be widened, to include other fields 


of research. 


58. Referring to the long-term programme drawn up by the Agency, he remarked 
that the document before the General Conference was the starting-point for 
elaboration of a more detailed plan. 
39- Outstanding amongst the problems facing the Agency, in that connection, 
was the development of reactor technology and nuclear power. 


40. The example of India, where a large-scale nuclear plant was being built, 
showed that the question was becoming increasingly important for the developing 
countries as well. They were now acquiring reactors and establishing new 
nuclear centres. The main issue for them, therefore> was the training of 
qualified staff, able to carry through an appropriate research programme and 
to undertake reactor construction, which was a necessary stage in the development 
of nuclear power. The Agency could do-much in that direction, both in 
training personnel and in providing advice on the utilization of.nuclear 
equipment. 
41. He thought consideration should be given to the possibility of turning 
one or more national institutes into international centres to which the.Agency 
could send scientists and engineers for training and to carry out specific 
research programmes. The Agency could also play an important part in research 
on radioactive waste disposal. 
42. His delegation was convinced that the third Geneva conference,.to be 
held in 1964? would help the Agency to draw up a specific programme with 
regard to nuclear power problems. 
43. Everyone agreed that safeguards should be attached to reactors with a 
capacity exceeding 100 Mffl. Nevertheless, his delegation had always considered 
that safeguards should be applied in such a way as to avoid infringing national 
sovereignty. That meant that they should be applied only where really necessary, 
their sole purpose being to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. 

GC(yu)/OR.77 
page 11' 


44. His delegation approved of the Agency's research contracts programme. 
45. He also noted with satisfaction that some positive results had recently 
emerged from the work of the Seibersdorf Laboratory? preparation and distribution 
of isotope standards, measures for the comparison and unification of 
methods of analysis, etc. Nevertheless his delegation thought that the Agency 
could play a greater part in scientific research, without any increase in 
financial expenditure, if it requested individual countries to submit to the 
Agency the results of research coming within the scope of its.programme. 
Poland would play its part in that respect, as far as its modest resources, 
permitted. > 
46. The Agency's vrork oh standardization and unification in the nuclear 
energy field, and on the establishment of standard regulations .for the transport 
of radioactive materials, was also useful. It would be possible, he thought, 
to draft a uniform code on the subject for adoption by all countries. A start 
had been made in that directipn by co-operation between the Agency and the 
countries of. the Council for Mutual Economic Aid (COMECON). 
47• The Agency's work during the past year had? however, been marred by 
several defects.• He was thinking of the attempt to introduce new principles 
for the award of fellowships, by which Type I fellowships would go only to 
countries in receipt of.aid under the Expanded Programme of Technical 
Assist-ance (EPTA)j -and also of the efforts to amend Article XIV of the 
Statute, which dealt with the method of financing the Agency's activity. 


48. To alter the principles by which fellowships were awarded, with the idea 
of discriminating against certain .countries, was contrary to the very basis of 
the Agency's work. And the proposal had failed to find any enthusiastic 
support within the Board. His delegation was in favour of awarding fellowships 
in such a way as to take greater account of the needs of applicants' 
from developing countries without depriving any Member State of its legitimate 
rights. The Agency, he recalled, had not been making full use of Type II 
fellowships for a number of years. 
49. The second question of serious concern to his delegation was the attempt 
to amend Article XIV of the Statute, dealing with the methods of financing the 
Agency's work. The proposed amendment would introduce a kind of compulsory 

GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 12 


taxation, imposed on sovereign States. To abandon the voluntary principle 
governing technical assistance operations would bring about not only a change 
in the Statute, but also in the character of the Agency itself. 


50. Furthermore, though the purpose of the proposed-amendment was ostensibly 
to ensure sufficient funds'for the programme of technical assistance to 
developing countries, in actual fact-it might lead to a reduction .in the 
funds available to the Agency for technical assistance purposes, since a 
number of countries which had so far been making voluntary contributions for 
technical assistance might refuse to take part if any element of compulsion 
were introduced, as United Nations experience showed. 
51. His delegation wished to declare solemnly that Poland would continue to 
grant assistance to the developing countries on as large a scale as possible. 
52. He recalled in that connection that Poland, together with the' other 
socialist countries, had, at the sixth regular session of the General Conference, 
put forward a specific plan of assistance to developing countries, providing 
• • • 7/ 
inter alia for the establishment of physics and medical centres.-" His 
Government had been prepared to supply equipment and fellowships to the value 
of approximately $75 000, a sum which exceeded its annual contributions to 
the Agency and was considerably higher than the contributions which would be 
requested of Poland if the proposed amendment to Article XIV of the Statute 
were adopted. The Agency had not, however, made any use of that offer. 


53. His delegation remained of the opinion that the programme concerned was 
not only practicable but could even be considerably extended. Poland, like 
the other socialist countries offering assistance, did not want to see any 
delay in implementing the programme. . . 
54* In conclusion, he stated that the Polish Government and people fully 
supported the Moscow, treaty and expressed the hope that the great Powers 
would continue the efforts begun at Moscow. 
2/ GC(VI)/COM.1/67/Rev.1.' 



GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 15 


55 • Poland's support for any initiative directed towards consolidating 


international peace was inspired not only by a general desire for peace but 


also by its particular geographic situation. His country was following with 


great anxiety the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany, whose signature 
had been placed with such reluctance beneath the Moscow treaty, and its 


attempts to acquire nuclear weapons at any price,- At the same time, the 


Polish people had welcomed with great satisfaction the fact that the 


Government of the German Democratic Republic had been prepared to sign the 
Moscow treaty immediately. 


56, The Polish delegation expressed its profound conviction that the initial 
step taken in Moscow would inspire all Governments to redouble their efforts 
to ensure peace throughout the world. 


57* Mr. HIRSCH (France) welcomed the Agency's new Member States, 


particularly Gabon and the Ivory Coast. 


58, After"the euphoria of the years 1955-58 and the readjustment of 1959-62, 
it-could-be stated that the-promise of 1962 had been fulfilled. Electric 
power production by atomic plants was already starting to assume industrialproportions 
in several large countries and becoming so nearly economically 
competitive that signs of concern could be detected in producers of conventional 
power resources. However, such concern was unfounded because longterm 
forecasts showed that a steadily developing world would definitely have 
to supplement its reserves of conventional fuels by nuclear ones. 


59. The United States Atomic Energy Commission had issued an interesting 
report on future prospects in which it dealt with the problem of world uranium 
resources in relation to the need to develop fast reactors. The French 
delegation agreed with the general long-term conclusions of that reports 
fast reactors constituted the only means of utilizing the immense uranium 
supplies available in the world's rocks. On the other hand, it had to be 
remembered that the development of electric power production by fast reactors 
was inevitably dependent on very large-scale production of plutonium in 
thermal reactors using natural or slightly enriched uranium. The economic. 
viability of thermal reactors had already been demonstrated, and the main 
nuclear task of the- coming 25 years would be to construct them in large numbers. 

GGk(VII)/OR.77 
page 14 


60. It therefore was a suitable'moment to seek a definition of the.Agency'a 
long-term tasks. The French delegation approved the main lines of the long-term 
programme', submitted to the General Conference. It was not a revolutionary plan, 
but simply a reassessment of the priorities to be assigned to the activities 
which clearly came-.within the Agency's terms of reference. It was to be hoped, 
in a field where changes were occurring so rapidly, that the programme would 
not become- stagnant,' and Prance had already proposed to the Board the setting 
up of a committee which could help the Secretariat adapt the programme to 
the needs of Member States at regular intervals. 
61; . The long-term' programme covered five major spheres of activitys power 
production, radioisotope 'applications, waste management, radiation protection 
and scientific research. 


62. Nuclear power production'was'naturally one of the Agency* s"main concerns, 
as it formed the basis of national nuclear energy programmes. Many new nuclear 
power station projects would have been launched by the end of 1963. In Prance, 
after the Marcoule reactors, the first nuclear power station of Electricite de 
France had started supplying power to the grid. The; next two power stations 
were under construction and a fourth had been decided on; it, too, would have 
a natural uranium, graphite-moderated reactor, cooled by pressurized gas'. At 
the same time, a similar type of reactor, using heavy water" as moderator,' was 
being developed. The first prototype fast reactor was under construction at 
Cadarache as a joint project with-the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM). 
France was also participating in joint undertakings-concerned with the design 
and construction of other types of reactors., . 
63. It should be reitereted that the nuclear power stations already constructed 
or under study had net outputs.of several hundreds of megawatts and were 
located in countries where industrial development justified setting up power 
stations of such large, size. It should also' be pointed out that the Agency 
had not yet had any opportunity to participate in international negotiations 
relating to power reactors. 
64. It was not certain whether medium-power reactors would be constructed in 
the near future with Agency assistance, even if such reactors were economically 
justifiable in certain locations. Similarly, the era of reactors for 
/ 



GC(VII)/0E.77 
page 15 


the production of industrial heat - say, for use in salino water conversion, 
a problem at present under study by an Agency panel - appeared remote, because 
such applications required considerable power capacities if they were to be 
economically sound. 


65. The Agency could nevertheless be of service in advising Member States 
which planned to set up nuclear installations. 'Economic surveys relating to 
both nuclear and conventional installations (provided that they were conducted 
in close liaison with the United Nations and its specialized agencies), the 
collection and dissemination of data and the training of key scientific and 
technical personnel would be of great value. The large-scale project due to 
begin in the Philippines in October with the assistance of the United Nations 
Special Fund seemed to be precisely the type of survey in which the Agency's 
qualifications and impartiality were irreplaceable. It was to be hoped that 
other projects of a similar nature would be organized. 
66. Radioisotope applications were the second major activity covered by the 
programme. The main thing to be avoided on that score was a dissipation of 
effort, because the application of radioisotopes was a matter particularly, 
suited to regional projects, whether relating to agriculture, hydrology, pest 
control or medical problems. The hydrological studies carried out in the 
Mekong Basin as part of a United Nations project in that region were a perfect 
example of the type of work that should be encouraged* In the case of 
countries standing on the threshold of atomic development, it'would be wrong 
to consider radioisotope applications merely as a secondary matter because in 
addition to the direct benefits of those activities, the training of personnel 
in the handling of radioactive materials, in the measurement of radiation and 
in radiation protection would be of valuable assistance when those countries 
were ready to embark upon the construction and operation of research reactors. 
67. The third main chapter of the long-term programme was devoted -to 
radioactive waste. For the operator of a nuclear power station, wastes 
constituted an economic problem for which no really satisfactory technical 
solution had been found. At the national level, the technical and economic 
problems were complicated by psychological ones, as the public was nervous, • 
about radioactivity and still not very familiar with the many and. various new 

GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 16 


units in use. At the international level, the problem was made even more 
complex- by political considerations. The Agency should'therefore contribute 
to the technical study of radioactive waste problems and to the formulation 


of practical regulations. The rather limited studies which could be carried 


out at th.e. Seibersdorf Laboratory could not serve for very much more than • 
training purposes. The Monaco Laboratory would continue to- provide technical 


data on changes in radioactivity in the sea and help'clarify the relationship 
between well-defined basic standards and the multiple aspects of.the diffusion 
of, and-changes in, • environmental radioactivity, on which more knowledge was 
required.• .Concerning regulations, France was studying the report of a panel 
on the.legal implications of radioactive waste disposal, on which it had been 
represented, and thought that in spite of certain conflicting views the final 
version might provide some simple and universally applicable rules. 


68. He had little comment to' make on health problems, which formed the fourth 
chapter of. the. programme. It would be sufficient to continue the work already 
in hand, which had always been amongst the.Agency's most successful.activities. 
69. Regarding scientific research, the Agency's activities should no doubt 
be restricted, as its limited funds would not allow it to play an important 
role. Moreover, research topics of immediate interest to all Member States 
were difficult to find. For those reasons, France had not favoured the 
creation of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics, which it feared 
might cause a drain on the Agency's limited resources. Above all, the 
interests of the developing Countries would perhaps be better served, at 
least initially, by the organization of summer courses in various areas of 
the world. In that connection, the Agency's efforts should be concentrated 
mainly on problems associated with the use of research reactors, because they 
required.such a heavy investment that failure to make proper use of them 
would be intolerable. Three regional-meetings had been organized'in 1963 • 
to co-ordinate the use• of research re-actors. France was participating'in 
that work and was .-always prepared to help in the training of technicians at 
its centres. 
70. The cost of the long-term programme, according to the Director General's 
estimates, appeared reasonable. Between 1963 and 1970? "the budget would rise 
from $10 million to $13 million, a rate of increase lower than that of many 
national programmes. 

GC(VII)/OR,77 
page 17 


71. It was in the light of that long-term programme and the comments he had 
just made that France approved the draft programme and budget for 1964* The 
French delegation appreciated the Director General's efforts to stabilize 
staff requirements and limit the growth of the budget, 
72. Technical assistance, whether in the form of training, expert missions 
or the supply of equipment, would continue to be the Agency's main activity. 
Between 1958 and 1962, fifteen Member States had received assistance representing 
about $6 million3 equivalent to two thirds of the total amount devoted to 
that aspect of the Agency's work. There was a certain anomaly in that situation 
and it could not be explained in terms of any criterion connected with the 
stage of development of the receiving countries or with their efforts in 
atomic matters. The Secretariat and the Technical Assistance Committee of 
the Board should endeavour to give greater publicity to the technical assistance 
available from the Agency and ensure the widest possible distribution of 
the resources concerned. France had been host to about 40 Agency fellows 
during the year and had provided 14 experts to meet various requests for 
technical assistance. 


73. The conference programme would be restricted in 1964. as the Third 
United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
was to be held in Geneva. France urged, and-would continue to urge, that the 
Agency should play a leading role in the organization of that Conference under 
the auspices of the United Nations. The availability in the Agency of several 
outstanding scientists, its experience in the successful organization of 
scientific meetings and its direct contacts with the national atomic energy 
organizations should ensure the best possible technical success with the least 
possible outlay. 
74. Regarding the delicate question of safeguards, France had voted, in the 
Board, for extension of the Agency's system to reactors of more than 100 MW. 
The general review to take place in 1964 would permit simplification of the 
existing safeguards document—' and make it acceptable enough to Member States 
so that they could be induced to use the Agency's services. In that connection, 
8/ INFCIRC/26. 



GC(VII)/OR.77 


page 18 


France had always recommended a flexible application of any rules formulated, 
which meant, in practice, application on a caso-by-case basis. The first two 


large nuclear power stations, in Asia, at Tokai-Mura and Tarapur, wore to be 
placed under Agency control. It would be advisable to establishing a working 
group in due course to study, as they arose, the problems involved in the 


control of those two installations of different types. 


75. Ho was pleased with his first contact with the International Atomic 
Energy Agency.. He had already had-occasion to appreciate' the qualities of 
the Director General and knew of the ability and loyalty of the scientific 
and administrative staff• assisting him. The Secretariat's efficiency would 
certainly-be increased-by the reorganization under way.- He hoped that continuation 
.of the Secretariatfs work in accordance with its new programme 
and the present easing of the political situation would enable the Agency, 
after the major conference in Geneva and the review of national programmes 
that would be made there, to participate ever more actively in the development 
of atomic energy throughout the world. 
Mr. BHABHA (India) said that the treaty limiting the testing of . 
atomic weapons had created a more propitious atmosphere for the Agency's work. 
India .had been one of the first States to adhere to that treaty and he wished 
to congratulate the three States primarily concerned. India believed that 
atomic energy, and indeed all scientific discoveries, should be used only for 
peaceful purposes, .an attitude which was reflected.in the title of its new 
Atomic Energy Acts "A Bill to provide for the development, control arid use of 
atomic energy for the welfare of the people of India and for other peaceful 
purposes and for matters connected therewith," 


77* Another fortunate circumstance was that advances- in technology had made 
nuclear power economically more competitive than many had thought possible a 
short while .ago.- Even in the less-developed countries nuclear-power could be 
economically generated, as was clear from his own country's experience. To 
illustrate that point he gave details of the cost of building two nuclear 
power stations in India and the cost of the electricity generated, which in 
one case was ICfo-l'jfo lower than that of electricity from a conventional power 
station. A third nuclear power station was now planned and a .special 


GC(VII)/OR,77 
page 19 


committee had been set up to draft a 15~ycar programme for power development 
in India, It seemed probable that it would be necessary to start building a 
new nuclear power station every year from 1966 onwards. YiThat had turned out 
to be economical for India might well prove to be economical for other 
developing countries,, which should study their own power problems as 
objectively as possible. The Agency could give valuable assistance in 
that matter and India would be glad to help in any way it could. 


78. The atomic power station at Tarapur was being built by a United States" 
firm and the two countries had entered into a bilateral agreement which 
covered provision of enriched uranium fuel for the entire life of the reactor. 
That was an excellent illustration of the desire for co-operation shown by 
two countries which held different views on certain aspects of the question 
of safeguards.' India had always held the view that enriched uranium and 
plutonium should only be supplied under adequate safeguards and, on that 
score, was entirely in agreement with the majority of other countries. His 
delegation was, however, against the attachment of safeguards to equipment and 
devices, in particular because it would widen the gap between the developed 
and the loss-devolopcd countries and thus increase tension. He was glad to 
note that the Indian viewpoint had been supported by the group of experts 
convened by the Board of Governors to advise it on extension of the Agency's 
safeguards system. Four of the eight members of the group had recommended 
that the principle of the attachment of safeguards to equipment and devices 
should be re-examined. He had no wish to delay extension of the Agency's 
safeguards system, but- he did not think that a short delay would be of any 
consequence and it seemed irrational to extend a system when its very basis 
was to be reviewed within a few months. His' delegation could not accept the 
extension of the system in the form in which it had been recommended and 
would, at the appropriate time, prepare amendments to the resolution adopted 
-by the Board^ . 


79. India had always supported international organizations and believed that 
international safeguards should be welcomed if they satisfied certain basic 
requirements. 'It had agreed with the United States, in principle, to request 
2/ GC(VII)/235. 



GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 20 


the Agency at a suitable time to enter into a trilateral agreement for 


implementation of the safeguards provisions of the agreement, between the 
United States and India. But the principle of safeguards should apply to 


all countries equally. India would like the Agency to recognize EURATOM, so 
that projects in which the latter organization was a participant could be 
brought under the international safeguards of the Agency by mutual agreement. 


80. At ..the conference on the Statute of the Agency in 1?56\ the Indian 
delegation had suggested that if all gaseous diffusion plants for the 
production of enriched uranium and all separation plants for the production 
of plutonium were placed under international control, no safeguards on source 
material, equipment or reactors would be necessary. At that .time India had 
not possessed any such plants, but one was to be completed during 1965 and 
his Government was willing to place it under safeguards, provided that, all 
other countries did likewise. He believed that if progress was made with 
disarmament, the type of safeguards system proposed by the Agency would be 
largely irrelevant. No peacefully-minded State could object to international 
safeguards if they applied to all alike, but unfortunately the system proposed 
did not satisfy that criterion. It was most effective with respect 
to .those least capable of dangerous activities, while leaving completely free 
countries which were self-reliant and therefore most capable of using atomic 
energy for military purposes, 
81. The long-term-programme for the Agency's activities was a well conceived 
document which should be given favourable consideration. The increasing 
activities of the Agency would require more- funds and he> hoped that they would 
be made available under the existing financial system.' A proposal to amalgamate 
the Regular Budget and the Operational Budget of the Agency was before the 
Conference.—' That was a very far-reaching proposal, involving a change in 
the Statute, and he could not see any pressing need for such a .radical change. 
Hot all the money contributed at present on a voluntary basis was being spent 
and, while his Government would be glad to support an increase in the Agency's 
Operational Budget and to make its own contribution thereto, he could not 
agree that there wore strong reasons for changing the system by which funds 
10/ GC(VII)/236. 



GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 21 


wore raised. States had joined the Agency with certain promises; to, change 
the provisions of the Statute relating to financial contributions might well 
lead to serious disharmony among the Members of the Agency. There were many 


.programmes initiated by the United Nations and the specialized agencies which 
were wholly or partly financed by voluntary contributions, such as those of 
the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, 
SPTA and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Adoption of the 
proposal in question would mean a departure from United Nations practice and 
would render States liable to give financial support to projects which they 
did not consider sound. His delegation, like many others, could' not support 
such a radical proposal and regretted that it had been put forward. 


82. India was facing an acute shortage of foreign exchange, but it had made 
a voluntary contribution in Indian currency equivalent to $25 000 during the 
last three years. Not all of that sum had been used. In addition, it had 
offered the Agency five fellowships every year involving a further commitment 
of some $12 000 a year. India was willing to increase the number of fellowships, 
provided only that the necessary space was available. In order to 
enable the Agency to plan its operational activities on a more secure basis, 
he wished to repeat the proposal made by his delegation the previous year 
that Governments should announce each year their minimum contributions for a 
specific period ahead, e.g. three or even five years. His Government was 
willing to give the equivalent of $25 000 payable in Indian rupees as its 
contribution to the General Fund of the Agency for 19&4, and to guarantee 
that at least that much would be made available in each of the two following 
years. The training school operated by the Indian Department of Atomic Energy 
was at present housed in temporary premises, but its permanent buildings 
should be ready in about two years and he hoped that the facilities would 
then be made available to scientists from other countries, especially the 
developing countries in Asia and Africa. 
83. Another suggestion his delegation had made was that the Agency might 
take the initiative in organizing collaborative activities among States on 
a regional basis. There were many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin 
America in which reactors and other scientific facilities were not being 
fully utilized, so that regional co-operation would benefit all concerned. 

GC(VIi)/OH.77 
page 22 


84. In conclusion, he'emphasized that, as ho had said at the beginning of his 
statement, recent developments were creating an atmosphere that was propitious 
for the growth of'the Agency's activities? he was confident that it would 
seize its new opportunities and go from strength to strength.' 
85. , Mr. KIM (Korea) said that his delegation wished to express its deep 
appreciation of the excellent work done by the Director General, the 
Secretariat and the Board. 
86. Atomic energy activity in Korea was at present confined to maximum 
utilization of the Triga Mark II Reactor which had come into operation in 
March 1962 and was now producing 18 different radioisotopes. The immediate 
aim was to ensure the effective use of radioisotopes in agriculture and 
medicine. The Korean Atomic Energy Research Institute .had .set up a Division 
of Nuclear Medicine, and a radioisotope clinic for the treatment of cancer 
and thyroid diseases was due to go into operation in October 1963 with, a 
cobalt-60 teletherapy unit. Strenuous efforts were also being made to 
recruit and train technicians for the agricultural research establishment 
to be opened in the near future. 
87. The Korean Office of Atomic Energy had decided that the most important 
objective of its atomic energy programme•should be wide and effective use of 
radioisotopes in.agriculture. It was hoped that the Agency would be able to 
provide the technical advice and assistance that were so badly needed. During 
the past year Korea had benefited from the services of three experts - two 
under EPTA and one under the Agency's exchange programme - whose work had been 
greatly appreciated. • The expert on the utilization of radioisotopes in 
agriculture had extended his stay for four months to study a grain disease 
called akiochi. On the other hand, Korea had been unable to obtain the timely 
services of experts on the medical uses of radioisotopes and electronics, and 
there was frequently a considerable gap between the arrival of experts and 
that of the necessary equipment. The success of technical assistance, 
particularly in countries building up their research establishments, depended 
upon its being provided whore and when needed? it was important that experts' 
services and equipment should be .provided separately and only in response to 
specific requests. . He suggested that more.funds should be appropriated for 
training programmes in the coming year, to meet the needs of the developing 
countries for well-trained scientists and atomic energy technicians. 

GC(.TII)/0E.77 
page 23 


88. His delegation had consistently stressed the need for regional training 
centres and more research contracts for the developing countries, and he hoped 
that the Agency would co-operate fully in the establishment of a training 
centre in the Far East. The establishment of a radioisotope training centre 
and reactor centre in the Par East and South-East Asia regions had been discussed 
at length during meetings held at Bangkok in December 1962 and Tokyo 
in March 1963, and was to he considered again by the Study Group on Operational 
Problems of Research Reactors and their Use for Isotope Production and 
Activation Analysis, which was due to meet at Manila in December1963 • 
89. Research contracts had always been a great stimulus to research workers 
in the developing countries, and the Republic of Korea had applied for five 
contracts in 1962,, It had so far been awarded one contract by the Agency on 
field experimental studies of the time and rate of fertilizer application in 
rice production. He hoped that the Agency would give favourable consideration 
to his country's application for seven research contracts in 1963* It could 
also help developing countries by encouraging the supply and exchange of upto-
date scientific and technical information. 
90. His delegation greatly appreciated the dispatch of a nuclear power survey 
mission to Korea by the Agency and felt sure its recommendations would prove, 
extremely useful. 
91. Finally, he suggested that sincere and realistic consideration should be 
given to the amendment of Article XIV of the Statute in order to improve the 
Agency's financial position in regard to the implementation of. various longterm 
programmes. 
92. Mr. BORISEVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic), said that 
his delegation supported the stand taken by the delegates of Ghana, Mali and 
the Ivory Coast regarding the inadmissibility of racial discrimination. 
93• The present session of the General Conference was taking place just over 
a month after the representatives of the three nuclear Powers - the Soviet 
Union, the United States of America and the United Kingdom - had signed in 
Moscow a treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and 
under water. However, the treaty's immense importance to all mankind lay 
not only in its specific provisions. It was the first hopeful step towards 
limiting the nuclear arms race and reducing international tension, and had 
for that reason been enthusiastically welcomed by all men of goodwill. 



GC(VII)/OR.7'7' 
page 24 


94. The Moscow treaty was the first step on the" long road mankind must follow 
until complete and general.disarmament, the only lasting arid dependable guarantee 
of world peace, was achieved. He expressed the 'hope that that first step would 
be' followed"by further,-more substantial progress towards'freeing mankind from 
the nightmare of thermonuclear war. 
95* The Agency could and should make every effort within its power to contribute 
to the current easing in the international situation and to promote early agreement 
on complete and general disarmament. It should continue its useful 
co-operation with the United Nations in studying the effects of disarmament 
on the development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. That was important 
work which should be carried out more energetically and purposefully than had 
so far been done. He welcomed in that connection the appearance of the first 
Secretariat report on the possible consequences of an agreement on complete 
and general disarmament for the development of atomic energy, despite its ' 
sketchiriess and the approximate nature of the estimates that figured in it. 


96. Turning to the progress made in the peaceful uses of atomic energy in the 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, ho pointed out that a research reactor, 
us'cd for various' types-of research and for 'the production of radioisotopes, 
had been operating there-since 1962. At the present-time new laboratories 
were being constructed on the reactor site. Great attention was being paid 
to the use of isotopes in automation and control of industrial processes, -the 
use of radiation for medical purposes, the use of tracer atoms and radiation 
in agriculture, the use of neuronography for studying the structure of new • 
materials, and so on. 
97* His delegation had made a statement at the sixth regular session of the 
Conference concerning the various ways in which the Byelorussian -Republic 
could -render effective assistance to 'other countries in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. He was unfortunately obliged to note that the joint proposal 
of eight socialist countries, including the Byelorussian Republic, had not so 
far been implemented, though it had been approved in principle at the sixth 
regular session. .
.. • . • 


98. Once more his dclegatidn was repeating the 'offer it had already made. 
The Byelorussian Republic was prepared, within the framework of the proposed 
programme, to accept-a number of fellows from developing countries for 

GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 25 


training in nuclear physics, to make available to the Agency free of charge 
the services of its exports in a number of specialized subjects and to accept 
specialists from developing countries for training in its scientific research 
institutes. 


99. In addition, desiring to make its own contribution towards extending the 
Agency's technical assistance, the Byelorussian Republic Y/as prepared to make 
available to the Agency, without delay, for possible application in developing 
countries, the results of certain scientific research work which had already 
been carried out on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He called upon other 
countries which had completed such work to make their results available to 
the Agency, too. 
100. The Agency's activities over the past year had been attended by a measure 
of success. Useful work had been done on long-term planning. The elaboration 
of a long-term programme for the Agency would enable it to draw up programmes 
which were better thought out and more rational, and which met the requirements 
of the majority of Member States. Basically, the programme was a welcome 
document, even though it had a number of weaknesses. 
101. Oao welcome feature of the Agency's activity over the past year was the 
fact that more attention had begun to be paid to the scientific and technical 
rather than the administrative side of affairs. In his view, however, the 
Agency's work thus far revealed a number of essential weaknesses! it still 
did not measure up fully to the aims and tasks devolving on the Agency under 
the Statute. 
102. One of the Agency's basic statutory functions was to grant technical 
assistance and it could do much in that connection, bearing in mind that 
existing possibilities were not at present used to the full. It appeared 
from the data provided by the Secretariat for the three years 1959-61 that the 
Agency had had at its disposal a total unused amount of $283 000 out of the 
funds specifically allocated for technical assistance purposes5 no obligations 
at all had been undertaken in respect of $155 000. Far from showing any 
improvement, 1962 had revealed a deteriorating situation with regard to the 
use of such funds. The total of non-liquidated obligations at 31 December 19&2 
had amounted to I56I 000 and unobligated appropriations to $258 000. 

GC(VII)/OR.'77 
page 26 


103. Furthermore,- technical assistance was being distributed unevenly among 
the various countries. Since the Agency's establishment, for instance, the 
puppet Governments of Formosa and South Korea had received three times more 
assistance than nine countries in Africa. 
104. Discrimination, however, extended wider than that. A decision had 
recently been taken by the Board, dictated by political considerations, which 
deprived certain countries of the possibility of receiving any fellowships. 
In' his view, that was a violation of the principle of equal rights for all 
•Members of the Agency, and -he therefore protested strongly against the decision 
referred to. The' Byelorussian Republic had never taken up any Agency fellowships. 
On the contrary, it was even prepared to grant the Agency fellowships 
free of charge under the technical assistance programme proposed- by the eight 
socialist countries, but could.not agree that it and other countries should be 
deprived, altogether of the right to receive Agency, fellowships, should- they be 
needed. .... 
105• For some reason such actions were generally explained by a concern to 
improve the work of the Agency. A similar "concern" had ostensibly motivated 
the proposal to alter the Statute and the Agency's Financial Regulations. 
His delegation wished-to make it quite clear Lhat the proposal in question 
w&a completely unacceptable to it, since - like the United Kingdom amendment 
to Article XIV of the Statute—', which had been rejected by the General 
Conference in the preceding year - it ran counter to the generally .accepted 
principle of the voluntary character of technical assistance, and.was designed 
to undermine the established and proven procedure for financing administrative 
expenditure by means of assessed contributions from Member States and 
operational expenditure by means of voluntary contributions. The proposal was 
a gross attempt to put countries whose national currency was inconvertible 
and which had so far been able to make their contributions to the Operational 
Budget in their own national currency in a position of inequality as regards 
the payment of budgetary contributions. It tended to increase the financial 
burden on Member States. His delegation was fully convinced that, should the 
proposal come "into effect, those countries which were pinning on it their hopes 


11/ GC(VI)/205, Annex I. 



GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 27 


of receiving more Agency assistance would lose more than they gained. The 
Byelorussian delegation reserved the right to go into such an important matter 
in greater detail when it came up for discussion. He would, however, take 
the present opportunity of calling on delegates to oppose the adoption of 
any such decision. It was inadmissible that, for the benefit of a small group 
of countries, yet another discriminatory political measure should he adopted, 
seriously impeding real co-operation within the Agency. On the authority of 
his Government? ho was able to state that if the proposal were nevertheless 
adopted,, the Byelorussian Republic would not pay a single extra cent towards 
the increased budget. 


106. To justify, discriminatory measures of that sort the Western Powers, 
alleged that the Agency lacked sufficient funds to finance its normal operational 
activities. Yet, as had been shown, the Agency was not making full 
use of the funds made available to ib for technical assistance. Over a 
number of years much of the Agency's resources had been unwarrantably spent 
on such activities as the application of safeguards, studies on radioactive 
waste disposal into the sea, the determination of environmental radioactivity 
and the award of contracts. 
107. In addition, the Agency was spending a great deal of money on its 
Laboratory at Seibersdorf. His delegation had objected to the Laboratory 
being set up, on the ground that it would be a useless and expensive burden 
to the Agency. Yet it had been.set up, and was now costing the Agency 
several hundred thousand dollars a year. Appropriations for the upkeep of . 
the Laboratory were increasing from year to year and had already reached over 
half a million dollars, the major part of which, in violation of the Agency's 
Statute, was being paid out of the Regular Budget. The work done by the 
Laboratory was extremely extensive in scope and included things which often 
had nothing to do with the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
108. In his delegation's view, the establishment of an international centre 
for theoretical physics would also involve the Agency in additional and 
largely wasted financial expenditure, and the Agency,should not therefore 
take over responsibility for such.a centre. 

GC"(VII)/OR.77 
page 28 


109. In addition to reducing its expenditure on work which, brought no real 
return be Member States, the Agency could, in his view, find new ways of 
expanding technical assistance. In* particular it could appeal to Member 
States, especially the industrially developed countries, to make available to 
the Agency free of charge, for the use of the developing countries, the results 
of the research carried out by them in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Countries advanced in nuclear science could also be asked to carry out, free 
of charge, in their own research establishments, certain research work on the 
Agency's behalf. The funds released as a result could be used to increase 
the scale of technical assistance supplied. 
110. Implementation of the proposals put forward in the preceding year by the 
eight socialist countries would also provide a considerable reserve, enabling 
technical assistance to be expanded within the framework of existing statutory 
provisions. Assistance of the kind he had proposed was the most effective and 
efficacious kind, while not infringing the fundamental principle of technical 
assistance, namely its voluntary character. And that was the direction in 
which the Agency should orient its technical assistance activities. 
111. Mr. do ERICB (Spain) referred to two international events that had 
taken place since the sixth regular session which were bound to have favourable 
repercussions on the Agency's works the nuclear test ban treaty, signed in 
Moscow on 5 August 1963, to which Spain, like many other countries, had 
quickly subscribed^ and the Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, 
signed on 21 May 1963. Both would affect bhe Agency's activities. The Moscow 
treaty would enable it to concentrate on the peaceful uses of atomic energy? 
the Vienna Convention, by establishing responsibilities, would involve an 
extension of safeguards. 
112. The Spanish delegation felt optimistics after successfully overcoming • 
its attack of growing pains the previous year, the Agency was now entering 
the stage of full development. Spain had continued to produce uranium 
concentrates at the rate of some 50 tons annually, had raised the national 
production of radioisotopes by 8<j/o and greatly increased their application, 
mainly in agriculture, through the intermediary of the Institute for 
Agronomic Research, and in medicine through the Ramon y Cajal Institute. 

GC(VII)/OR.77 
page 29 


The study and development of the heavy-water moderated, organic-liquid cooled 
reactor had continued, and an exponential experiment employing uranium carbide 
fuel elements was underway. A small experimental reactor in Moncloa produced 
the radioisotopes he had previously referred to. With regard to the benefits 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy which were more accessible to the 
general public, Spain was undertaking a series of nuclear power projects* 
It was hoped to put into effect soon three projects which were at present 
in preparation, involving three 3OO-MW power stations, to be operated by the 
private companies Hidrocloctrica Espanola, Bmprosa Sevillana de Electricidad 
and Empresa Iberduero, all of which were interested in the production of 
nuclear power. 


113. In view of the Agency's need for funds for development, his delegation 
was not in favour of the proposed amendment of Article XIV of the Statute. 
It did, however, view with sympathy the Pakistan suggestion to modify some 
of the Rules of Procedure and hold the General Conference every two years. 
That would help to reduce administrative costs and prevent the long-term 
programme from being subject to annual modifications. 
114. The Agency should intensify its technical assistance to countries such 
as Spain v<rhich were not as yet sufficiently advanced in research and needed 
fellowships and exchanges of students and teachers. The Agency should also 
stimulate the production of nuclear power. 
The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m. 



Internationa! Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VII)/OR.78 
9 January 1964 
GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

Seventh, regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 28 September 1963, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


6 Applications for membership of the Agency 1 -3 
(continued) 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 4 ~ 129 
Governors for 1962-63 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


China 4 - 12 
Iran 13-28 
United Kingdom of Great Britain 29 - 50 


and Northern Ireland 
Federal Republic of Germany 51 ~ 66 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 67 - 100 
Hungary 101 ~ 113 
Ghana 114 - 129 

* GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2. 


63-7987 



GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 2 


APPLICATIONS FOE MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGSFJY (GU(VII)/249) (continued)'/• 

1. The PRESIDENT said the Board of Governors had submitted a r'e'eommendation 
regarding an application from the Federal Republic of Jamoroun for 
admission to membership of the Agency. The Uonforonce would, he was sure, 
wish to take a unanimous decision in regard to the application by adopting 
the draft resolution set out at the end of document GJ(VII)/249. 
2. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
5. The PRESIDENT offered his hearty congratulations to Cameroun on the 
approval of its application? it would become a Member as soon as its instrument 
of acceptance of the Statute had been deposited with the Government of 
the United States of America. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1962-63 (GC(VII)/228, 
243, 250')' (continued) 


4. Mr. HUANG (Gh ina) remarked that a new hope had been brought to the 
peoples of the world by the signing of the treaty for a limited ban on nuclear 
tests. The civilized world had lived too long in fear of the destructiveness 
of its own scientific and technological achievements, so that any progress in 
halting the mad competition in armaments was greeted with relief and a wave of 
optimism. Although its terms of reference were limited, the Agency was vitally 
concerned with the climate of world politics and particularly with the opening 
up of new possibilities for the peaceful uses .of atomic energy. If but a small 
part of the cost of the nuclear tests carried out during its lifetime could 
have been diverted to the Agency's purposes, how much more could have been 
done to harness nuclear power for the betterment of the lot of peoples in 
developing countries! 
3. Many former colonies had become independent during the past twenty years 
and were for the first time facing their own development problems. Naturally 
they were most anxious to solve their problems of food, health, education and 
industrialization, but it would be hard for them to catch up undess the advanced 
countries made available the fruits of their experience and so enabled modern 
science'and technology to be applied -in the shortest possible time. It was 
particularly urgent that radioisotopes should be put into use in agriculture, 

GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 3 

medicine and industry in all developing countries, and that was a matter concerning 
the Agency at the technical level. But there would he a shortage of 
capital and technical skill in those countries for many years to come and, 


despite the Agency's utmost efforts, the training programme to date had been 


too slow. 


6. The. Agency must devote the major effort in future planning to speeding up 
the development of natural resources and public services in the developing 
countries. Future programmes should aim at more practical and productive 
projects, which would bring the newly independent peoples a greater sense of 
security and equality. If peace and freedom were to he preserved, the existing 
gap between the advanced and the developing countries must not he allowed 
to widen or persist. 
7. The Agency's scope of activity was limited under its Statute. Many 
other agencies, both in and outside, the United Nations, must work together to 
bring about the desired acceleration and expansion of programmes. By its very 
character, however, the Agency must take the primary role in pressing for 
speedier, dissemination of scientific knowledge and the application of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in the developing countries. Two avenues of 
approach must be broached by co-operative effort. The Agency and the related 
United Nations organizations should give immediate consideration to the possibility 
of financing power projects in the developing countries through such 
international financing agencies as the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development, the United Nations Special Fund, and so on. He was not 
suggesting that nuclear power plants should be the aim for all developing 
countries^ the form of power production selected would depend upon many factors, 
but power was the most urgent need in all the developing countries and 
shortage of capital put large-scale projects out of the question. It was 
even hard for a less—developed country to meet the prevailing terms on which 
loans were offered. Accordingly,'the element of profit in the transactions 
of international banking agencies should be reduced to the minimum. The second 
approach involved accelerating the tempo of training and expanding the provision 
of expert services. Progress to date had been meagre and slow for lack 
of funds to finance larger projects. The .programme must be expanded and the 
scope of the training broadened. 



GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 4 


8, Much technical study and planning would he needed to put those suggestions 
into effect. More emphasis would have to be given, in the long-term plans, 
to the needs of the developing countries| the idea that atomic energy was 
an exclusive privilege of the advanced countries should disappear. Modern 
scientific methods could quickly bring about a change in mental outlook. The 
application of science to everyday life in the developing countries should be 
a co-operative and not a competitive enterprise. The Agency, through its 
Member States, would have an important role to play in putting that new 
concept of co-operation into effect, and his own country hoped to contribute 
to the utmost of its ability. 


9- The Republic of China had made a certain amount of progress in nuclear 
science. The research reactor at the Institute of Nuclear Science had been 
brought to criticality in April 1961 and had been operating at full power 
since October 1962. The Institute was used both for training and for 
fundamental and applied research. Eesearch in' the application of isotopes in 
agriculture was being carried out in a number of other centres and the Medical 
School of the National University was using them in medicine. Research in 
nuclear engineering was also being undertaken and personnel ?fero being trained 
with a view to the production of nuclear power. The building of a nuclear 
power station was under serious consideration. 


10. Following a survey of their possible uses, production of a certain number 
of radioisotopes .had started, as a first step, and the supplies neede.d for 
hospitals and medical .research institutes were already being delivered. The 
connection -between black-rfoot disease - a local ailment - and increased amounts 
of trace elements (arsenic and sodium) in the hair had recently been discovered 
by means of activation.analysis. 
11. Many atomic energy projects had been undertaken during -the past few-years, 
and although the.quality of the work-at the beginning had not been 
as high as might have been hoped-, it had gradually and progressively improved. 
12. It had been his country's consistent policy to share experience in 
agricultural techniques with developing countries. Its experience in the' 
development of a nuclear programme might prove equally helpful to those" 
countries, and China was ready to share the knowledge it had gained as one 

GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 5 


way of showing its appreciation for the technical assistance it had itself 
received from friendly countries, from the Agency and from other United 
wations organizations. It would he glad to make teams available for work on 


selected aspects of isotope production 3,nd use. 


13. Mr. AZAJ (Iran) said that, generally speaking, the scientific and 
technical activities of the Agency during the past- year had been fruitful. 
The Director General and his staff were to be congratulated on the good work 
done. The growing interest in nuclear power in the developing countries was 
reflected in an increasing number of requests to the Agency for advice on 
nuclear power programmes. It was gratifying that the United Nations Special 
Fund was also showing an interest in nuclear power and had designated the 
Agency as the Executing Agent for a pre-investment power study in the 
Philippines. 
14i The Agency should devote special attention to the development of dualpurpose 
power reactors^ its approach to the Tunisian project for water 
de-salting' by means of nuclear power was, for instance, a very sound one. 
Studies on economic aspects of the integration of nuclear power plants into 
conventional power systems should be further pursued and perhaps accelerated. 

15. The number of research reactors in operation or under construction in 
developing countries was rapidly increasing. Accordingly, many Member States 
would appreciate more regional study group meetings on the- utilization of 
research reactors, such as those that had been held at Bangkok and Athens. 
Such meetings would bring about closer collaboration between regional nuclear 
centres and ensure that their research reactor facilities were put to better 
use. The meeting in Athens, which he had attended, had been very successful 
indeed and had resulted in the initiation of informal discussions between 
Greece, Turkey, Pakistan and Iran' on scientific collaboration in the utilization 
of their reactors, 
16. The agreement providing for the establishment of an International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics, under the auspices of the Agency, was a big forward 
step toward the attainment of the Agency's objectives. It was gratifying that 
the Board, after carefully examining all aspects of the matter, had decided to 
recommend that the Centre be set up, and thanks were also duo 'to the Italian 

GC(VII)/0H.78 
page 6 


Government for its generosity. The co-operation of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization and other competent organizations 
should ho sought in connection with, the work in the basic sciences to he 
carried out at the Oonire. 


17• The Agency should not devote too much effort to the compilation of nuclear 
data, which could he done, with Agency collaboration, by advanced nuclear 
institutes and laboratories in the advanced countries, 


l8o It was a matter for satisfaction that special attention had been given 
to the medical uses of- radioisotopes' under the research contract programme 
during the past year. In that regard, the Agency should establish closer 
co-operation with the World Health Organization, which was in a position to 
make recommendations about priorities. 


19•• The Agency had done interesting work on the calibration and standardization 
of radioiodinc uptake by the thyroid. So far as he was aware, no international' 
standards of purity and sterility had been established for radioisotopes 
offered for medical use, and cases had come to light in which the purity and 
sterility of commercial products had been doubtful. "rith the increase in 
radioisotope production at research reactors in both advanced and developing 
countries that problem would become more urgent, and the Agency could play an 
important role in establishing norms or standards,particularly for radioisotopes 
destined to be used in medicine. 


20. In the past few years a large number of radiotherapy centres had begun to 
function in Afro-Asian 'countries and those' centres urgently needed the Agency's 
assistance, particularly on physical aspects of their work. His delegation 
welcomed the appointment '.of an intor-re'gional adviser on radiotherapy in the 
Eastern Mediterranean area. More was required, however, in view of that area's 
needs, A meeting might perhaps be convened similar to the one held in Montreal 
in 1962, to .study different aspects of the.problem on .the spot and devise a 
practical solution,, 
21. The. use of radioisotopes in 'research on problems of malaria eradication 
•was of great interest to '-Iran. Its long-term eradication programme .faced a 
number of complicated problems which it was hoped might be solved by extensive 
research with radioisotopes, and two promising projects of the kind were being 

GC(VII)/0E.78 
page 7 


carried out in the Iranian Institute of I-Ialariology and Parasitology. That 
sort of work ?/ould be of interest to many other developing countries as well. 


22. Iran had noted with satisfaction the holding of regional training courses 
in the uses of radioisotopes in agriculture, at Ankara,- and the award of a 
research contract for work on the efficiency of fertilizers in a rice-growing 
area? it was also pleased that fourteen out of twenty-two contracts on 
radioisotopes applications in agriculture had been awarded to institutions 
in developing Member States. The holding of panel meetings under the Agency's 
agricultural' research programme' seemed to be a sound idea, and the Symposium 
on the Use and Application of Radioisotopes and Radiation in the Control of 
Plant and Animal Insect Pests, organized in conjunction with the Pood and 
Agriculture Organization of the United ITations (?A0)—' , had been a further 
example of fruitful co-operation between the Agency and other United Nations 
organizations. 
23. Iran attached great importance to work on soil salinity and regretted 
that thus far the Agency had not taken it up. For many developing countries, 
Iran among them, the use of radioisotopes in hydrology, including research on 
the behaviour of surface and underground water, was a matter of first priority, 
and the Iranian authorities were accordingly following with special attention 
the experimental investigation being carried out in Turkey in co-operation 
with FAO. 
24. The Agency had not devoted the attention it should to the application of 
radioisotopes in industry. The' survey of the scientific literature and the 
classification of various industrial applications, although useful, did not 
go far enough, and not a single research contract had been awarded. The 
application of radioisotopes in the petroleum and associated chemical 
industries was of vital importance fcr Iran. 
25. As to radiation protection, his delegation was in favour of the Agency's 
asking advanced laboratories to co-operate in research of a long and complex 
nature on such matters as the diagnosis -and treatment of radioactive poisoning 
and the toxic effects of incorporated radionuclides, the results obtained to 
be publicized through the Agency. The Agency could then concentrate its own 
1/ Held at Athens from 22 to 26 April 1963. 



GS(VII)/0E.78 
page 8 


efforts on such, basic problems as the safe handling of radioactive wast©, 
radiation dosimetry, regulatory and legal work, and the safety of nuclear 
installations* ' " 


26. It was a matter for satisfaction that, during the past year, safeguards 
had been extended to cover more reactors. The agreement between the Agency, 
the United States and Japan to transfer the administration of certain safe"-' 
2/ 

guards to the Agency-7 was of particular importance? the Agency could now 
prepare itself for a greater role in the application of safeguards to large 
power reactors, and thereby would be better able to prevent the diversion of 
fissionable material to military purposes. His delegation looked forward to 
the general review of safeguards, due to be carried out in 1964. 


27. The number of. ffellowships awarded by the Agency in 1963 was down as 
compared to 1962, whereas the number of research contracts had increased. 
That showed a new trend in the Agency1s technical assistance activities. 
28. He hoped the proposals he had made would reflect Iran's deep interest 
in enhancing the Agency's effectivoncss. ... 
•29. ' Sir Roger- MAKIWS (United Kingdom) said he found it encouraging that 
most speakers before h'im had devoted their remarks to the Agency' s mission 
and practical -work and had avoided political matters which we're outside its 
scope. He shared the view that the Agency was in better shape than over 
before;-• moreover, its membership wa,s steadily increasing. He was particularly 
glad to welcome another Commonwealth country, Nigeria. 
50. But there vras still some tendency to attempt to use the Agency for the 
furtherance -of political objectives." In-that regard, he would first recall 
the recent statement by the Secretary-General of the United JIations that •' 
serious political issues and. their bearing on the 'fundamental principles and 
specific provisions ..of the United -Nations Charter made it appropriate that 
such questions be considered by the principal political organs of the United 
Nations.. He. would add his own warning" .the surest way to handicap and injure 
the ..Agency' s scientific and technical mission was to involve it in political 
controversy. 
2/ The text of the agreement is reproduced in document IHFCIRO/47. 



GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 9 


31. Hoy/ever,, the recently concluded test ban treaty and ita possible consequences 
were a different matter* The United' Kingdom welcomed the fact that 
the overwhelming majority of Member States had signed the treaty or intended 
to do soj thus opening up a new and encouraging phase in the development of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and taking the first step towards more 
general disarmament. Eis delegation had been glad to co-sponsor the draft 
3 /


resolution before the Conference-7 , pledging its support to the United Nations 
Secretary-General in dealing with the problems that would arise from the conversion 
to peaceful purposes of resources released by disarmament. 


32. It was right that the Agency should stand ready to perform any tasks 
which the international community might Yfish to lay upon it. The best way to 
prepare for that was to de\relop "the Agency's technical programme and make its 
work and services as good and as efficient as possible. If nuclear disarmament 
should in fact take place, the Agency's role was likely to be technical - the 
provision of advice and services - and it was entirely appropriate that the 
Director General should give thought to the Agency's statutory responsibilities 
and keep under review the course of the nuclear test and disarmament discussions. 
But the nature of the tasks the Agency might be called upon to perform could 
not be determined at the present time and it would be advisable to proceed 
circumspectly. Any actual work to be undertaken should be limited in scope, 
for example to the question; mentioned by the United States delegation, of the 
examination of safeguards procedures for fuel fabrication facilities and 
chemical reprocessing plants. 
33. Among outstanding developments in atomic energy in the United Kingdom 
during the past year, the Berkeley and Bradwell nuclear power stations had 
been officially opened in April 1963, after having been in operation for some 
months, and had run smoothly and reliably from the start. The average 
availability of the four reactors, in terms of running hours as a percentage 
of possible running hours, had been over 90/£ between the beginning of December 
and the end of March. The first reactor at the Hunterston station had gone 
critical on 14 September 1963. "lien the last station under the present programme, 
77ylfa, was completed in 1969? the United Kingdom would have a nuclear 
capacity of nearly 5000 W:h The Government was now considering the size of 
the nuclear power programme for the years following 1968. 
3/ GC(VII)/250. 



GJ(VII)/0B.78 
page 10 •' 


34- The stations in the existing programme were of the well-established 
Magno'x type. Very good progress had been made in the past twelve months in 
the development -of new reactor systems. The prototype advanced gas-cooled 
reactor at "Tindscale had been operating 'at its full designed power of 28 MW(e) 
since'February-1963<• Even on conservative assumptions? large-scale power 
stations based on that typo of reactor should be competitive under United 
Kingdom conditions with the most efficient of alternative conventional power 
stations and, furthermore, the system had substantial development potential. 
If the Windscalc reactor continued to go well, it was intended, subject to 
Government decisions regarding the future programme, to invite tenders in the 
near.future for the construction of the first commercial advanced gas-cooled 
reactor. •••'•. 

35• The experimental fast reactor at Dounreay had reached its full capacity 


of 60 MW(t) in July 1963 and now provided an irradiation facility for fast 
reactor fuel which was at present unique. Construction of a prototype steam


generating heavy-water reactor of 100 IVl(c) had begun in May 1963 at the 
¥infrith Heath establishment. The Dragon project of the European Nuclear 
Energy Agency, under which a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor was being 
built, had been extended for three years to March 196?', the reactor was 
expected to go into operation during the summer of 1964. 

36. The Government was. consulting the shipping a.nd shipbuilding industries 
about the possibility of building the first British nuclear merchant ship. 
So far as the marine propulsion reactor was concerned, the United Kingdom had 
concentrated during the' year on the Vulcain system, which was being developed 
in collaboration with Belgium, and on an integral boiling reactors other 
possibilities wore being kept in mind. 
37. During the past year the.Agency's work had made good progress. . Its 
regulatory activities had included the successful conference in.May 1963 which 
had completed a convention on civil liability in respect of land-based nuclear 
installations. The review of the transport regulations had been put in hand 
and, he understood, was proceeding satisfactorily.. His. delegation was glad 
that the. Board had provisionally approved proposals which would extend the 
safeguards system to large reactors and had submitted them to the Conference.. 

GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 11 • 


38. It further welcomed the first example of a transfer to the Agency of the 
administration of safeguards, under an agreement between the United States and 
Japanj the United Kingdom was following suit in the case of its own bilateral 
agreement with Japan, If the negotiations were successful, the Agency would 
take over the administration of safeguards at Tokai-Mura,- which would be the 
first nuclear povrer station to be brought under the Agency' s system. 
39. The usual scientific activities -v scientific-meetings, research contracts 
and the work of the Scibersdorf Laboratory - had gone smoothly. The United 
Kingdom had had reservations about the proposal to establish an International 
Centre for 'Theoretical Physics at Trieste but had accepted the compromise now 
adopted by the Board and wished the new centre well. A debt of gratitude was 
owed to the Italian Government for the generous financial provision that had 
made the Centre possible, 
40o Perhaps the most important development during the past year had been the 
preparation of the long-term programme for the second half of the 19601s. 
The Director General and his staff wore to be congratulated on the joint 
memorandum by the Board of Governors and the Director General on long-term planning 
submitted to. the Conference-^. In general, the United Kingdom 
supported the programme laid down and would certainly vote for it. But 
there were a few comments he would like to make. 


41. First, his delegation welcomed the clear recognition, in paragraphs 6 and 7 
of the programme, that the period until 1970 would be one of transition and 
preparation. Nuclear power was one major long-term task. Special circumstances 
in a developing country might make nuclear power based on present technology 
an economic proposition in the fairly near future,'and the Agency would no 
doubt do what it could to help in such- cases. But during the latter part of 
the present decade, the Agency's main task in connection with nuclear power 
would be to help the Member States in general to prepare for the coming of 
nuclear po/wer on an economic basis and on a large scale in the 1970' s. 
42. He congratulated the Secretariat on the excellent report submitted on the 
development of nuclear power in various advanced countries", including the 


results of their study of United Kingdom experience in planning, building and 


5/ 
commissioning xhe Bradwell station-^ 5 the speed with which the study had been 
completed was remarkable." 


47 GC(VII)/227. 
5 / GC(VII)/OTF/62. 


GC(VII)/0H.78 
page 12 


43 •> His delegation welcomed the emphasis on helping the developing States to 
apply radioisotope techniques in agriculture, medicine and hydrology and to 
a lesser extent in industry, and fully endorsed the statement in paragraph 9 
of the joint memorandum on long-term planning. It was to be hoped that the . 
interesting discussion on savings in industry and agriculture through the 
use of radioisotopes, held earlier in the week, would have stimulated the 

interest of Member States in those increasingly important applications of 
atomic energy. 


44• The United Kingdom had always expressed the view that the Agency's 
technical assistance must he based on the requests and programmes of the 
developing States, so that the assistance given would be related and tailored 
to the individual circumstances and general economic development of each 
country. It ought not to be dictated indirectly by the donor States, which 
might limit the form in which they made assistance available by offering to 
provide a share of a few large schemes, or even by international bodies trying 
to lay down priorities for the developing countries. On the other hand, the 


size of the programme should be based on a realistic estimate of the resources 
likely to be available. %ere resources were limited, the various requests 


should be assessed against the suitability of the proposed projects in relation 
to the requesting country's general scientific and'economic development. 


45. A great deal had been done - the Director General playing a leading part — 
to- secure effective co-operation between the Agency and the United Nations and 
its specialized agencies. He entirely agreed with the points made by the 
Director General in that regard in his opening statement, and approved his 
6/ 


intention to start negotiations with other United Nations agencies—^, It was 
a matter for satisfaction that the Economic' and Social Jouncil of the United 
Nations (ECOSOC)7 in a resolution adopted unanimously at its last session, had 
recognized that the primary responsibility within the United Nations for 


7/ 


dealing with the peaceful uses of atomic energy' lay with' the Agency.—' But as 


the Director General clearly realized, the specialized agencies had a large 


and legitimate interest in the work which the Agency was doing and could 


6/ See document GC(VII)/OR.73, paras. 58, 61 and 637/ 
SO'OSOG Resolution 986 (XXXVl), reproduced in document INFOIRO/48, 



GJ(VII)/OR.78 
page 15 


reasonably expect to be consulted on matters of mutual interest at an early 
and formative stage in Agency planning, A sample of a commonsense approach to 
the matter was afforded by the joint progress report hy the Board of 
Governors and the Director General to the Conference on co-ordination in 

8/ 


power development—', where clear proposals for future liaison between the 
various organizations concerned v/cre put forward. 


46. The Board's report recognized that the long-term programme had to be 
flexible and had to be kept under review, not every year but perhaps.every 
two years. His delegation welcomed the related proposal to introduce.biennial 
programming within the framework of annual budgets§ its adoption should 
enable the Secretariat to plan further ahead on a fairly firm basis and hence 
more effectively.. It hoped that the operation of a system of biennial programming 
might lead Member States to agree' to an early amendment of the 
Statute, so that biennial budgets and biennial meetings of the Oonference 
could be introduced as well. That in turn would lead to-more effective - • •_ 
planning and some administrative savings, and would enable the Secretariat to 
devote more of its energies' to technical vrork and less.to administration. 
47. In connection with the possible financial implications of the programme, 
the Director General envisaged an increase by 1970 in the Agency's total, 
budget of about one third, bringing it up to just over $13 million a year. 
Taken in isolation a plan incurring an increase'.of that size was not unreasonable, 
but during the period of preparation and transition, most people would 
agree that there was much to be said for accepting a fairly slow rate of 
expansion. In the period to 1970, the Agency should certainly not aim at 
expanding at any faster rate than that envisaged in the joint memorandum on 
long-term planning. 
48. But talk about expansion, long-term programmes, the setting-up of regional 
centres and the like, was of little use unless those executing the programmes 
had a fair assurance that funds would be available. So far that assurance 
had been lacking in relation to the Agency's Operational Budget. In 1962, 
the United Kingdom had proposed an amendment to the Statute which was designed 
to remedy the situation by combining the Regular Budget and' the Operational 
Budget into a single budget financed from the assessed contributions of all 
8/ GC(VII)/229. 



GG(VII)/OR„78 
page 14 


Member States, at the same time recognizing that the Conference would not wish 
9/ 
to take the decision immediately-7 . Any amendment to the Statute should 
command wide support,... and accordingly his delegation had readily agreed that 
the whole question be referred to the Board again, so that the. Board .could 
re—examine it and report to the Oonferonce at its present session.-., , 


49. The new proposals now put forward modified the United Kingdom's original 
idea by imposing a limit on the- type of operational expenditure that could.be 
financed -from.assessed contributions— „ A number of delegations had already 
expressed .doubts about even those revised compromise proposals* .Different 
reasons' were given, but in many cases it was perhaps inevitable that there 
should-be reluctance to pay a contribution which was additional in the sense 
that many countries'had not been paying their share of voluntary contributions. 
The fact was, however, that'.no alternative proposals, had been put forward to 
solve the Agency's financial problem; and unless it was .solved, the five-year 
programme could not be properly carried out.. He would ask those delegations 
that had expressed doubts to think again before finally deciding to vote against 
the Board1s proposals. 
50. The General Conference' was asked to take decisions on two subjects of 
great''importance for the-Agency's futures the-longr-term- programme and the 
amendment of the financial provisions of the Statute-, The Board and -the. 
Secretariat had worked-hard and well on both .subjects and had come forward 
with proposals which,.'in his delegation's view, provided a spund basis..for 
the Agency's future. It would be surprising if there wore no reservations sand 
differences of opinion about those proposals,- but for its part the United 
Kingdom delegation would support them* Their adoption would enhance the 
Agency's ability to help Member States to turn to account the growing potentialities, 
offered by the peaceful applications of atomic energy. 
51. Mr. SCHULT^-^ERMgN '(?odera 1 Republic -q£ Germany).said that the 
Federal Government was.firmly convinced that wider international co-operation 
in'promoting scientific and technical progress in all fields could make a 
decisive contribution to better understanding between,nations and could raise 
9/ GC(VI)/205, Annex I. 
10/ GC(VII)/236. '' • "' 



GC(VII)/0H.78 
pago 15 


standards of living and strengthen peace. Those very considerations had 
loomed large when the Government had decided, the year before, to establish 
a Federal Ministry of Scientific Sesearch. 


52. Quite recently3 with_ the signing of the Moscow nuclear tost ban treaty, 
international co-operation had achieved something which put new hope into 
the hearts of,-men devoted-to peace throughout the world- The Federal Government 
welcomed the treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in space 
and under water, one of the aims of which was to prevent, in the interests of 
mankind, the occurrence of.further radioactive fall-out. The Federal Government 
hoped the.treaty would be the first step towards general disarmament, and 
that it would also strengthen the desire to eliminate the causes of international 
tension, which was causing anxiety to all nations and particularly to Germany. 
53o The German delegation was pleased that the Agency intended to adopt a 
long-term programme of activities. The idea of aiming at distant targets 
had already been found useful and effective in many countries and in other 
international organizations. In Germany, the Atomic Energy Commission, which 
contained the best German scientists and experts, had recently prepared a 
five-year atomic programme, v/hich was awaiting Government approval. Some 
items which had figured in previous programmes had been revised in the light 
of experience gained. For the years 1963 to 1967 an expenditure of over 
$600 million was provided for. The programme was devoted exclusively to peaceful 
purposes. Special attention was being paid to the preferential encouragement 
of basic research, almost half of the total expenditure being allocated 
for that purpose. About one sixth of the expenditure was being allotted to 
applied research. One third of the programme covered the design and construction 
of nuclear installations, a field in which private industry had to be 
accompanied by State encouragement. The short-term reactor development programme 
provided for a choice of various types - a choice that had not yet 
been made but which should give ample experience in construction and operation. 
In the long-term programme priority was given to breeder reactors. 


54> The German delegation approved the Agency's draft long-term programme. 
That programme was rightly based upon recent trends and assigned to the Agency 
two broad spheres of activity? on the one hand to encourage, promote and 
co-ordinate scientific and technical research? on the other hand, to help 
Member States by international action in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 



GC(VII)/OE.78 
page 16 


55• The work of promotion and co-ordination covered research, the use of 
nuclear power and regulatory activities, all subjects of equal importance. 


56. The present system of concluding research contracts with research institutes 
and centres was costly and. with the Agency's limited resources, could 
yield relatively few results. Some planning of research, with proper sharing— 
out of assignments, seemed to be called for. In line with proposals made by 
the German delegation at the sixth regular session, the long-term programme 
provided for a selection of research subjects of universal interest. Such 
subjects could be distributed among institutes in the various countries and 
handled by them at their own expense, the results being then placed at the 
Agency's disposal. A procedure of that kind would help to foster contacts s 
between research institutes and would at the same time be of service to all 
Member States. 
570 The use of nuclear power had not yet reached the level anticipated during 
recent years. However, an- investigation of the economics of nuclear power 
revealed some clear progress. It would be useful for the Agency to pay ever 
more attention to economic and technical studies. In future, for example, 
consideration should be given to the inclusion of atomic programmes in general 
economic and development programmes. In view of the great importance of 
building up the nuclear industry, the planned co-operation with the United 
Nations on power seemed both logical and necessary. 


58. The Federal Republic supported all the Agency"s efforts to establish 
universal standards for health, safety and civil liability. His country had *. 
particpated with great satisfaction in the work of the intergovernmental 
committee which had prepared the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for 
Unclear Damage. In the same way, it had followed with keen interest the 
proceedings at the Diplomatic Jonferencc held in May 1963. Although the 
Convention had already been approved by 43 votes to none with 6 abstentions 
(including that of Germany), more than a dozen countries, among them Germany, 
had made significant reservations regarding the text which had been adopted. 
It was to be hoped that the standing committee proposed by the Diplomatic 
Conference and set up by the Board of Governors would succeed in improving 
the Convention in various respects. 



GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 17 


59° The ever-increasing number of yc-ung States joining the Agency lent more 
and more importance to "technical assistance. Great responsibilities devolved 
upon world organizations under the United Nations Development Decade, At the 
United Nations Conference on the Application of Science and Technology for the 
Benefit of the Less Developed Areas—', the role of atomic energy had rightly' 
been stressed. It would have to he decided how the Agency could contribute to 
the great work in hand and play a major role in the provision of assistance 'to 


developing-countries during the Development Decade. 


60. . With regard to the Agency's fellowship programme, the German delegation 
considered that an increase in the number of Type I fellowships should be given 
priority over Type II fellowships. T7ith Type II fellowships it was often 
difficult to strike a balance between supply and demand. Tith Type I fellow-' 
ships, financed from the Agency's own budget, that was not the case. The 
Agency ought to have sufficient money at its disposal to send fellows from the 
less-developed countries to the centres best suited for their training. 
61. The developing countries were often short of technicians. Jo-operation 
based on "pairing off", as it wore, centres in advanced countries with corresponding 
centres in developing ones could be useful. The nuclear and research 
centres of advanced countries could accept personnel for training. Also, 
experts from existing centres could help in the construction and organization 
of new ones. Such assistance, given over a period of years, could do much to 
pave the way for modern technology in the developing countries. 
62. Regarding the programme for 1964? it was to be hoped that the third Geneva 
conference, which would deal with the most important aspects of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, would constitute one of its highlights. 
63. The German delegation hoped that greater harmony than in the past could 
be established between the Agency's programmes and those of the United Nations 
specialized agencies. The Secretariat should continue to devote its attention 
to that matter and should, if necessary, make proposals for a clear assignment 
of responsibilities. 
64. In connection with the important question of financing the Agency1s 
activities, the German delegation wished to restate the view it had already 
expressed at the sixth regular session, namely that the establishment of a 
single budget, financed from assessed contributions, would be the best solution. 
11/ Held at Geneva from 4 to 20 February 1963< 



GC(VII)/OBo78 
page 18 


His delegation certainly shared the often voiced opinion that the success of 
a scientific and technical organization did not merely depend on a large 


•budget, and that good work could be done even with relatively small financial 
resources provided operations wore well organized and based on proper plans. 
Nevertheless, it believed that the implementation of a long-term programme was 
possible only if an income of a definite amount could he guaranteed. The 
German delegation hoped the General Conference would take a right decision 
in that connection. The resolution adopted by the Board in June 1963, providing 
for certain activities to be financed in future from the Regular Budget, seemed 
an acceptable solution, 
65. In lino with the views he had just described, Germany had so far contributed 
to the Operational Budget the same percentage as it had to the Regular 
Budget. It would do the same for 1964° ^n addition, the Federal Government 
wished to make a special contribution to demonstrate its confidence in the 
future work of the Seibersdorf Laboratory; Germany intended to give a complete 
laboratory installation, representing a value of $35 000, for fine structure 
and spectrum analyses. It was convinced that the Agency's Laboratory would 
perform very useful work in calibration and in the training of specialists. 
66. "Finally, he expressed satisfaction that the Agency's programme was not 
static, but continuously developing. Generally, good programmes automatically 
resulted in improved financial circumstances. The Agency could make continued 
progress if the Secretariat, under the firm control of the Director General, 
continued to work with confidence and enthusiasm. 
67. Mr. PASECHIOK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) welcomed on 
behalf of his delegation the four new Members of the Agency - 2Tigeria, Gabon, 
Ivory Coast and Cameroun. 
68. The seventh regular session' was taking place at a time -when mankind found 
itself at an extremely promising yet crucial stage of its history. 
69. After many years of world-wide popular struggle for cessation of nuclear 
tests, the Governments of the Soviet Union? the United States of America and 
the United Kingdom had finally signed the Moscow treaty banning nuclear tests 
in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water. 
70. The Ukrainian people, like all the peoples of the Soviet Union, warmly 
supported and approved the agreement which had been reached, and rightly 

GC(VII)/OH.78 
page 19 


considered it to be a document expressive of the best interests of humanity, 
and one which constituted a first step towards solving fundamental.international 
problems, including the most important one of all - the problem of 
complete and general disarmament. 


71. The Moscow treaty showed that with good will and effort on the part of 
the States concerned, international problems could be solved in a manner 
acceptable to all sides, 
72. Nevertheless, it must be remembered that a partial ban on nuclear testing 
did not mean that the arms race was ended. It could not therefore do away 
with the danger of war by itself. The arms race must stop and disarmament 
begin before the menace of war could be eliminated and States and peoples 
alike freed of the burden of military expenditure. 
73. "/hat was essential at present was to continue to combat the menace of war 
and to go on straining every nerve to relax international tension and achieve 
lasting peace throughout the world. The peoples of the entire world urgently 
demanded that a solution be found to the question of complete and general 
disarmament. In that connection the Director General's communication on the 
possible effects of an agreement on general and Complete disarmament on nuclear 
12/ 


energy development—' proved what the Agency could do to solve the problem. 
The Agency had done very little in that direction, however, as was evident from 
the extremely sketchy and incomplete nature of the report in question. It should 
continue to study the economic and social consequences of banning nuclear 
weapons and achieving complete disarmament. The Director General, together 
with the Board, should be instructed to carry out a comprehensive study of the 
economic and social cons.equences of all aspects of disarmament, including the 
effect of the great quantities of nuclear materials, productive resources and 
countless scientists and specialists that would thereby be released for work 
on the peaceful uses .of atomic energy. To ensure implementation of the 
Conference's instructions, a report giving a systematic account of what had 
been done should be submitted at the next regular session. 


74. The Ukrainian delegation warmly supported the draft resolution jointly 
submitted by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of 
12/ The communication is reproduced in United Fations document E/3736/Add.3, 
part I. 



GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 20 


Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, under • 
the heading "Action pursuant to Resolution 982 (XXXVl) of the Economic and 


-•• • 13/ 


Social council of the United Nations".—-"^ 


75- There were two fundamental problems regarding the Agency's activity upon 
which his delegation would like to dwell. The first was the need to promote 


international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy* 


76. Important changes had taken place in nuclear science and technology over 
the preceding five years. Many countries were- beginning to use atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes, and the Agency had a great part to play in that connection. 
77. It was apparent from the report of the Board of Governors covering the 
period 1 July 1962 -.JO June 1963. that the Agency had done a certain amount of 
useful work during that time, especially in training personnel, providing 
equipment and experts for countries in receipt of technical assistance, 
organizing scientific meetings and publishing reviews and other literature." 
The work done on long-term planning was also deserving of appreciation. 
78. It. was the. view of his delegation, however, that the results, and often 
even the character, of the Agency's activity in recent years were still remote 
from the functions and objectives laid down by the Statute. The fundamental 
defects in the Agency's work were not the result of any real difficulties but . 
were due to the fact that a number of Western countries were trying to drive 
the Agency along the wrong path. 
79. Instead of promoting the practical side of the Agency's work, and directing 
its activity towards'peaceful employment of the enormous natural forces locked 
up in the atom, they were obliging it to undertake a review of the basic 
provisions in its Statute. 
80. A recommendation had been submitted by the Board to the General Conference 
concerning an amendment to Article XIV of the Statute, which provided that 
technical assistance should be financed out of the Regular Budget, thus changing 
voluntary into assessed contributions. 
81. The Ukrainian delegation vigorously opposed adoption of the proposed 
amendment, since it was and always had been its view that as far as the Agency 
12/ G(j(VII)/250. 



G3(VII)/OR.Y8 
page 21 


was concerned, the only correct principle in awarding technical assistance was 
the principle of voluntary contributions„ The socialist countries' proposal, 
concerning a programme of assistance to developing countries, submitted to the 


sixth regular session of the General Conference—', was in accordance with that 
principle. 

82. "fere the proposed amendment to he adopted, technical assistance, in the 
last analysis, would not increase hut diminish, because in doing away with 
voluntary contributions the Agency would be doing away with the basis of its 
entire technical -assistance programmee The initiative of Member States capable 
and desirous of providing assistance in kind, on a voluntary basis, would be 
stifled. T?ere the amendment to be adopted, the framework of technical assistance 
would be limited to a few specified forms,, such as the provision of non-capital 
equipment, fellowships, experts and so on, 
83. Again, the proposed amendment would inevitably undermine the very basis of 
all possibilities for co-operative action in the granting of technical assistance. 
The financial obligations of Member States would increase sharply, whilst no 
limit would be set to the Agency's budget. 
84. The voluntary principle was one generally accepted in the United Fations 
and other international organizations as far as the provision of assistance 
was concerned. There were no grounds whatsoever for its revision. As was 
stated in Article III.B.l of the Statute, the Agency should "conduct its activities 
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Fations to 
promote peace and international co-operation". 
85. He expressed the hope that the majority of delegations would not set out 
to revise the Statute. His delegation would vote against the amendment. 
86. Another factor which scarcely promoted co-operation within the Agency was 
the adoption, by the Board cf a decision extending the procedures followed under 
the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance to the award of Type I fellowships. 
By that decision, 25 Member States, including the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, would be deprived of the right to receive Type I fellowships, although 
neither the Agency1s Statute nor any other of its rules or regulations made any 
14/ GC(VI)/COM.1/67/Hev.l. 



GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 22 


provision for such limitation on the award of fellowships to any country. 
The Board's decision thus constituted open discrimination against 25 countries, 
almost one third of the Agency's Member States. 


87. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist .Republic had extensive facilities for 
training personnel in all branches of science, including the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Furthermore, highly qualified specialists were being trained 
for many countries abroad. Nevertheless his delegation considered that the 
award of fellowships by the Agency was an important form of international 
co-operation and of scientific and technical contact within the Agency. It 
was therefore unable to approve the discriminatory decision reached by the 
Board, which was tantamount to undermining co-operation within the Agency. 
88. Another problem was the extension of assistance to the developing countries,' 
which had to undertake atomic energy development as soon as possible, and 
therefore required the necessary scientific basis. 
89. The delegations of the socialist countries had introduced at the sixth 
regular session of the General "conference proposals for a technical assistance 
programme to developing countries, which provided for the establishment of six 
radiological centres and six physics laboratories. Three hundred fellowships 
were also to be provided. He appealed to the advanced countries to provide 
equipment, apparatus and fellowships, or financial resources, in view of the 
fact that one third of the scheme, to the value of 1700 000, was being guaranteed 
by the socialist countries. 
90. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was prepared to take a very active 
part in carrying out that programme, in the light of its own experience in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Soviet Ukraine was a Republic with an 
advanced industry and a highly developed agriculture, and was exceptionally 
rich in the fossil fuels - coal, oil and natural gas. The construction of 
atomic power stations there was therefore a matter for the more distant future, 
Nevertheless Ukrainian scientists were taking a direct part in working on 
nuclear engineering problems and Ukrainian factories were manufacturing apparatus 
and equipment for power stations under construction in other parts of the 
Soviet Union, as part of the general plan for developing nuclear power. And 
the labour and intelligence of all the Soviet peoples, including the Ukrainian, 

GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 23 


had gone into the ice-breaker Lenin and into the space-ships carrying out 
flights in outer space. 


91. Great importance was attached in the Ukraine to promoting research in 
fundamental nuclear physics as the basis of nuclear technology. It would he 
glad to share the results of its scientific research work and even its scientific 
ideas, which, as was well known, were the mes'c valuable fruits of the human 
mind. At the first and second Geneva conferences on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, the Ukraine had supplied dafca on the interaction of fast neutrons 
with the atomic nuclei of construction materials.. At conferences at Amsterdam, 
Paris, Kingston, Padua and Cracow, it had supplied information on nuclear 
reactions? at Salzburg, details of thermonuclear reactions? at the Rochester 
Conferences at Kiev, Geneva and Dubna, information on the physics of elementary 
particle acceleration; and at Prague, data on the operation of experimental 
reactors. He hoped that the third Geneva conference too would include a 
Ukrainian contribution dealing with new research work, 
92. A great deal of experience had been gained in the Ukraine in the employment 
of radioisotopes and radiation in the national economy. The use of radioisotopes 
as tracers, for instance, had made it possible to obtain a quantity of valuable 
scientific data, to develop new technological processes in industry and to study 
the most intimate aspects' of the physiological and pathological processes taking 
place in living organisms. 
93• It had been possible, for instance, in the metallurgical factories of the 
Bon basin, to study smelting and slag-formation processes by means of calcium-45 
and phosphorus-32 and to achieve a reduction in smelting time, a,n improvement in 
the stability of bottoms and roofs of furnaces, and a reduction in the hot 
standby time of open-hearth furnaces. Millions of roubles had been saved 
simply by introducing radiation automation and control devices. 


94. Using radioisotopes, Ukrainian agrobiologists had succeeded in investigating 
the most effective methods of applying phosphate fertilizer and found the key 
to increased yields, as well as discovering new plant metabolism and fertilization 
mechanisms. 
95. Radioisotopes and radiation had found wide application in the fight against 
disease, especially in the diagnosis and treatment of malignant diseases. The 

GC(VII)/OR„78 


page 24


Ukraine made no secret of its efforts in the peaceful use of atomic energy, 
and was assisting the developing countries on a bilateral basis, as well as 


through international organizations, and at the same time carrying out 


scientific and technical exchange with many other countries throughout the 
world. 


S6. A group of Ukrainian scientists, for instance, had been working for over 

two years, in Cairo assisting scientists of the United Arab Republic to set 
up a nuclear centre. 


97. Ukrainian scientists wore taking part in the design, installation and 
repair of nuclear plant and physics equipment, as well as in training personnel 
and drawing up and conducting scientific programmes with United Arab Republic 
scientists. In less than two years the Oairo centre, with the participation 
of Ukrainian scientists, had completed eight -experimental investigations, 
currently reported 'in "Fueloar Physics". 
98. Ukrainian scientists were in close touch with scientists in Poland, Hungary, 
Czechoslovakia, the German' Democratic Republic and other countries,, Direct 
scientific contacts and exchange of specialists were taking place between the 
French Atomic Centre at Orsay and the Institute of Physics of the Soviet Academy 
of Sciences at Kiev. Contacts were also being established between Ukrainian 
and United Kingdom laboratories. 
99- Ukrainian scientists had been glad to welcome the Director General of the 
Agency, Mr. Eklund. They hoped that his-visit would serve to encourage further 
useful contacts. . "• • ' 

100. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency 'would worthily carry out its high 
mission, and justify the hopes of the peoples of the world. 
101. Mr. JlNQSSY (Hungary) said his Government would always be on the side 
of those who sincerely worked for the prohibition of the use of atomic energy 
for military purposes, and for universal disarmament under effective international 
control. Hence it approved the Moscow test bain'treaty. His delegation also 
welcomed the new Member States from Africa and wished to associate itself with 
the struggle of the African countries to safeguard human rights and end racial 
discrimination. 

GU(VII)/OR.78 
page 25 


102. He welcomed, any Agency activity that really did. extend exchanges of 
information and assist the developing countries, and much had in fact been 
done through training, publications, scientific meetings and the fellowship 
programme. He wished to protest, however, against any attempt to introduce 
discrimination - such as the proposal, debased at length by the Board, which 
would deny fellowships to certain Member States, To say that there were not 
sufficient places available was a specious argument, since various countries, 
including Hungary, had offered fellowships which had been only partly utilized. 
The Agency should ensure that all such fellowships were taken up. Apart from 
any other consideration, they provided, for exchanges between countries. 
105. His delegation was opposed to the proposed amendment of Article XIV of 
the Statute and of the relevant provisions of the financial Regulations. The 
technical assistance programme must naturally be as efficient as possible, 
but he did not agree that the system of voluntary contributions had failedf 
the existing shortcomings were due to the Agency' s failure to make the best 
use of the funds contributed and to carry out satisfactorily the role of 
intermediary assigned to it under Article III of the Statute. 
104. He could not agree with the United Kingdom delegate that the success of 
the long-term programme depended on the amendment of Article XIV, Such amendment 
would make others necessary and lead in fact to a general revision of 
the Statute. That in turn would lead to .instabilities in regard to the level 
of the budget and leave the way open to increasing it whenever the specific 
interests of certain Member States so required. His Government had repeatedly 
indicated that it could not accept an amendment that would replace the present 
'system of voluntary contributions by assessed contributions, and would not 
consider itself bound by any obligations such amendment might imply. Hungary 
would do its utmost to assist the developing countries, but would do so as a 
moral duty which it would fulfil of its own free will. 


105. The Agency must not be made subservient to the political and financial 
interests of any State or group of States. 
106. His delegation was not altogether satisfied with the Seibersdorf Laboratory, 
which ought to be financed in much stricter conformity with the requirements 
of the Statute. 

GC(VII)/Oft.78 
page 26 


107. The special missions had succeeded only in damaging the Agency's prestige 
and should ho gradually replaced by expert groups who. would operate in 
response to specific requests from Member States.. 
108. It was also regrettable that the Secretariat had not yet been able to 
implement the technical assistance project proposed by the socialist countries, 
which had been unanimously approved at the sixth regular session. 
109. His delegation attached very groat importance to the question of longterm 
planning, and supported the Director General's proposals. 
110. The. budget reflected the Director General's efforts to reduce expenditure 
on administration and stabilize the budget level, but more should be done' to 
bring spending into line with the provisions of the Statute, 
111. The Secretariat- was to be complimented, on the efficient way in which it 
had organized scientific, meetings and produced various Agency publications* 
He welcomed improved Hungarian relations with the Agency, and especially withthe 
Director General. Examples of successful co-opere.tion were offered by 
the research agreement, with the Szarvas Research Institute for Rice. Cultivation, 
about which a short film had recently been made by Agency staff. 
112. On the.other hand, he had some serious criticisms to make. On certain 
occasions, the documentation provided by the Secretariat had not been 
sufficiently accurate or thorough. In June 1963> for example, the Board had 
had to discuss the Monaco project, but no report had been submitted about the 
research, now in its third year, carried out in Monaco at a cost to date of' 
some $300 000. More efficient documentation would enable the Board to be 
more sure of its ground in the recommendations if made to the General .Ccnfe'rsnce. 
113• Hungary wished to share its research results and was offering to the 


developing countries free of charge the results of ten different research 
projects on radioisotope applications in agriculture, medicine and industry. 


The results vrere valued at some 50 000 roubles. Hungary hoped that that form 


of co-operation would become increasingly common, but, before it could, the, 
Agency would have to overcome difficulties which certain countries put in-its-' 
way from political motives. 



G^-(VII)/OR.78 
page 27 


114. Mr. MDZIE (Ghana) said that during the year an Atomic Energy 
Commission had been set up in Ghana to replace the former Atomic Energy 
Committee! it v/ould he responsible for all atomic energy matters in Ghana, 
including operation of the research reactor soon to be constructed, and would 
assume liability for nuclear damage in the country. 
115. Ghana had had the benefit of the advice of three experts provided through 
the Agency,, in radiochemistry, agriculture and health physics. The expert on 
health physics had submitted an excellent report, as a result of which the 
Atomic Energy Commission, in consultation with the Department of Labour, had 
set up a Radiation Protection Board designed to satisfy the provisions of the 
relevant convention of the International Labour Organisation. The work of the 
other two experts had been most satisfactory. Steps vrere being taken to 
organize and equip radiobiology laboratories for research, particularly on 
cocoa, the main product of Ghana's economy! the help of the Agency would be 
required in obtaining the necessary equipment. 
116. Two fellowships for Ghanaians had been provided by the Agency and he 
wished to record his country's gratitude for the training facilities provided 
by a number of Member States to developing countries, For the coming year, 
it had asked for experts in the use of isotopes in hydrology and medicine. 
The stage had been reached in Ghana where training in atomic energy administration 
was needed, and the time had come when facilities should be provided for 
attaching personnel from developing countries to the Secretariat for training 
and experience. He accordingly welcomed the Director General's statement on 
that point. 
117. Ghana's research reactor project was proceeding according to schedule and 
the reactor should be in operation in eighteen months' time. His country 
would welcome co-operation in atomic energy matters with neighbouring African 
States and was particularly glad that Figoria, the Ivory Coast and Gabon had 
been admitted to membership. 
118. Maintaining the position taken by Ghana in the Board of Governors, his 
delegation would give full support to the draft resolutions on long-term 
planning and on the introduction of biennial programming—^. 
15/ GC(VII)/238. 



GC(VII)/OR„78 
page 28 


119. The establishment of an International Centre for Theoretical Physics on 
the lines recommended by the Board would contribute greatly to scientific 
advancement in the developing countries? his delegation accordingly supported 
the project, which would help to reduce teaching difficulties in those 
countries. It was to be hoped, however, that the establishment of the Centre 
would not affect the award of fellowships for study in more advanced countries. 
His delegation-agreed that the Centre should not remain at Trieste, and was 
in favour of moving' it, after the initial period, to an appropriate developing 
country. He warmly acknowledged the generous help of the.Italian authorities 
in the matter.,; 
120. After careful consideration, his delegation had come to the conclusion 
that the question of extending the Agency's safeguards system to large reactor 
facilities had strong political overtones and hence required special treatment. 
He would have preferred it to be referred back to the working group for further 
study, but would not oppose the draft resolution put forward by the Board 
if it came up for adoption at the current session. 
121. Although it supported the principle of inviting specific international 
organizations to be represented at sessions of the General Conference, his 
delegation was opposed to inviting any organization having military interests, 
since the aims and purposes of such a body would clearly be contrary to those 
of the Agency. 
122-. Ghana regarded the co-operation established between the Agency and the 
United Nations and its specialized agencies as being of great significance 
and hoped that far-reaching developments would follow from that co-operation 


during the United Nations Development Decade. 


123. ,The.setting-up of a Technical Assistance-Department in the Secretariat 
was a .welcome propo.salj such a department could render valuable services to 
the developing countries by being able to respond to their needs quickly. 
124. Arrangements should be made to hold Agency seminars in-developing countries, 
choosing places that would make it easy.for neighbouring countries 
to participate. 

GC(VII)/OR.78 
page 29 


125 • His delegation proposed, for the Agency's consideration, that a regional 
centre be set up in Ghana, to serve all West African States having common 
problems and interests, 


126. In common with other peace-loving nations, Ghana had welcomed and signed 
the partial nuclear test han treaty. It hoped that the treaty would be 
followed by further progress and that a total test ban would be achieved in 
the near future. It was,•• however, regrettable that Prance, in defiance of 
the treaty and of United Fations resolutions, was still preparing for atomic 
tests in the Sahara. Ghana joined the other African countries in protesting 
in the strongest possible terms against such wanton disregard of humanity's 
call for reason. .. . 
127. His delegation also vehemently protested against.the continued presence 
at the Conference of delegations reprc-senting the Republic of South Africa 
and Portugal, whose policies of apartheid and discrimination wore condemned 
by all right-thinking nations of the world. By maintaining those inhuman 
policies, South Africa and Portugal had shown themselves unfit for the 
responsibility of pursuing the interests of mankind in any sphere, including 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The South African delegation could not 
honestly claim that its country was able to co-operate with all other Member 
States while its doors were closed to all other Africans. 
128. Much had been said about the need to dray/ a distinction between politics 
and science, but that argument was a woefully weak one. In common with all 
other Member States, the African countries had become Members of the Agency 
through an act of their Governments, which were the political entities, and 
their representatives at the Conference could not be expected, in socking the 
advancement of science, to ignore the very basis of the Agency's authority. 
Every delegation Y\ras bound to uphold the policies of the country it represented 
and Ghana would certainly do so wherever and for whatever purpose nations were 
gathered together. Science could certainly not be divorced from politics, for 
the object of scientific development was to benefit the peoples of the world, 
and that object was itself a political one. 

GC(VII)/OR„78 
page 30 


129. So long as Ghana remained a Member of the Agency, its delegation would 
continue to object to the membership of any country which practised policies _ 
inimical to the very existence of mankind, and it would be satisfied with 
nothing less than the permanent withdrawal from the Agency of the delegations' 
of South Africa and Portugal. Meanwhile Ghana would take whatever steps 
were open to it to express its opposition to apartheid and to any other "form 
of racial discrimination!' compromise on that issue it could not and would 
not' accept. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



international Atomic Energy Agency GC(VII)/OR.79 

9 January 1964 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH

General Conference 

Seventh regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 27 September 1963, at 3 p.m. 

President: Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 

later: Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 1 -jB 
Governors for 1962-63 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 


Japan 1 -4Congo 
(Leopoldville) 5 - 10 
Greece 11 - 20 
Thailand •21 -23Bulgaria 
24 - 31 
Sweden 32 - 36' 
Brazil 37 - 41 
Turkey 42 - 49 
Burma - 53 


50 


Philippines - 62 


54 


Albania 63 - 75 
Algeria - 78 


76 


* GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending; the session is given in 
document GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev. 2, 

63-7991 



~GC("#II)/OR.79 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AM) REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1962-65 
(GC0TIl)/228, 243, 250) (continued) •'' " 


1. • Mr, UCHIDA (japan) recalled that when the draft Statute of the Agency 
had been approved in 1956 it had been hailed as a rare occasion on which East 
and West had reached full agreement on an important international problem. 
Six years had passed since then^ the membership of the Agency had increased 
and its activities had been considerably enlarged., However, the "cold war" 
atmosphere had subsisted to some extent, and had sometimes influenced the 
Agency's deliberations, It was important that the emphasis should be on 
scientific and technical questions and that political considerations should be 
kept out of the di'scussions as far as possible. He hoped that the recent test 
ba.n treaty would help to restore the atmosphere which had prevailed at the time 
of the Agency's establishment, 
2, In common with other international organizations, the Agency was constantly 
handicapped by shortage of funds, and the recommendation of the Board of 
Governors on the financing of the Agency's activities-^ deserved careful consideration. 
It was the outcome of long and difficult discussions in the 
Board, during which its merits and defects had been exhaustively considered. 
He appreciated the doubts of some delegations concerning the proposal to depart 
from the original provisions of the Statute and the relationship with the 
United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, but the discussions 
in the Board seemed to show that there was in fact no other alternative if the 
Agency's financial difficulties were to be overcome. His delegation would 
therefore support the Board's recommendation, 


3. Referring to the question of safeguards, he pointed out that Japan was one 
of the few countries directly involved. The United States and Japan had 
agreed to transfer to the Agency the administration of the safeguards provided 
2/ 
for in the bilateral agreement between them—'„ It was undoubtedly the common 
desire of all the Members of the Agency that atomic energy should eventually be 
used solely for peaceful purposes, and it would be a significant step forward" 
if a system of verification by an international organ could be developed. 


1/ GC(VII)/236 and Adda. 
2/ The text of the agreement is reproduced in document IWFCTRC/47, 



GC(VII)/OR.79 
page 3 


Although it might not he very clear at present what the role of the Agencyshould 
he, the safeguards system, if widely utilized, would certainly become 
an important factor in the future development of a universal verification 
system. He appreciated the Director General's assurance to recipient States 
that the necessary controls would he exercised fairly and uniformly. He 
expected that other delegations would share the "Director General's view, and 
that Agency safeguards would ho so estahlished and implemented as to serve the 
further development of the nuclear energy industry,. His Government 'Would 
support the principle of the extension of the Agency's safeguards system, 


4o In conclusion? he referred to the proposed intensification of the Agency's 
regional activities and warmly welcomed the appointment of a regional officer 
as a first step in that directions 


5. .- Mr. MALU (Congo (heopoldville)) pointed out that continents formerly 
considered backward were becoming aware of their place in the world and wished 
to participate to an increasing extent in the progress of mankind,, The Gongo 
had joined the Agency as a partner willing to contribute, with all the other 
Members of the Agency, to promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy,, It 
had, indeed, provided the raw material necessary for the discovery of that 
formidahle source of energy and the first atomic reactor had been fuelled with 
uranium from the Congo. 
6. The Congo was operating the first research reactor on the African 
continent and using it exclusively for peaceful purposes. For four years, 
with the co-operation of the Agency, it had also been operating a nuclear 
centre for the benefit not only of its own nationals, hut of the entire African 
community., 
7. The TRICO reactor, installed in 1959? was producing radioisotopes which 
were being used for medical and agricultural research in the Congo and in some 
neighbouring countries.. Industrial applications were still limited, but 
thanks to the TRIGO reactor it had been possible to carry out a study on 
activation.methods designed to increase production of- palm-oil, which was most 
important for the whole African continent. 

GC(VII)/OR.79 
page 4 


8. Apart .from radioisotope applications, the Congo had laid particular stress 
on. training. The Government nuclear centre had organized various, training 
courses in 1960 and .in 19&5? some for university graduates and others for the 
technicians of whom Africa was .in such great .need5 for, in- spite of the 
generous assistance of friendly nations, i.t was on African soil that African 
technicians and research workers should he trained-. He expressed his satisfaction 
at the decision to set up, at Cairo, the first regional isotope centre 
for the Arab, countries5 but the Agency should now take steps to provide 
tropical Africa with a regional training centre specially, adapted to conditions 
in that region. The Congo Government was prepared to place the TRICO reactor 
at the disposal of any regional centre that was established. It had decided 
to raise the power of the reactor from 50 to 250 kilowatts in continuous 
operation, with the possibility of substantially higher power in intermittent 
operation. The conversion had been maSe possible by assistance from the 
Agency and certain Member States^, to-which the Congo Government expressed its 
gratitude,. 
9. The value of the installations which the Congo was prepared to place at 
the disposal of neighbouring countries would depend on the increased potentialities 
of the TRICO reactor and on the specialized equipment for the application 
of radioisotopes provided under co-operation agreements with Lovanium 
University, Agronomists, doctors and engineers would be able not only to 
familiarize'themselves with the various aspects of radioisotope production, but 
also to apply radioisotopes in their own special fields of research, 
10, The Congo had played a fundamental role at the beginning of the atomic age 
and investment in the TRICC centre had proved particularly rewarding and 
effective. The Congo was the African country which had contributed most in 
that highly specialized field; it was right that it should also receive something 
in return, and he had no doubt' that'Members would wish to expand the 
Agencyxs programme of assistance to developing countries and include the Congo, 
in particular, in that programme, remembering the part it had played at the 
beginning''of 'nuclear development and was 'continuing to play in central Africa, 


11, Mr, SPA¥IDES (Greece) said that he was glad to note that the 
Conference had started in an atmosphere of relaxation of international tension 
as a resalt of the conclusion of the test ban treaty, which Greece had been one 



GC(VII)/OR.79 
page 5 


of the first countries' to sign. He hoped that -the effect of the treaty would 
be to divert man's innate-feelings of rivalry into a phase of peaceful com-; 
petition devoted to the fight against hunger, poverty, disease and illiteracy, 
which were far more important problems than conquest of the moon and of space, 


12. ' In the existing climate of optimism, • it was to be hoped that even the one 
source of discord which had disturbed the friendly atmosphere of the' debates 
would find its solution with the passage of time. The fact that such a 
controversial, subject a-s the relations between different races had been.kept-on 
the fringe of the debate was encouraging, and ha congratulated the African and 
other countries on their understanding and respect for the cardinal, principle 
that the Agency was not the proper place for the solution of political issues. 
15•> He thought that the time had come to reconsider current views regarding 
the Agency's usefulness. Judging from the financial resources placed- at its 
dispo'sal, the great Powers did not seem to attach much significance to it„ 
Other international organizations much narrower in scope were much more satisfactorily 
financed. As an example, he would mention that Greece contributed 
to the European Organization for Nuclear Research more than ten "times the amount 


.it gave to the Agency, from which it received much greater technical assistance. 
He was convinced that if the Agency was to fulfil its 'important task, contributions, 
would have to be greatly increased and the Agency's activities , ' 
expanded-in all directions. , -. 


14. If that idea met,with general approval and were put into practice, as he 
believed it should be, then the resulting increase in the Agency's work would 
create additional problems-requiring the co-operation of all Member States. 
That-being so, the proposal that the General Conference should meet every two 
years did not seem to be entirely reasonable. 15. 
The reorganization proposed in'other directions would undoubtedly give the 
Agency greater flexibility and efficiency-and the. Director General and his 
staff were indeed to-be congratulated for their work on long-term planning 
which, together with sound financing, would be a powerful aid-to the,Agency in 
carrying out its allotted tasks. 
I60 As a seafaring nation, Greece had great expectations of the Monaco ""project 
and was very glad that the project was to be extended for a further five years. 
His country had also -nade use of the Agency's Laboratory, which should always 



GU-(.VII)-/0E„79 
page 6 


be ready to meet the changing and increasing needs of the developing countries„ 
He welcomed the Director General's statement that the Centre for Theoretical 
Physics was to he opened in 1964 and he hoped it would he the first of a series 


of similar institutions., 


17c He then gave some details about the progress in atomic matters made in 
Greece., The swimming-pool type reactor at the. Der/iocritos Centre had, since 
ciiticality, been working according to schedule, producing short-lived isotopes 
for local use and serving for various experiments., Also, work on a programme 
for eradication of the Dacus fly? a serious olive pest, was proceeding satisfactorily? 
in co-operation with the United States Department of Agriculture 
and the Agency, and it was hoped soon to carry out pilot studies prior to 
putting into effect an eradication plan covering the whole country. He 
recalled that a very successful Symposium on the Use and Application of Radioisotopes' 
and Radiation in the Control of Plant and Animal Insect Pests had been 


3/ 


hold in Greece— , and said that his Government, which laid great store by • 
international co-operation in that form,, looked forward to equally valuable 
result's from a symposium on medical radioisotope scanning to be held in Athens 
in the same month of 1964° 


18, In common with seme of the previous speakers, he believed that the Agency 
should do more in bhe field of power reactors. The need for power was 
increasing in most areas of the world, including the developing countries, and 
the Agency must be prepared to guide such countries when they were ready to 
enbark on nuclear power projects. It would also be helpful if the seafaring 
nations were to pool their resources to promote work on nuclear ship propulsion,. 


19* Greece? which had completed its term of office in the Board of Governors, 
welcomed the amendment to the Statute to include representatives of the Middle 
East and Africa on the Board, and he hoped that a way would be found to give 


all Member States a chance to serve on the Board. 


20. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the Agency would be successful 
in carrying out its vital work, and promised that the devoticn and co-operation 
of Greece to that end would always be forthcoming* 
j>/ Held at Athens from 22 to 26 April 1965* 



GC(VII)/OR.79 
Page 7 


21. Mr. CHOOIMEAYAF (Thailand) said that his delegation w s pleased to 
note the recommendation of the Board of Governors that the Agency's technical 
assistance programmes should he largely concentrated on the developing 
countries. He hoped that the proposed new financial arrangements would 
receive the support of all Member States, for they would benefit the work of 
the Agency as a whole and, in particular, would facilitate long-term planning. 
It was, however, desirable that the Secretariat should be more flexible in its 
administrative work. 
22. The Thai research reactor at. Bangkok bad been in operation for almost a 
year, and it was appropriate that the Agency should have held a study group 
meeting in that city in ~:^)62— . 
23. In conclusion, he expressed his Government's appreciation of the technical 
assistance furnished by the Agency. 
24. Mr. 1ADJAK0Y (Bulgaria) said that, thanks to the signing of the 
Moscow treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in space and under 
water, the vrork of the seventh regular session was taking place in an international 
atmosphere that was favourable to mutual comprehension. There could 
be no doubt that the signature of the treaty had been received with relief by 
people everywhere since it put an end to contamination from radioactive fallout 
and it would help to strengthen the Agency's role in reaching agreement on 
universal disarmament. 
25. The Agency had already made a contribution in the form of measures taken 
with a view to giving effect to Resolution GG(VI)/RES/l30 concerning the basic 
aspects of economic and social consequences of disarmament". There could be 
no more praiseworthy activity than that which -aimed at utilizing atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes. 
26. One of the Agency's most fruitful act reviewed in the Board's 
annual report to the General Conference (GC(\rIl)/228), and one which had the 
support of all Member States, was the provision of fellowships for the training 
and specialization of scientific personnel The Agency should concentrate 
more and more on that work, which would be all the more fruitful if candidates 
were chosen from amongst the most gifted^ then, on their return home, they 
would themselves be able to undertake the training of others. Some-might be 
4/ Study Group Meeting on the Utilization of Research Reactors, held from 
17 to 21 December 1962. 



GC(VII)/OR.79* 
page 8 


called upon by;the Agency as experts; it would accordingly be advisable to 
allow a- longer period of training to young scientists who had proved their 
ability to -do research and encourage them to specialize still further,, 


27„ His delegation deeply regretted the tendency to reduce every year the 
proportion'of the Agency's resources devoted to fellowships. He believed 
financial resources could be made available by substantially reducing expenditure 
on the safeguards system*, 


5/ • " -28,, 
The long-term programme-7 was useful, but he was struck'by the fact that a 
rather large place was accorded to activities which his delegation would have 
preferred to see more restricted^ the research contract programme, for example, 
could be considerably reduced and the amounts so freed transferred to' the 
appropriation for fellowships. His delegation had previously indicated that 
it would prefer to see research stimulated by means other than research contractso 
In the first place, the Agency could obtain the data it needed on 
certain problems from Member States which possessed themj it could, ask certain 
Ilember States to investigate the problems which interested it under their 
national programmes^ and finally, certain problems could be more effectively 
examined if they were made the subject of general competition and, in such 
cases, the organization of international competitions would facilitate their 
solution,, 
29„ His delegation would also like to see the work of the Agency's 
Laboratories develop in consonance with the aims of the Agency,, Their 
principal job was to provide services for Member States and not to act' a's 
research centres. His delegation could not approve the work of the Monaco• 
Laboratory since it did not know in what it consisted, No one would deny' the 
importance of the waste management problem, but there could 'be no justification 
for devoting so much attention to the disposal of waste into the sea,' since'''that 
was a procedure "that could not be recommended. ' '- • • <• 


30. He recalled the programme of technical assistance to the developing ' 
countries submitted to the sixth regular session by the socialist countries, 
including Bulgaria—'„ He noted with regret that the relevant resolution-^ 
5/ GC(VII)/227. 


6/ GC(VI)/COM.1/67/Rev.i 
2/ GC(VJ)/EES/131.. 



GC(YII)/OR.79 
page 9 


had not produced the results that might have been expected because the "Western 


countries had not yet shown themselves ready to co-operate in giving effect 


to it, 


31, The Bulgarian delegation wished again to emphasize the fact that it' could 
not support the proposed amendment to Article XIV of the Statute, which was not 
only contrary to the principle of free consent in technical assistance matters 
hut could not achieve its purpose, that of increasing the Agency's resources 
for its technical assistance activities5 rather would the amendment have the 
opposite effect. If it were adopted by the General Conference his delegation 
would be compelled to refuse any and all obligations which the amendment 
entailed. 


Mr„ Tohamy (United Ara-b Republic), Vice-President, took the Chair, 


32, Mr..BRYNXSLSSOH (Sweden) said that, since atomic energy was on the 
point of becoming competitive with other sources of power, it was most 
appropriate.that the present state of atomic technology should be surveyed at a 
third Geneva conference to be held in 1964* The Agency had a very•important 
part to play in its preparation, and the wealth of technical information forthcoming 
would, no doubt, subsequently be used for the benefit of all Member 
States. 


33, The complicated technical problems involved in the integration of nuclear 
power into existing power systems had been extensively studied in Sweden, The 
combination of hyd.ro and nuclear power ha5 great economic advantages, and he 
anticipated that most .of the new demand for power in the 1970!s - cheap hydro 
power in Sweden would be exhausted in the present decade - would be met by the 
installation of some 4000 MW of nuclear power. The result of the Swedish 
studies had been made available to the Agency, and Sweden was prepared to 
extend co-operation in that field to countries with similar problems, A 
summary of the studies had just been distributed to all delegations, 


-^xe
34= The Agesta Power Station had gone critical on 17 July 1963 and , offer, 
made at the sixth regular session of the General Conference, of fellowships to 
study heavy-water reactor technology at the Station could now be implemented. 
Technical information on the Station would also be provided for Inclusion in 
the Agency's information documentation on power reactors. The Agesta reactor 


GC(VII)/Ofi.79 


page 10 


provided electric power and hot water for.district heating, but Swedish studies 


on the use of nuclear power for district heating showed that for that ,purpose 


it was not yet competitive with conventional fuels. The extensive development 
work on smaller reactors now taking place might change the picture, but 


generation of cheap electricity by very large power reactors might on the other 
hand, make electric domestic heating a more attractive proposition. Sweden's 
first large power reactor> the Narviken boiling heavy-water reactor with a 
maximum capacity of 200 I1V7, was now under construction. Very large reactors 
wi"h an electrical capacity of about 1000 MW were being developed in Sweden in 


order to explore the -potentialities of the heavy-water type. He felt that 


that item of information might be of interest in connection with the de


salination of sea-water. 


35" Since it was one of the Agency's principal_ functions 'to promote, the... use of 
atomic power all over the world, electric power production had hitherto 
received the most attention, but some of the o.ther uses he had mentioned might 
assume great importance. In the long-term planning of the Agency's work, the 
ever-widening potentialities and the rapid technical advances likely to 
materialize had to be taken into account„ 


36„ Lastly, he wished to stress the importance for the Agency's future of' 
flexibility in the long-term programme. 


37., Mr a DUARTS (Brazil) said that the Conference had opened in the wake 
of a most important and gratifying event? the signature of the Moscow partial 
test ban treaty, which was a first step towards measures that would release 
enormous manpower and resources for utilization in the various activities of 
the Agency. If the Agency was called upon to undertake bigger tasks, it was 
inevitable that an efficient and appropriate system of safeguards must be 
applied. His. delegation therefore welcomed the recommendation of the Board, of 
Governor ttet the existing sysie. should „. r9vised^'. 


38,, He noted with satisfaction the range and quality of the Agency's 
activities for the benefit of developing countries' and the proposals for a 
long-term programme,- The confidence placed, in'the Agency by developing 
countries was shown by the fact that requests for technical assistance called 
for financial resources three times greater than .those available. 


8/ See document GC(VII)/235. 



GC(VI'l)/ORP79 


-o&re '12 

39° The Agency could not, however, claim .to .be autonomous .i,n its activities. 
As the United Rations Conference on the Application of.Scienoe and Technology 


9/ ' 
SOT the. Benefit of the Less Developed.Areas:-7. had shown, there was an .urgent 
need for concerted action in scientific training and research,^ and the general 
agreement on that- point had led .to the appointment of a co-ordinating committee 
by the United Nations. . The Agency should inform- the United Nations of its 
interest in co-ordinating its work with sLich specialized agencies as the TTorld 
Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations and the United Nations .Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization^ 
Brazil would oo-sponsor a draft resolution on that subject, during the 
Conferenceo ..... , . . 
40, His delegation was convinced that 'the Agency should have a twofold * • 
characters first, it should act as a world administrative bureau for the uses 
of atomic energy and, secpndly, it should carry, on field work. His. country 
attached great importance to the Agency's field work, such as that .already 
being done at the. Seibersdorf ..and .Monaco Laboratories and. at the Middle .Eastern 
Regional Radioisotope, Centre for the.Arab Countries, and the work to be undertaken,
in the near future at the International Centre for Theoretical Physics, 
4-1° Finally, he wished to express Brazil's pleasure at the decision to hold 
the study group'meeting on research reactors a't'Sao Paulo in November 1-963


420 Mr, PLCAY (Turkey), after expressing his country's deep satisfaction 
at the increase in the Agency's membership and "welcoming Gabon, the Ivory Coast 
and Nigeria as new "embers, stressed the importance which Turkey attached to 
the Moscow treaty on the partial banning of nuclear tests, Tha't agreement 
held promise of greater understanding among nations and closer co-operation in 
using nuclear energy exclusively for the progress of mankind. It was Turkey's 
ardent wish that the hopes placed in the treaty would not be disappointed, 


43c The Turkish Government appreciated .at .its true-,value the -important and 
fruitful role which the Agency had played in co-ordinating the efforts of its 
Members in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. , It felt certain that the 
Agency would be equal to its task in the future, although that would require an 
even greater effort than in the:past„ 


.9/ Held at Geneva from 4 to 20 February 1963. 



GC(75I>/OR•s79 
page 12 

44. He then expressed his country's gratitude for the valuable assistance the 
Agency had given it, particularly'in organizing training courses on the 
agricultural applications of radioisotopes, The first regional course on the 
subject had taken place the previous year at Ankara, and had been attended bysix 
Turkish students and 14 fellows from eight countries in Europe and the 
Middle East (Spain, Yugoslavia, Austria, Greece, Israel, Iran, Afghanistan and 
Pakistan), The Turkish Government hoped that the second course of the same 
kind, which was to take place' under the Agency's auspices from 1 October to 
25 November 1963 at Ankara, would'prove as fruitful as the first. In view of 
the encouraging results obtained, and the interest shown in the courses by the 
most diverse countries, Turkey intended to continue its efforts in that field, 
placing the experience gained at the disposal of all the countries in the 
region, ' '• " 
45.' Turning next to the activities of the Nuclear Research Centre at Istanbul, 
he explained that it had been set up around the TR/l reactor at Cekmece', which 
had become critical in 1962". So far, the Centre was only being used for 
theoretical studies' and training but a' programme of_ varied but modest 
activities had already been drawn up. For example, an agreement had been 
reached with Brobkhaven' National 'Laboratory in the United States,. providing 
for co-operation in'studying certain specific problems. A team of American" 
research- workers had already done some work with Turkish staff. Contacts had 
been established with nuclear centres in other countries in the region, for the 
common, use. of reactors, on a reciprocal.basis, in multilateral research . , 
project,s,,,.. The .Centre's. radiochemistry laboratories already had sufficient 
equipment., arnd .staff to make a start, and the equipment of the health, physics 
laboratories was stijl further advanced. It was hoped that the Centre would 
soon be able to- begin producing radioisotopes on a modest scale,. He thanked 
the Agency for the help it had given the Centre by sending out experts, providing 
fellowships and exchanging information. 


46. Turkey was- following with great interest the research, work being, done , 
under...A.gency auspices on the use .of radioisotopes to combat crop pests. In 
view of the vital importance of that research, it would like to. see closer 00operation 
between the specialized agencies and all interested countries. 

GC(VII)/0E.79 
page 13 


47, The Turkish delegation much appreciated the Secretariat's work-on the 


long-term programme, which was an especially difficult task because of the 


complexity of the problems it raised, • Turkey supported the programme and 
hoped that it would he executed with the greatest efficiency, economy and 


fairness in the allocation of available resources. 


48, The. setting-up of a new Department of technical Assistance, proposed by 
the Director General and approved by the Board of Governors, was a very timely 
measure which would make it possible to meet the needs of the developing 
countries as effectively as possible,, The Director General's decision to. 
improve the geographical distribution of Agency staff was also a wise step, in 
keeping with the Agency's objectives and ideals* 


49. He. warmly congratulated the Director General on having been able to introduce 
a new vigour into the Agency's activities in such a short time, not least 
by his personal prestige, and thanked him and his staff for the understanding 
and close co-operation which they had always shown in their dealings with the 
Permanent Mission of Turkey to the Agency^. 
50c, U SAIN BY/A (Burma), after v/elcoming the new Members - Nigeria, Ivory 
Coast and Gabon - said that the General•Conference was being held under 
favourable circumstances as a result of the signing of the partial test ban 
treaty in Moscow* He hoped that the treaty, which Burma had already signed, 
would enable fissionable material hitherto used- for destructive purposes to be 
diverted to peaceful ends, 


51o Burma had only a very modest programme for the utilization of atomic 


energy and had not.been able to participate actively in the affairs of the 
Boardf nevertheless it had followed the Agency's activities with great 
interest and appreciated the technical assistance it had received,, Like all 
developing .countries, at the present stage of its development•in nuclear 


science Burma attached the .greatest importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance. He welcomed the establishment of a new Department of Technical 
Assistance and hoped that it would be headed by the experienced staff member 
from a developing country who was already responsible for technical functions„ 


52.' His delegation hoped that Burma would continue to be represented in the 
Secretariat„ It welcomed the appointment of a regional officer for Asia and 
the Par East and the principle of rotation for that post. 



GC(VII)/OR.79 
r-ago 14' •• 


53° Some delegates had'mentioned SoutWAfricaj' Burma was strongly opposed to 
^£?;£^ei^.an^ ^ad 'taken all the measures proposed in the United Nations against 


South Africa, but he thought the sentiments expressed by the outgoing President 
on the opening- day of the Conference—'' should be 'supported, 

54° Mro de CASTRO (Philippines) said that the General Conference was 


taking place at an auspicious time, soon after.agreement hadbeen reached on 


the Moscow test ban treaty which, it was hcped, would result in efforts 
hitherto devoted'to the nuclear arms race' being gradually diverted to the 
promotion of the Agency's aim, the peaceful use of the atom, 


55o During the current session four new States had been admitted to membership. 
The growth in membership showed that the importance of what the Agency was 
doing and would' continue to do in bringing the benefits of atomic energy to 
r.voples throughout the world, was being recognized. 


56. He congratulated the Director General and his staff on the substantial 
progress achieved in many areas during the last year. If they were unable to 
accomplish more, it was because the Agency was handicapped by lack' of funds. 
Hence, his delegation'supported the-amendment to*the Statute recommended by the 
Doc.'d with a view to' providing in a singl'e budget for the activities hitherto 
financed from'voluntary'contributions. The existing system of financing the 
-•.-s'vuTLoal assistance programme had not yielded the'means necessary to carry it 
out effectively, and it 'was after all one of the Agency's most important 
'-c-hvitieso He therefore hoped that the proposed amendment would be supported 
by all States sincerely wishing to help the less-developed countries.,. 
5Y> At the sixth regular session of'the General Conference his delegation had 

• supported the proposal to' establish posts for regional experts to deal with' 
spocial matters'of common interest to the various regions5 that would help 
solve, the problem of recruiting experts and enable the Agency to provide expert 
services when most needed. He was pleased to note that steps had 'been taken 
t:> Implement that proposal by the appointment of a specialist' in nuclear 
technology to serve as a regional officer for Asia and the "Par East, The -' 
Situdy Group Meeting on the Utilization of Research Reactors in Bangkok and the 
Oomerence of Countries in Asia and the Pacific for the Promotion of Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy^--' had served to stress the need for regional co-operation, 
10/ GC(VII)/OR.73, para0 6, 
ll/ Held at Tokyo from 11 to 13 March 1963. 



GC(VII)/OR.79 
page 15 


and the Agency- could' well play a vital part by co-ordinating the research 
programmes of the different countries, with'a view to avoiding duplication of 
effort and waste of scarce resources, 


580 His own country was engaged in a modest atomic energy research and development 
programme as part of a general scheme to utilize science and technology 
for national welfare and progress,, An atomic centre had been established 
where research work was being carried out in such fields as agriculture, 
biology and medicine, industry and the physical sciences,, The facilities and 
staff of the centre were to be increased,, On 26 Aiigust 1963, five years after 
the establishment of the Philippines Atomic Energy Commission,, the research 
reactor had gone critical. Indigenous skills had been utilized to the fullest 
extent in the design and construction of the reactor building and in the 
installation of the reactor itself. The experience gained by Philippine 
engineers and 'scientists had been invaluable, and would no doubt be useful iri 
the larger projects'contemplated for the future. The reactor would be utilized 
for research-, the production of radioisotopes? training and education, ' He 
welcomed the study group meetings on reactor utilization being conducted under 
the Agency's auspices, from which the Philippine,,and other research centres in 
the region would benefit, and also thanked the Agency for sending a mission to 
the Philippines which had provided the occasion for a full discussion of his 
country's programmes in isotope production, activation analysis, hot-atom 
chemistry;, the preparation of labelled compounds and radiation chemistry, 


59. While agreeing with the Director General that nuclear.power, was bound to 
play an important part in the industrialization of developing countries, he 
pointed out that the potentialities of conventional power plants should not be 
overlooked. The pre-investment study on power to be undertaken in his country, 
as a United Nations Special Fund project5 might well be instructive for the 
Agency and interested countries in regard to the introduction of nuclear power 
in developing countries, 
60, One of- the most serious problems facing the developing countries in their 
atomic energy, programmes was the shortage of trained manpower! nuclear studies 
were a new branch of science, and educational institutions had not been able to 
keep abreast of the times. In most developing countries the nucleus of 
qualified personnel had invariably,received their- training abroad and reliance 



GC'(VI'I)/0E.79 


pago 16 


on overseas training for highly specialized and advanced work would' probably 


continue for some time. His delegation recommended that the Agencyrs'fellow


ship programme should continue to he given high priority and it had repeatedly 


proposed that'fellows^should be enabled to pursue'their studies to the 


doctorate level; The revised guiding' principles for Agency fellowships now 


made that possible for deserving fellows. Equally important was the role 


that- the Agency and UMESCO might play in bringing about close co-operation in 


training arid research between the universities and atomic energy research 
"centres, ''In the Philippines steps had been taken in that direction and a 

graduate programme in nuclear science and engineering had been agreed upon.' 


between the Philippines-University and the Atomic Energy Commission, providing 


for the joint use of staff and facilities of both institutions. 


6l, His delegation supported'the proposed changes in the Secretariat structure 
under which the Agency's technical assistance services would be consolidated in 
one department. The change would not only promote efficiency but also 
facilitate the co-ordination of all technical assistance activities that were 
by nature interrelated. 


62.- It also.endorsed the Agency's programmes and activities. 


65. Mr. WESHO (Albania) welcomed*the four African States which had just 
become Members of the Agency. His delegation fully supported the struggle of 
the African nations against the racial policy followed in 'South Africa and 
urged the Agency to take measures against South Africa, even going so far as 
to deprive it of membership. . . 
64. He pointed out that humanity was at present experiencing revolutionary 
scientific'and technical'developments which offered great prospects for 
increasing production;''and utilizing natural forces on a wide scale. ' Man was 
systematically penetrating and mastering the secrets of the- 'microcosm. • The 
practical use of nuclear energy was becoming a reality-. However,, the-greater 
..the progress made in the use of nuclear energy, the greater the need for 
international co-operation in that sphere. He noted that the Agency had 
already, achieved, good results, especially in connection with the award of 
fellowships,, the exchange of technical and scientific information and the 
organization of scientific meetings.. Good regulat.ory work had also been done, 
especially in establishing international regulations for the transport of 
radioactive materials and with regard to liability for nuclear damage, etc. 



GC(VII)/0Eo79 
page 17 


65. However, there were also a number of shortcomings in the Agency's work 
which seriously impeded effective international co-operation,, The Agency's 
main aim should he to provide technical assistance to the developing countries 
in the field of atomic energy,, 
"66, But the United Spates and its 'Vestern allies were trying to convince 
everybody that the Agency's main function was one of control, so that the 
Agency should he turned into an instrument for control on an international 
scale. The United States was thus compelling the Agency to enforce, 
prematurely, a system of control and safeguards. Such was the purpose underlying 
the agenda item entitled "Extension of the Agency's safeguards system". 
The Government of Albania demanded that Agency assistance should he used 
solely for peaceful, and not military, purposes,, However, he was disturbed 
by the fact that the United States and some other ".'estern countries were using 
that as a pretext to force on the Agency a system of control and safeguards 
which would adversely affect the prestige and sovereignty of the lessdeveloped 
countries,, He was also perturbed by the fact that the organizational 
apparatus was steadily and to an increasing extent being converted into an 
instrument required by the United States in order to establish control over 
sources of nuclear raw materials in other countries, purloin their scientific 
discoveries and secure a monopoly of atomic secrets, thereby making it more 
difficult for other countries to benefit from the results of important 
scientific discoveries,, 

67o In his opinion?,the Agency's most urgent task was the provision of 
technical assistance, in the widest possible sense of the term, namely 
assistance which included the dissemination of information'regarding technical 
achievements, the supply of equipment and instruments and the training of 
specialists,, The possibilities for economic and social development offered 
by atomic energy must not become the monopoly or prerogative of the more 
advanced countries. If the Agency concerned itself first- and foremost with 
questions of control and safeguards, it would be complying with the wishes of 
the State Department of the United, States„ 


68„ 'The technical assistance provided by the Agency in 1962 did not fully meet 
the current needs and wishes of Member States, Although there was an increase 
in expenditure on fellowships compared with 1961? the number of fellowships 



O0(VII)/OR.79 


page ? 8 


awarded was almost exactly the same as in i960. Furthermore, a.large 


proportion of the f.unds for technical assistance .was going to States belonging 
.to aggressive military blocs, to 'the detriment of the less-developed countries, 


69. The Agency had still not become a truly international body owing to the 
reluctance of the -United States and its allies to accept, certain socialist 
countries as Members0 
70. The People's Republic of China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
the German Democratic Eepublic and various other countries had not yet been 
accepted as Members of the Agency, The fact that the People's Republic of 
China still did not occupy its rightful place in the Agency, which continued 
to be held by the representative o"f the usurper Chiang Kai-shek, showed that 
the United States was concerned not so much with putting the Agency's ideals 
into practice as with achieving its own selfish, political ends, 
71. His delegation thought an end should be put to that situation and that 
the People's Republic of China should be given its rightful place in the Agency, 
72. The present session of the General Conference was opening, under extremely 
complicated international conditions. The unbridled armaments race continued 
with greater intensity. Despite the constant protests by the whole of. 
humanity, the carrying out of nuclear explosions had not been discontinued. 
The greatest danger, however, consisted in the stockpiling and perfecting of 
nuclear weapons. The Western States, under the leadership of the United 
States, blinded by hatred of Communism, were making every effort to prevent the 
acceptance of proposals for disarmament. Their military budgets were reaching 
astronomical proportions and the United States was creating new hot-beds of 
tension in various countries of the world, A striking example of that was the 
aggressive action of.the United States against the peace-loving nations of 
Cuba, South Viet-lfam, Laos, etc, 
73. He then, referred to the signing of the Moscow treaty banning nuclear tests 
in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water. The Albanian delegation 
considered that the banning of tests went only a short way towards meeting the 
hopes of the nations of the world, since it contributed little to the preservation 
of life and health. In reality that treaty was a fraud since it did not 
prohibit the stockpiling of arms of immense destructive power. Underground 
nuclear arms tests would continue as before. 

GC(VII)/OR.79 
page 19 


74° The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania thought that the most 
effective way of ensuring lasting peace was complete and general disarmament. 
The Agency had an important part to play in that connection, 


75. In conclusion, he expressed confidence that the Agency's problems could 
and would be solved and that the Agency would follow the path of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
76. Mr. RAHMOIOT (Algeria) expressed Algeria's desire to co-operate in 
the Agency's future work. The Government of the Republic of Algeria regretted 
that the many tasks of the new administration had prevented it from making a 
close study of its obligations towards the Agency with a view to applying for 
membership. However, in accordance with the wishes of the President of the 
Republic, Algeria was prepared to undertake its international responsibilities. 
The Agency was one of the organizations which best reflected the scientific 
values of the modern age, and Algeria would give it full support and encouragement, 
as it seriously wished to embark on the process of development. 
77. I"t had already made a good start. The University of Algiers provided 
training in nuclear physics, and courses in nuclear chemistry would start 
shortly. Independently of the University, the Scientific Research Authority 
was particularly concerned with the growth of the Fuelear Research Institute. 
That Institute, which possessed three accelerators of 700 keV, 2 MeV and 
3 IfeY respectively, had already acquired some experience in the study of 
elementary particles. The new 8-MeV tandem installation would permit advances 
in the study of reaction energies. Courses in theoretical and nuclear physics 
were being conducted by professors and by research workers engaged on their 
doctorate studies,, Equipment of the "Nuclear Research Applications" section, 
which would deal with medicine, agriculture and hydrology, had started in 1963. 
78, Algeria congratulated the Agency on its considerable efforts to help the 
developing countries and hoped that numerous regional centres would be set up 
under Agency auspices for the benefit of the countries in question. 


The meeting rose at 5° 15 P.ni. 



Internationa! Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VII)/0E.80 
9 January 1964 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 
ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THIS EIGHTIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 30 September 1963, at 3.15. p.m. 


Presidenta: Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 


CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda* 
Paragraphs 
21 Voluntary contributions to the General Fundfor 1964 
1 
112223 
Opening date of the eighth regular session 
Annual reports on the Agency's activities 
Appointment of the internal Auditor 
2-5 
69 
10 - 12 
24 Elections to the Agency's Staff PensionCommittee 
13 - 16 
2017181914 Scale 
The Agency's relations with intergovernmentalorganizations 
The Agency's accounts for 1962 
The financing of the Agency's activities 
Extension of the Agency's safeguards system 
of Members' contributions for 1964 
17 - 20 
21 - 22 
23 - 24 
25 - 27 
28 - 30 
13 The Agency's programme and budget for 1964 31 - 37 

* GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VII)/INF/66/REV.2. 


63-7995 



GC(yil)/0E.80 
page 2 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1964 ' 


1. The PRESULT announced that at the meeting that morning of the 
Committee for Pledges of Voluntary.Contributions to the General Fund,•contributions 
for 1964 to a total value equivalent to $1 046 638 had been pledged. 
That figure did not include the value of some special contributions which had 
also been pledged. 
OPENING DATE OF THE EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION 


2. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had considered 
item 11 - Opening date of the eighth regular session - and had requested him to 
present the following report to the Conference. 
3. The Committee thought that if the usual time-table was to be followed 
the eighth regular session should start on Tuesday, 22 September 1964- It 
believed, however, that there might be some advantage in advancing the date 
so that the session could begin rather sooner after the close of the Third 
United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, 
which was planned to end on 9 September. However, as the final arrangements 
for that Conference would not be made by the United Nations until later in 
1963, the Committee considered that it would be premature for the General 
Conference definitely to relate the opening of its next session to the timing 
of the Third International Conference. 
4. The Committee had accordingly requested him to recommend on its behalf 
that Tuesday, 22 September 1964 be provisionally set as che opening date of 
the eighth regular session, but that the Director General be authorized, after 
consulting the Board of Governors, to advance that date somewhat to bring it 
closer to the end of the Third International Conference if such a change should, 
in due course, appear to be in the general interest. The Committee wished to 
make it clear that its recommendation was subject to the understanding that 
the Director General would give the Governments of all Member States several 
months' notice of any such change of date. 
5• The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted. 



GC(VII)/OR.80 
page 3 


ANNUAL REPORTS -ON THE AGENCY'S ACTIVITIES (GC(VII)/233, 234) 


6. .. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the Board's recommendations concerning 
the Agency's annual reports to the General Assembly of the United Nations for 
1962-63 (.GC(7Il)/233) .and to the Economic and Social. Council of the United 
Nations for 1963-64 "(GC(VII)/234). He invited the Conference to consider, 
first, the draft resolution appearing in the first recommendation. 
7. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VII)/233 was adopted. 
8. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider the draft resolution 
appearing in the second recommendation. 
9 • The draft resolution contained in document GC.(VII)/234 was adopted. 


APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 


10. . The PRESIDENT said that since October i960 the Agency's annual 
accounts had been audited by the Auditor General of 'the Federal Republic of 
Germany. His present appointment as the Agency's External Auditor would end 
when he had finished his audit of the accounts for 1963. However, the 
preparatory work for the audit of the 1964 accounts must begin before the 
General Conference met next year and it was therefore necessary for the 
Conference at the present session to appoint ah External Auditor to audit 
the accounts for 1964 and subsequent years. 
11. In order to ensure continuity, it was the practice In most' United Nations 
organizations to change their External Auditors only when there were special 
reasons'for doing so. The Government'of the Federal Republic of Germany had 
indicated that it was. prepared to continue to make the; services of its Auditor 
General available to the Agency, and he therefore proposed that the Auditor 
General of the Federal Republic of Germany be re-appointed to audit the 
Agency's accounts for the years 1964 to 1966 inclusive. 
12. The President's proposal was accepted. 

GC(VII)/OR.80 
page 4 


ELECTIONS TO TH"S AG2NCYrS STAFF PMSION COBOIETTSE (GC(VII)/25l) 


13. The PRESIDENT said that in his proposal (GC(VII)/25l) the Director 
General explained that it had been difficult in the past to obtain a quorum of 
the Agency's Staff Pension Committee, and accordingly proposed that its com-' 
position should be increased from six members and three alternates to six 
members and six alternates. 
14. The Director General1s" proposal was adopted. ' 
1'5. The PRESIDENT said that consequent upon the adoption'of the Director 


General's proposal the Conference was required to elect two members and two 
alternates to the Committee. Of the..persons. .-.elected to the Committee in the 
past, one member and one alternate could continue to serve. At its present 
session the Conference would therefore have to elect one member and one 
alternate. Mr. Bruce of Canada and Mr. Safouat of the United Arab Republic 
had been proposed for election as member and alternate respectively. 


16. Mr. Bruce (Canada) was elected as member and Mr. Safouat (United Arab 
Republic) was elected as alternate member of the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (GC(7Il)/245, 
Annex, 252, 253) 


17. Mr. LANG (Austria), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on the representation of intergovernmental 
organizations at the eighth regular session (GC(l/ll)/252). 
18. The draft resolution contained in- document GC(¥l~l)/252, paragraph 3,' 
was adopted. 
19* Mr. LANG (Austria), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 


Committee, presented the Committee's report on the proposed agreement for 


co-operation with the Commission for Technical.Co-operation in Africa 


(GC(VII)/253). 


2 0. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VII)/253; paragraph 39 
was adopted. 

GC(VII)/OR.SO 
page 5 


THE AGENCY'S_ ACCOUNTS FOR 1962 (GC(VII)/231, 256) 


21. Mr. LANG (Austria), Rapporteur of the Administrative and- Legal 
Committee, presented the.Committee1s report on the Agency's accounts for 
1962 (GC(VII)/256). 
2 2. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VII)/256, paragraph 3> 
was adopted. 
THE FINANCING OF THE AGENCY'S ACTIVITIES (GC(VII)/236, 257) 


23- Mr. LANG (Austria), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on the financing of the Agency's 
activities (GC(VII)/257). It would he noted that if the General Conference 
adopted the draft resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph 3 of 
its report,, no action on the Board's recommendation to amend Article XIV.B.l 
of the Statute would be taken and the Board would be requested to continue 
studying the question of financing the Agency's activities and to submit any 
appropriate proposals to the Conference at its eighth regular session. 


24- The draft resolution contained in document GC(VII)/257? paragraph 3? 
was adopted. 


EXTENSION OF THE AGENCY'S SAFEGUARDS SYSTEM (GC(VII)/235, 253) 


25- Mr. LANG (Austria), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on the extension of the Agency's 
safeguards system (GC(TIl)/258). 


2 6. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(VII)/258, paragraph 3. 
27. There were 57 votes in favour and 4 against, with 6 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1964 (GC(VII)/254) 


28. Mr. de ARAOZ (Mexico), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's report on the scale of Members' 
contributions for 1964. 

GC(VII)/0H.80 
page 6 


29. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(VII)/254? paragraph 2. 
30. There were 57 vote's in favour and 8 against, with A abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S PB0GRAMM3 MI) BUDGET FOE-1964 (GC(VII)/230, 255) 


31. Mr. de ABAOZ (Mexico), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's first report on the Agency's 
programme and'budget-for 1964 .(GG(¥Il)/255 ). 
32.' The PRESIDENT, suggesting that the draft resolutions contained-in 
Annexes I to III of the report be taken seriatim, invited the Conference to 
vote on the draft resolution contained in Annex Is Regular Budget 
Appropriations for 1964. Under Rule 69(a) of the Rules of Procedure, 
decisions on financial .questions required a two-thirds majority. 


33. There were 54 votes in favour and 9 against, with 1 abstention. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 
34. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution contained in 
Annex II? Operational Budget Allocations for 1964. 
35• The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


36. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft resolution.-contained in 
Annex Ills Use of the Working Capital Fund in 1964. 
^7- The drcft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


The_ meeting rose at 4.5 P..ro. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(VII)/OR.8l 

10 January 1964 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference ENGLISH 

Seventh regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 1 October 1963, at 10.55 a.m. 
Presidents Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda * 
13 The Agency's programme and budget 1 -3 
for 1964 (continued) 


4 -8 

15 Long-term planning 


9 - 11 

16 Power development 


(a) Co-ordination 
(b) Nuclear power 
21 Voluntary contributions to the General 12 -' 14 
Fund for 1964 (continued) 


12 Election of Members to the Board of 15 - 40 
Governors 


* GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2. 


63-7999 



•GC(VII)/OR.8l 
page 2 
THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME AND BUDGET FOR 1964 (GC(VII)/26l) (oontinuedH 

1. Mr. de ARAOZ (Mexico), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, introduced the Committee's second report on item 13 of..-the 
agendas The' Agency's Programme and Budget for 19&4 (GC(VTl)/26l). Annexed to 
the report were two draft resolutions which the Committee recommended for 
adoption. 
2. The draft resolution in Annex I to document 0C(VII)/26l (Co-ordination of 
Atomic Energy Activities) was adopted, 
5. The draft resolution in Annex II to document GC(VTl)/26l (Jo-ordination of 
Abstracting Services in Nuclear Sciences) was adopted. 
LONG-TERM PLANNING (GC(VII)/262) 


4. Mr. de ARAOZ (Mexico), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, introduced the Committee's" report on item 15 of the agendas 
Long-term planning (GC(?Il)/262). Annexed to the report were four draft resolutions 
which the Oommittee recommended for adoption, 
5. The draft resolution in Annex I to document GC(VII)/262 (The Long-term 
Programme for the Agency's Activities) was adopted. 
6. The draft resolution in Annex II to document GC(.¥Il)/262 (Programme of 
Technical Assistance to the Developing Countries) was adopted. 
7. The draft resolution in Annex III to document GC(VII)/262 (Role of the 
Agency in Promoting the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy during the Development 
Decade) was adopted. 
8. The draft resolution in Annex IV to document C-C(VII)/262 (introduction of 
Biennial Programming) was adopted. 
POTOR DEVELOPMENT 


(a) Co-ordination (GC(VII)/259) 
(b) Nuclear power (GC(VII)/259) 
9. Mr. de ARAOZ (Mexico), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee,• introduced the Committee's report on item 16 of the agenda; 
1/ GC(VII)/OR.80, paras. 31 to 37. 


GC(VII)/OR.8l 
page 3 


Power development (GJ(VII)/259). Annexed to the report were two draft 


resolutions which the Committee recommended for adoption. 


10o The draft resolution in Annex I to document GC(VII)/259 (Co-operation with 
the United Nations in Matters of Energy and Power) was adopted. 


11. The draft resolution in Annex II to document G^(VII)/259 (Civil Liability 
for Nuclear Damage) was adopted. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TC T93 CENTRAL :WD FOR 1964 (GC(VII)/260, 260/Corr.2) 
(continued) 2/ 


12. -Mr-. -T0RKI (Tunisia), Rapporteur of the Committee for Pledges of 
Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund, informed the General Conference 
that the contributions pledged by 34 Governments had risen to a total of 
$1 047 8385 to that must be added the $57 600 just announced on behalf of the 
Canadian Government, ?/hich brought the total pledged by 35 Governments to 
Si 163 038, when the matching contribution by the United States was taken into 
account. Some Governments would announce their contributions later, while 
others had intimated their intention of making contributions in kind or special 
contributions towards the cost of a specific activity of the Agency. 
13. On behalf of the Committee he recommended the General Conference to adopt 
the draft resolution appearing in its report (Gc(VII)/26o). 
14• 'The draft resolution following paragraph 5 of document GC(VII)/260 was 
adopted. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TC THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(VII)/248) 


15. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to take up agenda item 12s 
Elect-ion of- TIembers-to the Board-of Governors.. A report on the subject by the 
General Committee (GC(VII)/248) was before the Conference, notifying it that 
seven Members must be elected to the Board during the current session. The 
Committee went on to specify that elections were required in respect of the 
following five geographical areass Latin America, Africa and the Middle East, 
Eastern Europe, South Asia and the Far East. It drew the attention of the 
General Conference to the fact that the elections must be conducted with due 
regard to equitable representation on the Board as a whole of the Members in 
2/ GC(VII)/0H.80, para. 1. 



GC(VII)/OR.8l 
page 4 


the geographical areas specified in Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. A list 
of Members already designated by the Board or elected by the Ceneral Conference 
was to be found in paragraph 3 of the Committee's report. Rule 79 of the Rules 
o.f...Procedure provided that the elections should- be by .secret ballot and that 
there should be no nominations. . .... 


16. .' At the ..invitation of the President, a member of the Bulgarian delegation 
and a member of the Netherlands delegation acted as tellers. 
17. • • The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of Latin America. 
18. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows; 
Ballot papers returned;: 71 
Invalid votes; 0 
Abstentions; 3 
Valid votes; 68 
Required majority; 35 
Votes obtained? 


Uruguay 65 
Bolivia 1 
Cuba 1 
El Salvador 1 


19•. Having obtained 'the required majority, Uruguay was elected a Member of 
the Board. 


20. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect two Members from the 
area of Africa and the Middle East. 
21. A vote was taken by secret ballot,' the result of which was as follows; 
Members to be elected; 2 
Ballot papers returned; 71 
Invalid votes; 0 
Abstentions; 4 
Valid votes; 138 
Required majority; 35 



GG(VII)/0E.8l 
page 5 


Votes obtained? 


Morocco 41 
Tunisia 33 
Ghana 29 
Congo (Leopoldville) 28 
Senegal 7 


22. Having obtained the required majority, Morocco was elected a Member of 
the Board. 
23. The PRESIDENT noted that only Morocco had obtained the required 
maj'ori'tyjT" "pursuant 'to 'Rule'8l-of-the Rules of•Procedure,.another vote would 
therefore have to be taken to elect a second Member for Africa and the. Middle 
East, 
24. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows; 
Ballot papers' returned'?'"' • 71 
Invalid votes? 0 
Abstentions? 1 
Valid votes? 70 
Required majority? 36 
Votes obtained? 


Congo (Leopoldville) 29 
Ghana 25 
Tunisia 15 
Senegal 1 


25. The PRESIDENT noted that no Membe: 
A second vote would therefore have to be taken under Rule 81 to decide between 
the two Members which had obtained the greatest number of votes, namely, Congo 
(Leopoldville) and Ghana. 

GC(VII)/OR.8l 
page 6 


^6. A vote was,taken by Secret ballot, the result of which was as follows? 


Ballot papers returned? 70 
Invalid votess 0 
Abstentions? 2 
Valid votes? 68 
Required majority? 35 
Votes obtained: 


Congo ^LeopoiSvilTe')" 36' 
Ghana 3? 


27. Having obtained the required majority., the Gongo (Leopoldville) was elected 
a Member of. .the Board. 
28., The PRESIDIUM1 invited the Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of Eastern Europe. 


29. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows" 
Ballot papers returned; 71 
Invalid votes% 5 
Abstentions5 5 
Valid votess 61 
Required majority; 31 
Votes obtaineda 


Romania 59 
Yugoslavia 2 


30. Having obtained the required majority? Romania was elected a Member of the 
Board. 
31. The PRESIDENT invited-the Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of 'South Asia. 
32. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows? 
Ballot papers returned? 70 
Invalid votess 6 
Abstentions? 4 
Valid votess 60 
Required majority; 31 
Votes obtained? 


Afghanistan 60 



GC(VII)/0E.81 
page 7 


33° Having obtained the required majority, Afghanistan was elected a Member 
of the Board. 


34. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of the Par Bast. 
35. A vote -was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as followss 
Ballot papers returned; 70 
Invalid votes; 0 
Abstentionss 10 
Valid votes; 60 
Required majority; 31 
Votes obtained; 


China 38 
Philippines 22 


36. Having obtained the required majority, China was elected a Member of the 
Board. 
37. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to fill the remaining vacant 
seat on the Board of Governors. 
38o A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows; 


Ballot papers returned; 71 
Invalid votes; 1 
Abstentions; 4 
Valid votes; 66 
Required majority; 34 
Votes obtained; 


Switzerland 47 
Yugoslavia 17 
Tunisia 1 
United Arab Republic 1 


39• Having obtained the required majority, Switzerland was elected a Member 
of the Board. 



GC(VII)/0H.8l 
page 8 


40. The,.;PJfflS.!Q)MS.Aefilal'efl.itJie- elections. cdmp.Iet.d'-and--pointed out-that, 
under Article VI.D of the Statute, the Members just elected to -'the--Boardtrould 
hold offiqe. from the rend of the seventh regular session of the General. 
Conference until the end of the ninth regular session* He congratulated-.those 
Members on their election and thanked the tellers. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. .: 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VII)/OR.82 
10 January 1964 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 
ENGLISH 

Seventh regular session 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 1 October 1963, at 3.40 p.m. 

President: Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 

3 
Credentials of delegates to the seventh 1-43 
regular session 

(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 
10 General debate and report of the Board of 44 - 63 
Governors for 1962-63 (continued) 
6 Applications for membership of the 64 -66 
Agency (continued) 
25 Closing of the session 61 - 88 

* GC(VII)/247. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VII)/INF/66/Rev.2. 


63-8003 



GC(VII)/OR.82 
page 2 


CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE SEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 


(b) Report of,.the Credentials Committee (GC( VTl)/264)1. 
The PRESIDENT announced that the Credentials Committee had mei.-.-that--'". 
morning to examine the credentials of delegates in accordance with Rule 28 
of the Rules of Procedure? its report., containing two draft resolutions, was 
to be found in document GC(VII)/264. Some additional credentials had meanwhile 
been received. The Chairman of the Committee had informed him that the 
report was self-explanatory. ' 
2. Mr. NESHO (Albania) said his delegation could not agree with the 
conclusions of the Credentials Committee's report-and could not approve it as 
a whole, since it had not come to the right decision on one of the most 
important questions confronting the Agency - the question of restoring its 
legal rights to the People's Republic of China, 
3. The Committee's proposal to recognize the credentials of the representatives 
'of- the puppet Chiang Kai-shek .clique, which represented no one and 
nothing, was not only a grave injustice to the great Chinese people but also 
a flagrant violation of the most elementary principles of international law. 
To close the Agency's doors to the Chinese people was to act overtly against 
the highest aims of the Agency. 
4. During-'its fourteen years of popular government, the great Chinese.people 
had made very considerable progress in the economic and cultural development 
of their country; the People's Republic of.China persistently pursued a 
peace-loving foreign policy and firmly supported the principle of peaceful 
co-existence between countries having different political and social systems, 
5> The People's Republic of China was the initiator of the five points of 
co-existence and observed them strictly. Its policy of peace had made an 
especially useful contribution towards peaceful settlements in Korea, Indo-China 
and Laos. It was in the forefront of the struggle for peace and the rights 
of national self-determination. It had diplomatic relations with 42 States 
and friendly and cultural links with more than 150. 


6. It supported all constructive proposals for strengthening peace,and. 
international security, and very important measures to that end' had been taken 
on its initiative. In furtherance of its policy of peace and good neighbourly 

GC(VII)/OR.82 
page 3 


relations,, it had concluded frontier agreements with Burma, Nepal, Pakistan 
and Afghanistan. It was tireless in its efforts to resolve the disputed 
Indian frontier questions by negotiations, 


7. Participation in the Agency of a country representing one quarter of the 
whole world's population and possessing enormous economic resources was bound 
to have a positive influence on the whole organization. 
8. The United States, which had imposed its will in the Agency, had barred 
the People's Republic of China from participating in the Agency's work, as it 
had likewise done in other international organizations. That was because the 
United States, which was occupying the island of Formosa, had to protect its 
loyal servants - the representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek clique. However, 
whatever the United States might want, the People's Republic of China existed 
as a great and peaceful State which was developing and growing stronger every 
day. 
9. The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania considered that the 
time had long since come to expel the Chiang Kai-shek representatives from 
the Agency and to admit the delegation of the People's Republic of China, for 
only that delegation had the legal right to represent the Chinese people in 
the Agency. 
10. • Mr. EMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
Soviet Union had not recognized and still did not recognize as legal the 
signature of Chiang Kai-shek's representatives on the Statute, and it 
therefore could not recognize the legality of their credentials to represent 
China at the General Conference. 
11. For those reasons, his country could not agree with the recommendation 
of the Credentials Committee so far as the credentials of the Chiang Kai-shek 
representatives were concerned. 
12. Nor did the Soviet delegation recognize the election of the Chiang 
Kai-shek representative to the Board. In that connection he wished to cite 
an example from the immortal work "Dead Souls" by the great Russian writer 
Gogol, about an astute man who built up a business by trading in the dead. 
An attempt was at present being made to build up a business by electing a 
corpse to the Board, but nothing would come of such a business because it was 

GC(VII)/OR,82 


page 4 


a hopeless cause. Everyone was well aware of the efforts of the Soviet 
delegation to create in the Agency a business-like atmosphere conducive -tohealthy 
co-operation. The election of the Chiang Kai-shek representative 
greatly complicated the Board's work, and responsibility for it lay with those 
who had caused a place which belonged to the living to be occupied by a corpse. 


1*$. Mr. LPJE (China) said it was a matter for regret that, despite the 


harmonious atmosphere in which the Conference had started,, voices were now 


being raised against the- representation of the. Republic of China. His 


delegation protested against the remarks made by the representative of a very 


insignificant country and regretted also that the representative of the 


Soviet Union had joined in. -The Government "of the Republic of China,, which 


he had the honour to represent, was the only legally constituted Government 


"of China. It spoke for the Chinese people in the United Nations, in the 
••specialized agencies, in the Agency and in all the intergovernmental organ


izations. It was participating in the Conference as a loyal Member of the 


Agency and had at the morning meeting been elected to serve on the Board of 


Governors-. The remarks in question were therefore out of order. 


14. The United' Nationss the specialized agencies and the Agency were international 
bodies that'were all working for peace. The Mao Tse-tun regime 
represented nothing but aggression. It was surprising to find voices in 
the- Conference still being raised in favour of an aggressor when condemnation 
would be the appropriate sentiment. The Agency's concern was with the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy. His delegation therefore urged that 
neither space nor time, be allowed for statements against his Government which 
could only bring discredit on the Agency. 
1-5. Mr. HEPF3R (United States of America) said that the United States 


delegation supported the report of the Credentials Committee and would vote 


in favour of the two draft resolutions. 


16. The Credentials Committee recommended that the General Conference should 
decide to take no action on any proposal to change the representation of China. 
The-relevant draft resolution was consistent with the resolutions on the same 
subject adopted at previous sessions and with the decisions consistently taken 
by the other United Nations organizations. 

GC(VII)/OR.82 
page 5 


17. The representation of China had been debated extensively at the two 
preceding sessions of the United Nations General Assembly which, on both 
occasions, had rejected proposals calling for a change in the representation 
of China, and had also approved the credentials of the representatives of the 
Government of the Republic of China as being in conformity with the requirements 
of its rules of procedure. 
18. The Agency and the specialized agencies had consistently recognized that 
political issues, including those bearing on the representation of Member 
States within the United Nations system, were primarily the concern of the 
United Nations5 in conformity with the General Assembly's recommendation 
mentioned in the preamble to the Credentials Committee's Draft Resolution I, 
they had repeatedly followed the policy adopted by the General Assembly in 
such matters. His Government took the view that organizations within the 
United Nations system should, as in the past, act in harmony with the relevant 
General Assembly decisions. 
19. Mr. OCHEANA (Romania) said his delegation noted with regret that 
once again the Credentials Committee was recommending that the General 
Conference agree to the participation in its work of persons purporting to 
represent the Chinese people but in reality representing nobody. 
20. It was hard to-understand how it came about that representatives of 
certain countries could maintain over the years that the People's Republic of 
China did not exist, at the same time depriving the Chinese people of representation 
by its rightful representatives. The fact that the principle of 
universality was not respected was gravely prejudicial to the Agency's work, 
effectiveness and prestige. 
21. While he would vote for the adoption of the Credentials Committee's report, 
his delegation contested the validity of the credentials, of the Chiang Kai-shek 
representative! for the same reasons, it was unable to recognize his right to 
sit on the Board. 
2 2. Mr. BORIS'ZIVICH'(Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that 
his delegation had repeatedly stated, and was stating again at the present 
session of the General Conference, that it could not approve the credentials 

'G"C(VII'.)/0E.82 
page 6 


of the Chiang Kai-shek representatives, since they did not represent the 
great Chinese people. His delegation' therefore was'opposed to Draft 
Resolution I, contained in the Credentials Committee's report. 


2.3. His delegation did not recognize the so-called "election" of the 
Chiang Kai-shek representative to the Board. It was the work of a particular 
group of countries, and showed little evidence of any sincere desire to 
co-operate. The presence of the Chiang Kai-shek representative on the 
Board would very considerably hinder its work. 
24. -,- • • Mr. KOVAR (Czechoslovakia) recalled that the Czechoslovak delegation 
had .stated at previous sessions of the General Conference, in conformity with 
its statements at the Conference on the Statute, that the Czechoslovak 
Government could not recognize any signature to the Statute on behalf of 
.China other than that of a representative of the Government of the People's 
Republic of China. For those reasons it could not recognize credentials 
issued by any other party. The only legal Government of China was the 
Government of the People's Republic of China, His delegation was unable-to 
accept the report of the Credentials' Committee as far as the section concerning 
the credentials of China was concerned. 


25. The Czechoslovak delegation also considered it necessary to state that 
the Chiang Kai-shek clique represented nobody and had no right to appear on 
behalf of China. All its international acts wore therefore invalid. For 
those reasons, his delegation was likewise unable to recognize as legal the 
results of the elections which had been carried out to fill the vacancy on 
the Board for the area of South-East Asia and the Pacific. The results of 
those elections would have a very unfavourable effect on the future work of 
the Board. 
2 6. Mr. MELLBR-CONRAD (Poland) said he would vote against Draft 
Resolution I. The Polish delegation had never recognized the credentials 
of the private individuals who represented the Chiang Kai-shek regime. The 
Polish Government "recognized-only the Government of the People's Republic of 
China as the rightful representative of the Chinese people in the Agency. 

GC(VII)/0H.82 
page 7 


27- It was to be regretted that the elections to the Board had further 


emphasized the illegal situation created within international organizations 


by the continued presence of representatives of that regime. In their 


absence,, the Conference might have been able to close in the same spirit of 


.calm and constructive co-operation which had marked its' proceedings throughout. 


2^' ' Mr. KAJJAKOV (Bulgaria), said that his delegation did not(recognize 


the credentials issued by the Chiang Kai-shek regime,, which did not in fact 


represent the great Chinese people5 it did not recognize the election of a 


Chiang Kai-shek representative to the Board either, and so could not approve 
_ the .Credentials CoiMfoittGG1 s i-eport as a whole. 


29- Mr. TETMYI (Hungary) said that his Government recognized the 


People's Republic of China as the only Government of China which could legally 


represent the great Chinese people. 


30. His delegation recognized the credentials of the representative of the 
Chiang Kai-shek clique neither in the Agency nor in the Board and he 
regretted very much that the election of the Chiang Kai-shek representative 
to the Board would greatly complicate the Agency's work. 
31. Mr. KAHG (Republic of Korea) said his delegation fully endorsed the 
report of the Credentials Committee and would vote for the two draft 
resolutions. 
32. On the other hand, it deeply regretted that the friendly atmosphere 
prevailing throughout the Conference should have been disrupted by the 
.delegations who .had raised the question of the representation of China "for 
purposes of political propaganda. As all were aware, the -Conference was 
concerned specifically with the peaceful uses of atomic energy and its time 
should not be wasted on political manoeuvring. 


33. The credentials of the delegation of the Republic of China were 
unquestionably valid, having been issued in accordance with Rule 27 of the 
Rules of Procedure by the only legitimate Government of China, and examined 
and approved by the Credentials Committee under Rule 28. 
34- It had been repeatedly pointed out that Red China was not: eligible for 


membership of the Agency. Its record in Korea, Tibet and India would be 


enough to rule that out, apart from the fact that it had been'branded by the 


United Nations as an aggressor in a resolution adopted in 1951*' 



GC{VII.)/OR.82 


page 8 


35. No' more of the time of the Conference should be wasted on the discussion • 
of'a- political question which was outside its competence and was a matter .to 
be dealt with by the United Nations:.General Assembly. 
3 6. Mr. VINOKUROV (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) stated that the 
Ukrainian delegation objected to the recommendation, contained in the report 
of 'the Credentials Committee, concerning recognition of the credentials of the 
so-called representatives ; of• China at the Conferences who were better Ixnown 
throughout the world as "Chiang Kai-shekists". 
3T. Owing to the support of certain v/estern countries, that entirely 
unrepresentative group was continuing to occupy a place in the Agency and 
thereby to" make It appear as though it represented the_people and Government 
of China. ' . . • 


38. The decision just adopted to elect Chiang Kai-shek representatives to the 
Board was not only 'regrettable but'would be directly, prejudicial to genuine 
co-operation within the Agency. • His delegation was unable to accept the 
Committee's recommendation and was vigorously opposed to recognition of ,the 
credentials of the Chiang Kai-shekists as valid. 
39. The PRESIDENT, noting that there were no further speakers, assumed 
that the majority was prepared to accept the report of the Credentials Committee 
and adopt the two draft resolutions it contained. 
40. 
Draft Resolutions I and II, submitted by the Credentials Committee 
(GC(VEl)/264), were adopted. 
41. Mr. MICHAELS (United Kingdom) said that United Kingdom approval of 
the report of the Credentials Committee meant that' the credentials in question 
were considered as being in order and did not necessarily imply recognition 
of the authorities who had issued the credentials.- For many years how, • 
whenever the Conference' or any organ of the United Nations.or of a specialized 
agency had- approved the report of its credentials committee, a similar state"
merit-with regard to the'credentials of China.had been made on behalf of the 
United Kingdom. The limited significance of the approval so given was so 


. well known that it appeared superfluous to explain it again and in future that 
would not be considered necessary. However, the absence of such a statement 
on any, occasion should not be taken to mean that any different significance 
should be attached to United Kingdom approval. 



GC(VII)/OR.82 
page 9 


42. Mr. USMANT (Pakistan) explained that, had the draft resolutions 
submitted by the Credentials Committee been put to the vote, his delegation 
would have voted for Draft Resolution II and against Draft Resolution I. The 
Pakistan Government considered that China should be represented in all United 
Nations organizations by the Government of the People's Republic of China and 
not by the Chinese Nationalist Government. 
43^ Mr. ORLANDO RODRIGUEZ (Cuba) said his delegation's position was 
exactly the same as that of Pakistan. Cuba did not recognize bhe right of 
the Chiang Kai-shek regime to represent the Chinese people5 the Government of 
the People's Republic of China was their only rightful representative. 


..........i/ 


GENSEAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1962-63 
(GC(vIl)/250/Rev.1s 265, 266)(continued)2/ 


44. 
The DIRECTOR GENERAL said he agreed with the delegates who had 
expressed the view during the general debate that science could contribute 
to international understanding and he thought the proceedings of the Conference 
had in fact shown that the desire to co-operate promoted mutual understanding. 
45. The deep satisfaction and optimistic hopes expressed by the vast majority 
of delegates regarding the Moscow tost ban treaty were significant, and the 
draft resolution (GC(VII)/250/Rev.1) submitted by the three original signatories 
of the treaty indicated the way in which those hopes could be realized. 
If that resolution was adopted he would bring it to the attention of the 
Secretary-General of' the United Nations, with whom he would have an opportunity 
to discuss the subject in New York, and he would establish closer contacts 
with the Secretary-General in that regard if the latter considered such a 
course desirable. If the resolution was adopted, the action requested would 
be taken and every assistance would be given to the Secretary-General and 
Member States in accordance with Article III.B.1 of the Statute. He would, 
of course, continue to co-ordinate Secretariat activities arising out of the 
economic and social consequences of disarmament with those of the United Nations. 
1/ The delegate of Burma has informed the President in writing that he sought 
to take the floor at this stage to state that his Government did not 
recognize the Republic of China. 


2/ GC(VII)/OR.79. 



GC(7II)/OR.82 
p age 10 


46. The wide support expressed for the Agency's safeguards system constituted 
one milestone in its history and would produce valuable results in the future. 
47• The long-term programme—'which had been approved would provide guidance 
for future activities. Delegates had made many interesting suggestions 


regarding those activities during the general debate o,nd he wished to comment 


031 some he considered particularly important. 


48. Lack of information seemed to have given rise to some misunderstandings 
which the Secretariat would try to prevent in future by providing detailed 
annual reports on 3uch activities as the regional oenxres, the Monaco 
Laboratory, the Seibersdorf Laboratory, and so on.49* 
The comments made would also help the Secretariat in planning technical 
assistance5 the procedures .adopted would be revised as far as possible in 
the light of those comments,c:and the establishment-of the new Department of 
Technical Assistance should make it easier:to carry out that task. The 
suggestion that experts should be enabled to follow up the work done after 
their assignments had ended, and that groups of experts should be sent to 
countries on request, would be taken into account. The present rules governing 
the relationship between the provision of equipment and experts would be 
examined, but in making any changes it would have to be borne in mind that 
technical assistance could not be transformed into a supply programme. 


50. The reduction in the funds allocated for fellowships was due to the 
decrease in the number of requests received; there had been similar reductions 
in other international organizations. On the other hand, over 50^ of the 
research contracts were now awarded to developing countries, _-..'. 
51. Constructive suggestions had been made regarding several other subjectss 
radioactive waste disposal, the establishment of a waste disposal area, food 
irradiation, the desalting of water, regional reprocessing plants, a demonstration 
power plant, silt problems, the production of stable isotopes and 
the industrial use of radioisotopes. 
3/ GC(VII)/227'. 



GC(VII)/0E.82 
page 11 


5 2. The study of power development (including cost studies),, advice on 
reactor siting and reactor evaluation constituted major tasks of the Agency. 
The integration of nuclear power plants into existing grids called for 
special attention. Work on power development would be co-ordinated as far 
as possible with similar work carried out by other international organizations. 
53. The development of power reactors by Member States, and the Agency's own 
work on the subject, had a direct bearing on the development of the safeguards 
system. The existing system would be reviewed in 1964. That task would not 
be easy, and ho could only appeal to Member States to help in securing the 
widespread international support and confidence required to ensure that the 
results of the review would be successfully applied. The Agency's regulatory 
work would continue, particularly the work on the transport of radioactive 
materials, a subject that would become increasingly topical. 
5 4* The regional approach would be emphasized whenever possible in providing 
advisers,, convening meetings, establishing centres and co-ordinating research, 


55. The .policy of having research done free of cost;, on subjects of particular 
interest to the Agency,, by Member States willing to do so would be continued 
and the practice, if possible, expanded. 
5 6. Unfortunately, many of the stimulating suggestions made during the 
general debate would require an expansion of the Agency's activities, and 
could not be carried out unless the necessary financial backing were forthcoming. 
The Agency had one of the smallest budgets among the organizations 
in the United Nations family and delegates would understand that if effect 
was given only to some of the suggestions made, that would be due to the 
limitations imposed by the financial situation. 
57. He thanked delegates for their appreciative comments on and their constructive 
criticism of the vrork done by the Secretariat. 
58. 
The PRESIDENT, referring to the draft resolution on action pursuant 
to Resolution 982 (XXXl/l) of the Economic and Social'Council of the United 
Nations, submitted by the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United 
States (GC(VII)/250/Rev.1), said that none of the sponsors considered it 
necessary .to introduce the resolution since it would probably be acceptable 
to all delegates. 

G-C(VII)/OR.82 
page 12 


59-.
.. Mr. NBSHCr (Albania) said that the delegation of the People's 


Republic .of Albania disagreed-with Sub-paragraphs (c), (d) and (0) of the 


preamble to the draft resolution, considering that the treaty providing for 


a-partial ban on nuclear weapons tests, which had been signed in Moscow on 


•5 .August 1963 between the Governments of the Soviet Union, the United States 
and the United Kingdom,.met people's expectations only to the very limited 
extent that it would be of some benefit to human health. Basically, however, 
the treaty was a piece of deception? it entailed serious•consequences for 
human life and did not in any way mean that nuclear weapons were no longer 
being stockpiled and perfected. On the contrary, stocks ox nuclear weapons 
were growing ever larger and at the same time underground tests v/ere being carried 
on in order to improve them. His delegation would therefore vote • 
against the resolution. 
60. . Mr. ORLANDO RODRIGUEZ (Cuba) said that, in the absence of instructions 
from his.Government-, his delegation would abstain from voting on the 
resolution. 
61. The PRESIDENT said that, since there were ,no other speakers, he • 
a,ssumed the Conference was prepared to adopt the resolution. 
62. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VII)/250/Rev. 1 was adopted. 
63. The PRESIDENT said that, before the Conference took up the next 
item, he wished to draw attention to two documents which had just been 
.distributed. 
The first (GC(vil)/265) contained a' statement by South Africa. 
In the English text of that document the second' sub-title should read "Note 
by the President"-and not "Note by the Director General" and the opening' 
sentence should read "On Monday, 30 September, the President received a 
communication ....". The second document (GC(VII)/266) contained a joint' 
declaration by a group of Member States in Africa and Asia regarding South 
Africa. Delegates who had intended to ask for further clarification of the 
subject-matter of those two documents had, in response to an appeal made by 
him, agreed to refrain from doing so and he would like to thank them for their 
co-operation. 



GC(VII)/0H.82 
page 13 


APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(VII)/263)(continued)^/ 


64° ' The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider the- application 
submitted -by Algeria for membership of the Agency, The Board had met that 
morning to consider the application and had submitted its recommendation in 
document GC(VII)/263. As would be seen from paragraph 2 of the recommendation, 
the Board had determined that, Algeria was able and willing to act in accordance 
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter., and had accordingly 
submitted a draft resolution for consideration by the General Conference 
recommending that the application be approved. 


65• The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 


66. The PRESIDENT said that Algeria would become a Member of the Agency 
as soon as its instrument of acceptance of the Statute had -been deposited with 
the United States -Government,, in accordance with Article XXI. C of the Statute. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


67. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan)5 speaking on behalf of the delegations from 
the countries of -the British Commonwealth., thanked the President for the 
impartial manner in which he had discharged his duties, the officers of the 
Conference for the part they had played in bringing the discussions to a 
speedy conclusion, and the Austrian Government for its hospitality. He, 
congratulated the Secretariat on having prepared the necessary documents so 
efficiently. 
68. Mr. SQUZA SANTOS (Brazil), speaking on behalf of the delegations 
from the Latin American countries, which had a long tradition of settlingdisputes 
by peaceful means, said that they particularly appreciated the 
efforts made, first by the Temporary President, Mr, Baffour, and then by the 
President, to create a conciliatory atmosphere, which had enabled the 
Conference to set aside political issues and tackle its real task successfully. 
A milestone had been passed in consolidating the Agency's work. Members 
should resolve to further it's constructive purposes and eschew political 
controversy. 


4/ GC(VII)/OR.78, paras. 1 to 3. 



GC(VII)/OR.82 
page 14 


69„ Mr. gAKICSlTOVTC (Yugosl avia) said that the session had not disappointed 
the hopes inspired by the new turn- taken in international relations, particularly 
between the major nuclear Powers, which should help the Agency to -carry 
on its.work successfully and assist developing countries to make the best'use 
of scientific and technological advances. He -thanked the President, the 
officers of the Conference, and the Secretariat. 


70. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) paid a tribute to the statesmanlike 
qualities shown by the President, who had been largely responsible for 
the success of the session and for ensuring that the discussions were mainly 
concerned with scientific and technical problems. That augured, well for the 
Agency's future. He also expressed his appreciation of the work done by the 
officers of the Conference and by the Secretariat. 
71.- Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) congratulated the President on 


guiding the Conference to a successful conclusion. Its proceedings had 


strengthened his faith in the possibilities of international understanding 


and "co-operation, to which the developing countries were anxious to make their 
full contribution, so that the Agency's aims might be attained for the-benefit 


of all peoples. He asked the Agency and the major nuclear Powers to extend 


their assistance to the developing countries in the form of both projects and 


equipment. 


72. ' Recognition was due for what had already been achieved by the Director 
General and his staff. 
7 3. Mr. CHOQKHAVAH (Thailand), speaking on behalf of"the delegations' 
from countries in South-East Asia, joined in the tributes paid to the 
President's skilful conduct of business and to the work of the Secretariat. 
74. Mr. MELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), associating 
himself with those who had congratulated the President, wished to express on 
behalf of the Soviet delegation his profound gratitude for the contribution 
the President had made to the work of the Conference, helping to reach decisions 
which had enabled delegates to surmount extremely difficult situations during 
the discussion of certain problems. He also expressed his gratitude to the 
Secretariat, which had been most versatile in providing assistance to delegates 
throughout the Conference. 

GC.(VII)/0E.82 
page 15 


75• . Mr. AZAD (Iran), on behalf of the delegations from countries in the 
Middle East? thanked the President for the manner in which he had promoted 
harmony and understanding, and the Director General for the work achieved by 
the Secretariat during the past year. 


7 6. Mr. DADZIE (Ghana), speaking on behalf of the delegations from 
African Countries, expressed their gratitude to the Fresident for his 
impartiality, to the officers of the Conference and the Secretariat for their 
excellent work, and to the Austrian Government for the facilities provided. 
He also thanked the Chairman of the Board of Governors. 
77- The President had, by his good offices, ensured that stress was laid on 


the technical business of the Conference, but he (Mr. Dadzie) nevertheless 
felt bound to point out that no State pursuing policies inimical to millions 


of people should be represented at the Conference, or in any other inter-' 
national gathering. Apartheid had caused untold suffering, and for too long 


men of goodwill had appealed in vain to the Government of South Africa to 


abandon its ignoble and inhuman practices. They could no longer stand aside 


and watch such brutalities being perpetrated, and the delegations from the 


African and Asian countries had accordingly registered their indignation and 


5/ 
protest in a declaration^ on the incompatibility of the policies of apartheid 
with membership of the Agency, and had appealed to all Member States to do 
their utmost to secure, in the shortest possible time, a review of South 
Africa's apartheid policy in the context of the Agency's work. 


78. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan), intervening on a point of order, said that 
the Conference had reached item 25 of its agenda and statements of the kind 
just made should be ruled out of order. 
79. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the delegate of Ghana had begun by 
making a speech of thanks and had incidentally referred- to the joint declaration 
circulated by a group of States. 
80. Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) said that, if the matter referred 
to by the delegate of Ghana were taken up, his delegation would be forced to 
withdraw from the meeting. 
5_/ GC(VII)/266. 



GG(VII)/OR;82 
page 16 


81. Mr. SOLS (South' Africa) regretted, that the courtesies customary'at 
the closure of the General Conference had been marred by reference to matters 
that had been raised earlier in the discussion. He had asked for the floor 
to associate himself with the tributes paid to the President for his constructive 
leadership during an extremely difficult session. The business of the 
.Conference had been conducted with exemplary efficiency and speed and, for the 
first time since the Agency's inception, both major Power groups.had left 
aside political differences and concentrated on administrative, scientific 
and technical problems. As a result, agreement had been reached on action 
which he hoped would lay the foundations of wider co-operation in the future°, 
the President had done much to inspire the conciliatory spirit which had made 
that possible." 

82. The lesson to be learned by all men of goodwill from the course taken by 
the Conference had some relevance to the subject brought up by the delegate 
of Ghana. . But he would not reply to that delegate, since to do so would be 
at variance .with the South African delegation's approach to the work of the 
Agency, to .which it had contributed much and hoped to contribute more in the 
future. Representatives of South Africa were always ready to discuss 
political issues in the appropriate place and he hoped that, in future, the 
technical character of the Agency would be fully respected.. 
83. Mr. GUDBNUS (Austria) associated himself with the tributes paid to 
the President and thanked delegates for the^compliments they had paid to the 
Austrian Government. 
84. The PRESIDENT said that the .JAoscow test ban treaty had been a first 
step towards general and complete disarmament - a process which would increase 
the Agency's responsibilities. He hoped that as more nuclear materials 
became.available the Agency would be used as a channel to distribute them for 
peaceful purposes. The Board's annual report—' and the long-term programme 
showed that the Governors and the Director General were aware- that the Agincy's 
responsibilities might expand and that 'they were alive to the prospects opened 
up by the possibility of nuclear power soon becoming competitive with conventional 
power. 
6/ GC(VII)/228. 



GC(Vn)/OR.82 
page 17 


85. He was confident that the Agency would meet the challenge of the United 
Nations Development Decade and play its part fully and effectively. 
86. Much had been achieved at the Conference, and achieved quickly, thanks 
to the unremitting support of delegations, He thanked them particularly for 
the moderation they had shown during the discussions in refraining, as far as 
possible, from entering into problems outside the purview of a highly technical 
organization. He also thanked the officers of the Conference and the 
Secretariat for their work, and the Austrian Government and the civic 
authorities of Vienna for the facilities they had provided. 
87. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute's silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


8 8. The PRESIDENT then declared the seventh regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 3-55 p.m. 



