International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VIII)/OR.8 5 

15 January 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference 
ENGLISH 

Eighth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 14 September 1964, at 2.40 p.m. 


Temporary Presidents Mr. PERERA (Ceylon) 
Presidents Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda 


1 . Opening of the session 1-3 
2 Election of the President 4-14 
3(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 15 - 17 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 18-21 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 22 - 25 
6 Applications for membership of the Agency 26 - 28 
7 Statement by the Director General 29 - 47 
- 
Statement by the Representative of the 48-53 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 
* GC(VIII)/268, 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VIII)/INF/75/Rev.2. 


64-6678 



GC(VIII)/0E.85 
page 2 


OPENING OF -THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared open the eighth regular session of 
the General Conference. • 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
Conference to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed the delegates of Memher States, the 
observers from other States, and the representatives of the United Nations, 
the specialized agencies arid other intergovernmental and non-governmental 
organizations- He thanked the President of the Austrian Parliament, the 
Minister for Foreign Affairs1 the Governor of Lower Austria and senior Austrian 
officials for attending the meeting. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


4. Mr. PRADO (Brazil) proposed Mr. Eschauzier (Netherlands) for the 
office of President of the Conference. Mr. Eschauzier had had a long career 
as a diplomat and had represented his country at many international conferences 
and on the Board of Governors. 
5. Mr. HAYMERLE (Austria) supported the nomination of Mr. Eschauzier. 
6. Mr. Eschauzier (Netherlands) was elected, by acclamation., President of 
the General Conference for its eighth regu'lnr session. 
7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT appealed to all delegates to acoord to the 
President the same support as the General Conference had accorded to him as 
President for the seventh regular session. 
Mr. Eschauzier (Netherlands) took the Chair. 


8. The PRESIDENT thanked'delegates for the honour they had done to his 
country in electing him President of the General Conference for its eighth 
regular session. He paid tribute to the retiring President, who had directed 
the discussions of the seventh session with such authority. 
9. Through long association with the work of the Agency he was fully aware of 
the responsibilities incumbent upon him and would endeavour to discharge them 
in the spirit of his predecessors. 

GC(VIII)/OR.83 
page 3 


10. The eighth session followed closely on the Third International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy—' and might he considered a sequel to 
that conference. Much of what might appropriately he said on the latter 
subject had already been said most eloquently by Mr. Emelyanov, President of 
the Third Geneva Conference. He would therefore confine himself to those 
facts which in his view should form the basis of the deliberations at the 
present session. 
11. It was fitting to recall the launching ten years ago by President Eisenhower 
of the."Atoms for Peace" programme, which had resulted in the establishment of 
the Agency. With the conclusion of the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty-^, which 
had now been in force for twelve months, the hopes of man that his miraculous 
inventiveness would be harnessed to the service of human life had begun to 
assume concrete form. Those hopes had been confirmed by the decision of the 
major nuclear Powers to limit the production of fissionable materials for 
military purposes. It was true that nuclear disarmament had not yet been 
achieved, but progress towards that end had been most encouraging. The Agency 
had a major role to play in seeing that fissionable materials were used solely 
for peaceful purposes. Meanwhile, it was steadily pursuing the objectives laid 
down in its Statute. Nuclear power was becoming more and more competitive and 
the use of fissionable products in research, science and industry was expanding 
rapidly. While such favourable developments gave grounds for satisfaction, one 
should not forget that they brought with them an increase in the dangers 
inherent in radioactivity. It was therefore logical that the regulatory 
activities of the Agency in regard to health and safety, the transport of 
radioactive materials and the disposal of radioactive waste should assume 
growing importance. 
12. The provisional agenda of the present session was not very full, principally 
because questions related to the use of atomic energy had just been discussed 
at the Third Geneva Conference. Moreover, a number of other questions were 
currently being examined by the Board of Governors. Nevertheless, the 
reduction in the time devoted to the deliberations of the General Conference 
was a sign of the Agency's growing efficiency, which was also reflected in the 
fact that, for the first time, the Board of Governors had drawn up a biennial 
programme for the Agency's activities. 
l/ Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 
2/ Concluded at Moscow on 5 August 1963. 



GC(VIII)/OR.85 


page 4 


15. The financial situation was less satisfactory and would continue to be so 
until an adequate method had been devised for financing the Agency's activities. 
14. Although the creation of the Agency had involved an important political 
decision., the Agency itself was a purely scientific and technical .organization, 
and its importance for the well-being of nations, and particularly .of .the 
developing countries, had been brought out by the tangible results which it had 
achieved during the seven years of its existence. Whereas, at the beginning of 
the first regular session, the Agency had numbered only 53 Member States, it 
now had 88 Members, to which should be added the four States whose applications 
for membership were pending. That was a clear indication of the interest which 
the newly independent countries took in the Agency's work. States were 
becoming increasingly aware of the fact that the Agency was the principal 
technical instrument of the United Nations in the sphere of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. But it should not be forgotten that it was by devoting 
itself to the practical tasks which lay ahead that the Agency would be most 
useful to Member States. 
: APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 


15. The PRESIDENT proposed that a Credentials Committee should be 
appointed in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure and that it 
should consist of the following nine Members? El Salvador, Hungary, Iran, 
Iraq, Japan, New Zealand, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, United States 
of America and Uruguay. 
16.• The proposal was adopted.unanimously. 


17. The PRESIDENT pointed out that under Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, 
the Conference was /required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the election of 
the Chairmen of the two Main Committees. .He therefore proposed suspending the 
plenary meeting for a short time to enable the two committees to elect their 
chairmen.-,. ... 
The meeting was suspended at 5.5 p.m. and, resumed at $.15 p.m. 


ELECTION OF THE-VICE-PRESIDENTS .... 


18. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the eight posts of Vice-
President of the Conference. 

GC(VIII)/OR#83 
page 5 


19. Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) proposed the delegates of the following States? 
Argentina, Canada, India,( Indonesia, Japan, Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
20. Mr. FERRO (Hungary) seconded the nominations,, 
21. The delegates nominated were declared elected to the eight Vice—Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF TEE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


22. The PRESIDENT pointed out that under Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure 
the General Conference was required to elect four additional members to the 
General Committee, He invited nominations. 
25. Mr. GRANT (Ghana) nominated the delegates of the following Statess 
France, Nigeria, United States of America and Yugoslavia*, 
24. Mr. OFTEDAL (Norway) seconded the nominations. 
25. The delegates of the States nominated were declared elected to the General 
Committee, which was thus duly appointed in compliance with the provisions of 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(VIII)/267, 282) 


26. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider the recommendations 
of the Board of Governors concerning the applications for membership of the 
Agency made by Cyprus and Kuwait (GC(VIII)/267) and by Kenya and Madagascar 
(GC(VIII)/282). The Board had submitted a draft resolution in respect of each 
of those applications but he thought the Conference might take the four draft 
resolutions together. 
27• The four draft resolutions were adopted unanimously. 


28, The PRESIDENT stated that, in accordance with Article XXI.C of the 
Statute, Cyprus, Kenya, Kuwait and Madagascar would become Members of the 
Agency as soon as their respective instruments of acceptance of the Statute 
had been deposited with the United States Government. 


STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


29. The DIRECTOR GENERAL welcomed the five new Members of the Agency; 
Algeria, Cameroun, Gabon, the Ivory Coast and Nigeria. The admission of Cyprus, 
Kenya, Kuwait and Madagascar would bring the membership of the Agency up to 92. 

GC(VHI)/OR.83 
page 6 


30. Many of the delegates had attended the Third Geneva Conference and he 
would not therefore report on the work of that meeting in detail. He did, 
however? wish to quote a few figures on the utilization of nuclear power.- In 
1955? when the First Geneva Conference had been held, the installed nuclear 
capacity in the world had been only 5 MW| in 1958 it had risen "to 1-85 MW, 
and. it was now about 5000 MW5 in 1970 it was expected that the installed 
nuclear capacity would have grown to some 25 000 MW„ That increase clearly 
demonstrated that certain types of reactors had passed well beyond the 
,laboratory stage and had become another product of the manufacturing industries. 
31i The Agency had undertaken a pre-investment study on nuclear power on the 
island of Luzon, in the Philippines, under the auspices of the United Nations 
Special Fund; a report would he submitted in July 1965- At_th,e request of 
the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, the Agency had also organized an • 
evaluation of the bids which had been made for the 70 MW Eooppur reactor which 
was to be built in Pakistan. In such cases, the Agency could be of service to 
Member States by identifying.cost items and thus enabling' a real comparison 
to be made between different bids. 

32. The Agency was also engaged in assessing the safety of different reactor 
sites and different types of reactors. • It had been suggested that such services 
might be more conveniently provided by an international evaluation group set up 
under Agency auspices% that possibility would be explored in the near future. 
33• The most significant development in the application of nuclear power during 
the-past year had been the study of the use of dual-purpose reactors, designed 
to produce electricity and to desalt water. The Agency had organized a number 
of panel meetings on the subject; and, after the recent statements by 
President Johnson and Mr. Khrushchev, it seemed reasonable to look forward to 
fruitful co-operation in a field that offered enormous benefits, primarily for 
countries with vast arid areas but perhaps also for the Indus'trialized countries, 
which were becoming increasingly aware of the importance of careful utilization 
of their valuable natural resources of water, 


34. The increasing number of reactors lent particular importance to the 
Agency's safeguards system, which had been extended during the past year to 
cover reactors of over 100 MW(th); the United States had placed the Yankee 
reactor, with a capacity of some 175 Mff(e), under the safeguards system, and a 
first inspection of that reactor had recently taken place. 

GC(VIII)/OR.83 
page 7 


35. The revision of Agency safeguards at present being carried out should have 
the effect, of facilitating a wider application of the system. It was encouraging 
to note that out of 38 countries possessing reactors, seventeen had accepted 
international safeguards. Moreover, the responsibility for safeguards provided 
under a number of bilateral agreements had been transferred to the Agency, 
36. He wished to draw particular attention to a number of international and 
regional projects in which the Agency was taking part. The organization of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste had been going on apace 
and a seminar on plasma physics would begin on 5 October9 with a much higher 
enrolment than had been expected. The Centre's Scientific Council, in which the 
TJnited Fations Tdcuational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the European 
Organization for Wuclear Research (C^RTT) and the Joint Institute for Nuclear 
Research, Dubna, were participating, had met on two occasions and had given 
valuable advice on the programme of the Centre. The Middle Eastern "Regional 
Radioisotope Centre for the Arab countries in Cairo was continuing its valuable 
training and research activities and had made arrangements to organize a third 
general course in the use of radioisotopes in October,, The joint programme of 
research in reactor physics with the reactor ^ORA had been extended for 
another three years. After two years' work a research project in reactor 
physics had emerged, and Forway, Foland and Yugoslavia had agreed to co-ordinate 
their efforts with a view to solving specific problems of common interest. 
As a result, it was expected that the exchange of information would be 
considerably facilitated and speeded up. 
37- The Board had endorsed a request by Congo (Leopoldville) to establish a 
regional radioisotope centre for tropical Africa for training and research and 
had approved an agreement for a joint training and research programme for the 


countries of Asia and the Far Fast, involving the use of a neutron crystal 
spectrometer. A joint research project using a liquid nitrogen loop In Latin 
America was also under study. 


38. The Agency was endeavouring to stimulate regional co-operation, especially 
In the developing countries, and could give valuable assistance by promoting 
closer co-operation between established centres in advanced countries and newer 
centres in the developing countries in the form of "sister" laboratory arrangements. 
It was also intended to establish closer contact with national atomic 
energy commissions and to encourage them to hold regional meetings for the 

GC(VIII)/GR.83 
page 8 


discussion of common, problems. In February 1964 an agreement had been 
concluded between the Agency and the Commission for Technical Go-operation 
in Africa (CTCA). AS the functions of that Commission were due to he taken 
over by the. Organization of African Unity (OA'J), steps would he taken to- ensure 
good co-operation between the OAU and the Agency. 


39 - During the previous year, the Agency had had an expert in nuclear technology 
stationed at Bangkok as Regional Officer for Asia and the Par East. It 
would be helpful if delegates from the region would express opinions on the 
utility of that service, so that the Secretariat could assess the extent to 
which similar servioes should be established for other regions. 


•40o The action taken by the Agency with a view to furthering co-operation 
between international organizations had yielded good results. A Liaison 
Officer had been stationed by the Agency at the Resources and Transport 
Division of the United Nations in Hew York and Scientific Liaison Officers had 
been sent to the Pood and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health 
Organization (WHO), In addition, a joint Agency-PAO Division was due to be 
established shortly at Agency Headquarters. 
41. The Agency was to serve as Executing Agency for a project on the eradication 
of the Mediterranean fruit fly, submitted to the Special Fund hj the Central 
American Phytosanitary Organization, whose members were the Central American 
States and Mexico. The project would enable it to be seen whether the sterilemale 
technique was scientifically and economically feasible on a large scale. 
Similar research was being carried oat on the tsetse fly through Agency research 
contracts and could be expanded if sufficient funds were available. Agency 
studies on rice.and maize cultivation were'continuing and had already produced 
encouraging results. Irradiation techniques were being used in experimental 
studies of food preservation, especially for the disinfestation of grain5 in 
that connection the Agency had already undertaken studies in Argentina, Pakistan 
and Turkey. 
42.- He wished to make a special point of the extremely harmonious manner in 
which the United Nations departments and those of the Agency had co-operated in 
the organization of the Third Geneva Conference. That co-operation had 
contributed to a substantial reduction in the direct cost of the Conference $
1-million, as compared with the 13.5 million for the 1958 Conference. 



GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 9 


43. Efforts had been made to organize the' eighth session of the General 
Conference on a tighter schedule in order to comply with the wishes of many 
Member States that their delegates should he able to return home as soon as 
possible, as many of them had already been attending the Third Geneva 
Conference. 
44• The General Conference would note that the 1965 budget proposed only a 6fo 

increase in expenditure and that staff increases related mainly to the staff 
required for nuclear data compilation. Emphasis had been put on technical 
programmes and the need for more scientific and technical staff in 1965 would 
be met by further adjustments. The fact that the scientific staff had been 
able to carry out satisfactorily the extra work involved in the preparation 


of the Third Geneva Conference without undue interference with their normal 
duties suggested that there was still some unused capacity in the Secretariat, 
which he would endeavour to utilize to the full. Moreover, the establishment 
of the Department of Technical Assistance should result in savings in both 
staff and costs. 


45• The recruitment of staff on as wide as geographical basis as possible was 
one of the main structural requirements of an international organization, and 
contributed greatly to ensuring the impartiality that was so necessary in 
an international civil service. A certain rotation in posts was also beneficial, 
and it should therefore not be expected that a staff member of a given 
nationality would automatically be replaced by a candidate of the same 
nationality or that the replacement would be given an equivalent position or 
grading. 


46. If newer Member States were not in a position to make experienced 
scientists available to the Secretariat - as they had been invited to do - it 
might be possible for them to send young scientists and administrators, who 
would thus acquire valuable experience. 
47. The success of an organization depended ultimately on the confidence and 
support which it received from its Members. He would therefore welcome the 
comments and suggestions of delegations regarding the Agency's work, so as to 
ensure the best possible co-ordination of effort and thus the maximum benefit 
to all Member States. 

GC(VIII)/OEo83 
page 10 


STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


48, The PRESIDENT invited, Mr. Spinelli, Representative of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, to address the Conference. . 


49. Mr. SPINELLI (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) said that he took pleasure in conveying to the Conference, the best wishes 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the success of its • 
work. 
50. The Conference was opening under particularly favourable auspices, since 
the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, in 
which'the Agency had played such an active part, had just successfully 
concluded its work in. Geneva-. He wished to take the opportunity of paying 
tribute -to iflr. Eklund,'Director General of the Agency, who had been the main 
artisan-organizer of the Conference. Without trying to assess the results' 
obtained, he had pleasure in making specific mention of the atmosphere of 
co-operation which had prevailed throughout the proceedings and of the 
contribution that the Conference had made to the United Nations Development 
Decade. The.Geneva Conference had provided striking evidence of•the fact 
that while many theoretical problems still remained to be solved in the • 
realm of nuclear energy, the stage of industrial application, which would • 
open up the way to a better life for mankind, had now been reached. 
51. The -areas of co-operation between the United Nations and the Agency were 
bound to multiply, as was already apparent" in the 'co-operation which had been 
established in the important field of water desalination and in the implementation 
of various scientific and administrative projects.. , 
52. ..He congratulated the Agency on the progress it had made in various fields, 
particularly in regard to safeguards and the very promising start that had 
been made by the International Centre for Theoretical'Physics'at Trieste. 
55. He -asked the President and the Director General to convey his thanks to 
the Austrian Government for its generous hospitality. 
The meeting rose at 4.:55 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VIII)/OR.84 
14 January 1965 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

Eighth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETNG 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 15 September 1964, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of 1 -2 
items for initial discussion 


Declaration concerning the representation 


of South Africa 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 4 - 108 
Governors for 1963-64 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 4 -26 
France 27 -33 
Senegal 39 -54 
United Arab Republic 55 -70 
Tunisia 71 -93 
Afghanistan 94 -101 
Uruguay 102 -104 
Argentina 105 -108 


* GC(VIII)/285. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(vIII)/INF/75/Rev.2. 


64-6682 



GC(VIII)/OR„84 
page 2 


ADOPTION OF TKE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION ' . 
(GC(VIII)/268, 285) 


1. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference accept, the recommendations 
made by the General Committee in regard to the agenda and the allocation of 
items for initial discussion (GC(vni)/283). 
2. The recommendations of the General Committee were accepted, and the 
agenda was thereby approved. 
DECLARATION CONCERNING THE REPRESENTATION OF SOUTH AFRICA 


3. Mr. MALU (Congo (Leopoldville)), speaking on behalf of a group of 
delegations, made the following statements 
"The African States present at the eighth regular session of the General 
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency, namelys Algeria, 
Cameroun, Congo (Leopoldville), Gabon, Ghana, Nigeria, Senegal, Tunisia 
and the United Arab Republics 


1. 
Noting that the existing South African Government's policy of 
apartheid and racial discrimination inflicted and continues to 
inflict untold suffering on the African community5 
2. 
Noting with great anxiety the refusal of the aforesaid Government 
to respond to the appeals coming from all sections of international 
public opinion and, in particular? the Security Council and the 
General Assembly of the United Nations 5 
3. 
Noting that the Government of South Africa has been designated by 
' the Board of Governors to represent Africa and the Middle East on 
the Board, in spite of its policy which is directed against the 


•African community, a policy which led to its inability to serve the 
cause of its membership on behalf of the continent of Africa, and 
in spite of its inability to co-operate with the group of countries 
it is supposed to serve on the Boards 
Declare that s 


The South African Government in its present status does not express the 
opinion and wishes of the African Member States and cannot carry out the 
noble mission of the Agency in Africa and definitely cannot represent the 
continent of Africa on the Board of Governors of the Agency." 



GC(VIII)/OR.84 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1963-64 
(GC(VIII)/270, 270/Corr.l, 270/Md.l, 2 and 3, 280) 


4. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) said that, like many other 
representatives, he had been attending the Third International Conference on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, which had just been conducted with outstanding 
success in Geneva, under the efficient leadership of Professor Emelyanov. 
At the Conference he had taken part in productive discussions on nuclear 
developments with colleagues from all over the world. The Agency staff, the 
participants and the many others helping to make that Conference an outstanding 
scientific and technical contribution to nuclear progress were to be specially 
commended for their efforts. The spirit of international co-operation evident 
during the meetings had been especially welcome. In that connection, he would 
also mention that he had been present in Sweden for the first visit of the 
United States nuclear ship, the Savannah, and had also been to Brussels to 
confer with the leaders of the European nuclear industry. 
5. Some general impressions had emerged from those and other experiences and 
developments of the past year. Two generalizations were particularly pertinent 
in so far as the General Conference was concerneds the world had, twenty-five 
years after the discovery of nuclear fission, arrived on the threshold of the 
nuclear power age| and the Agency had come of age, as a result both of its real 
accomplishments and of the growth in urgency of its responsibilities deriving 
from the prospect of the early widespread use of nuclear power plants„ 
6. As the Geneva Conference had dramatically demonstrated, the time had come 
when nuclear power production was an economic possibility. To be specific, 
there was widespread agreement that large nuclear power plants with high load 
factors could compete with conventional sources of energy in many parts of the 
world. In the United States, it was estimated that the cost of power from 
large reactors of today was essentially the same as that predicted for the 
late 1960's only two years previously by the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission. 
7. Secondly, international tensions had diminished perceptibly. The 
conclusion of the Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, 
in Outer Space and Under Water had been an important factor in that regard. 
The result had been a growth of the favourable international climate that was 
conducive to widespreai exploitation of nuclear power in the world. 

GC(VHI)/OR.84 
page 4 


8. As a result of those two developments, an atmosphere of confidence 
pervaded the international nuclear community. At the present time, the 
prevailing optimism was rooted in the reality of experience, unlike the 
situation obtaining some ten years previously when the unlimited'hopes had 
been based on no more than guess-work. 
9. Lastly, the Agency had made striking progress in developing its experience 
in the critical matter of international safeguards. Acceptable, uniform 
international responsibility in the matter of those functions, which fell 
within the province of the Agency, was an important basis for the high hope 
that nuclear energy could eventually satisfy the power needs of the world10. 
Those events were encouraging. As the Agency began its eighth year, after 
the long struggle towards goals that had often seemed almost unattainable,'the 
vision and faith of its Member States were shown to be justified. Today, major 
functions of the Agency in the world-wide development of nuclear energy had in 
large measure the texture of reality, and his country's feelings as to the 
meaning of the Agency's role could best be expressed by recalling 
President. Johnson's message to the Geneva Conference 5 referring to past 
accomplishments and future prospects in nuclear power and desalination, the 
President had said that the United States looked to the Agency to play an 
ever larger role in peaceful efforts in those directions5 already it had set 
standards for the care and keeping of nuclear materials - an achievement that 
had raised United States hopes for the establishment of a workable system of 
world law in respect of nuclear energy. 
11. The telescoping of nuclear technology made the work of the Agency more 
important and more urgent than ever before. The new economics of large-scale 
nuclear power plants would not, it was true, have any sudden marked impact on 
its workload. It was to be expected, however, that further technological 
achievements would follow in the wake of those of the past year and there was 
no time to be lost in developing precedents.and procedures in world nuclear 
law, and in equipping nations with the technical competence to "take advantage , 
of those achievements. 
12. Commenting on the progress made by the Agency in the past year and on the 
work ahead, he singled out for commendation the advance that had been made in 
strengthening the safeguards system. At the present time, seventeen countries 

GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 5 


receiving materials and equipment from the United States had agreed, in 
principle, to accept the application of the Agency's safeguards to the assistance 
in question, which was being furnished under trilateral and other agreements 
making the necessary provision for such action., The arrangements covered 
several important research reactors as well as power reactors. 


13. The extension of the Agency's system to cover reactors of over 100 MW(th) 
had resulted in an agreement to place the United States Yankee power reactor 
under Agency safeguards, a step which was expected to make a substantial 
contribution to mutual understanding of the problems of control of nuclear 
materials„ The agreement also provided that the Agency should continue to have 
safeguards responsibility for a small power reactor and two research reactors 
in the United States. It was to be hoped that other Member States would take 
similar action, thus helping to enable the Agency to carry out its statutory 
responsibilities. 
14. Gratifying progress had been made to date on the general review of the 
Agency's safeguards system. The United States endorsed the preliminary 
assessment of the Working Group performing the review, to the effect that the 
basic principles of the present system were sound but that improvements in 
language and format were desirable. It also noted that the Working Group was 
giving attention to some aspects of safeguards not as yet incorporated, such 
as measures relating to fuel reprocessing. 
15• As the world—wide development .of the peaceful uses of atomic energy had to 
proceed with no resultant encouragement to military nuclear development, there 
were strong reasons for the Agency to play a central role in controls. The 
practical advantages of international safeguards over those applied under 
bilateral agreements included uniform applicability, no weakening of safeguards 
standards to give commercial advantage to suppliers, and a reduction in the 
number of inspection teams sent to countries'having several suppliers. He 
would also add that United States experience to date had shown that the system 
placed no onerous burdens on the participating States and in no way interfered 
with the efficient operation of the nuclear installations concerned. 

16. In the regulatory area the Agency was to be commended for the-emphasis- laid 
on the development of health and safety codes and practices and for the increase 

GC(VIII)/0H.84 
page 6 


in technical advice and short-term assistance to Member Statesj also for 
establishing a list of consultants that were available to advise Member States 
on health and safety measures and proposed shipments of irradiated fuel. 


17. The increasing use of radioactive materials had also added to the 
importance of the work in radioactive waste management. The United States 
continued to believe that primary emphasis should be placed on technical 
assistance to developing countries regarding urgent, practical problems of 
waste management, even at the cost of reducing the number of symposia and 
panel meetings. The Agency should promote more vigorously the establishment of 
international waste burial grounds, as well as the solution of associated 
problems. 
I80 One aspect of the new prospects for nuclear power in which there, was 
intense interest was worthy of special mention. A recent report of the United 
States Office of Science and Technology drew attention to the feasibility of 
very large combined nuclear power/desalting plants - which could be operational 
in the period 1970-75 ~ f.r converting salt water to fresh water for municipal 
and industrial uses at a cost comparing favourably with the price of fresh 
water from other sources, and also for producing electricity at a relatively 
moderate cost. The possible production of irrigation water at a reasonable 
price, as early as the 1980's, was also foreseen. President Johnson, in his 
message to the Geneva Conference, had offered United States co-operation to 
other countries in helping them .to overcome water shortages. That offer had 
been confirmed subsequently at the Agency's Panel on the use of Nuclear Energy 
in Saline Water Conversion. The United States was prepared? (l) to provide • 
the services of a nuclear desalination expert to the Agency5 • (2) to arrange' 
for Agency staff to visit United States facilities engaged on desalting 
problems1 and (3) to consider nominations by the Agency of qualified 
individuals from other Member' States, to be given research and training 
opportunities in United States facilities concerned with the nuclear and 
conventional aspects of desalting. 

19. The part taken by the Agency in two desalting projects was' encouraging? 
it had been the focal point for discussions between the United States and 
Mexico on a proposed study on the feasibility of installing a nuclear power/ 
desalting plant near the Gulf of California to meet water and power needs in 

.GC(VIII)/OR.84 
page 7 


the areaf and it was acting as an observer in a joint survey being conducted 
by the United States and Israel to define the scope and requirements of a 
nuclear desalting project in the latter country, A further fact of note was 


that recent United States discussions with scientists from the USSR had 
resulted in agreement on effective scientific co-operation in developing 
methods for desalting sea water and brackish water, including the use of 
nuclear power. 


20. It was through its programmes of research, training and technical 
assistance that the Agency could assist Member States to attain the technical 
competence necessary to take advantage of a maturing nuclear technology. In 
that connection, it was gratifying that work was in progress on biennial 
programming. As research and technical assistance were long-range activities, 
programming for a two-year period would bring significant improvements in the 
work. The modest increases in the 1965 budget for research contracts and for 
the Seibersdorf Laboratory were constructive. The priority being given to the 
award of contracts to research reactor centres and laboratories in developing 
countries, and the research and educational opportunities made available under 
Agency agreements at the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste, the NORA reactor in Norway, and the Marine biology project at Monaco, 
were greatly to be welcomed. The establishment of an experimental programme 
for Asia and the Far East at the Philippines Atomic Energy Research Centre, on 
the basis of the gift of a neutron crystal spectrometer by the Indian Government, 
was a model effort to stimulate research at regional level. 
21. The utilization of research reactors continued to be one of the Agency's 
most promising fields of activity. About forty-five per cent of the Member 
States now had research reactors in operation or under construction. The 
United States supported Agency plans for giving assistance in developing 
research programmes, particularly at newly established national centres, through 
such means as regional study group meetings. It would continue to provide 
experts for those undertakings and would maintain the "sister laboratory" 
arrangements with developing countries. 
22. As a means of stimulating research and development, the United States was 
pleased to renew for 1965? the sixth consecutive year, its offer to donate up 
to $50 000 worth of special nuclear material for use in Agency projects in 

GC(viIl)/ORo84 
page 8 


research and medical .therapy. It offered two kinds of assistance in the 
construction and operation of sub-critical assemblies? (l) provision to the 
Agency of up-to-date technical information, covering detailed design, fabrication 
and operating characteristics of an inexpensive sub-critical assembly 
developed by an American firm at its own expense^ and (2) the lease of 
fabricated natural uranium slugs for sub-critical assemblies. Enriched 
uranium in unfabricated form, to a value of up to $125 000, might also be 
leased under existing policies for similar use. 


23. The Agency's technical assistance activities had evolved on a sound basis, 
although not all needs could be met owing to the shortage of funds. Despite, 
that shortage, in the period 196I-63 it had been able to grant about 1400 
fellowships for study in the various branches of nuclear science and had sent • 
out about 450 experts and visiting professors to assist Member States in 
developing their programmes. The establishment of the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, of a regional isotope training centre and 
of several joint research and training programmes were also noteworthy efforts. 
The programmes benefited significantly through co-ordination with similar 
activities of the World Health Organization (WHO), the Pood and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations, and other 
agencies. Further benefit, particularly in applying the Agency's limited funds 
to the best advantage, would come from the "country programme" approach to 
technical assistance, and the United States urged the Secretariat to continue 
its steps towards full utilization of that type of programming. 
24• The greatest problem facing the Agency in respect of technical assistance 
was financial stability. At the seventh regular session of the General 
Conference, the United States delegate had strongly urged the adoption of a 
statutory amendment to place the entire budget on an assessed basis. Although 
that proposal had not been pressed because there was not enough wide 
understanding to achieve early ratification, the United States still regarded • 
that course as the best ultimate solution. In the meantime, it would urge all 
Members that had not already done so to contribute to the General Fund in an 
amount at least equivalent to their percentage of the regular programme. Gifts 
in kind for use in approved programmes would also be helpful. For its part, 



GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 9 


the United States would continue to make available, to the greatest possible 
extent? training opportunities in its institutions, expert services and 
certain items of equipment. 


25. A summary of accomplishments showed that the Agency was beginning its 
eighth year in the strongest position in its history. In the past three 
years, the total approved budget had risen from about $8.33 million to about 
$9.75 million. Research and technical assistance programmes had been meaningful 
3 improved new laboratory, training and joint research programmes had been 
established, and safeguards responsibilities had expanded. The General 
Conference and the Board of Governors had been increasingly concerned with 
technical and administrative problems and, what was most important, had 
virtually eschewed inappropriate and unproductive political discussions. 
26. For all the reasons he had mentioned, 1964 had been a year of fulfilment 
and maturing. The economic break-through in large nuclear reactors, the 
easing of world tensions, the new mood of confidence in the world nuclear 
community, the Agency's progress towards a world nuclear law and the ability 
it had demonstrated to give positive, help to countries developing nuclear 
programmes had all contributed to the opening of a bright new phase in the 
exploitation of nuclear energy for the benefit of man. But the struggles of 
the past had merely been a prelude to the larger challenges of the future. 
With continued devotion and good will, the Agency could hasten the time when 
nuclear energy would help man to conquer want and to build a secure and 
peaceful world. 
27. Mr. HIRSCH (France) welcomed the Agency's new Member States. France, 
which had long enjoyed close relations with the Malagasy Republic in nuclear 
matters, was particularly gratified at the admission of that State to the 
Agency. 
28. The Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
had shown that the -experience accumulated over several years in the organization 
of international conferences had enabled the Agency and its Director 
General to acquit themselves extremely well of the heavy task presented by 
the scientific organization of a highly exceptional meeting, and to do so 
with far more limited resources than in 1958. 

GC(VIII)/OR.84 
page 10 


29- In his view, the Third Geneva Conference had been notable for its 


technological, rather than its scientific? character and for the almost 


complete disappearance of political aspects. The large nuclear installations 
under construction or projected, whose capacities were of the order of 500 
MW(e), would certainly become competitive? irrespective of whether they used 
natural or enriched uranium. He thought that there should be no further 
large-scale conferences until some experience of operating those installations 
had been acquired by the countries constructing them. The next conference 


could therefore take place in about five years' time and should be organised 
by the Agency5 in fact? nuclear energy was becoming part of the development 


of modern technology and should no longer receive special treatment in the 


form of being under the aegis of the United Nations. 


30. The Agency's Programme and Budget for 1965 seemed reasonable. The French 
delegation approved the efforts of the Director General towards keeping the 
strength of the Secretariat at a constant level. The execution of the Agency's 
long-term programme was about to begin. That programme should be revised each 
year? and should be -progressively expanded taking into account new trends in 
national programmes and the development of atomic energy throughout the world. 
For example, the problem of water desalination was assuming ever-increasing 
importance^ it was right that the Agency should participate in general studies 
and multilateral projects? and that everyone should help those countries for 
which the problem was already acute. It was important? however? to guard against 
premature hopes? for the utilization of atomic energy in the treatment of sea 
water and brackish water would necessitate years of research and development 
before nuclear reactors could enter into competition with conventional sources 
of power. The Agency should therefore pay close attention to trends in methods 
of treating water and to the progress of research aimed at perfecting new 
methods of physical treatment of salt water. 
31* The regional meetings devoted to the use of research reactors had met 
with great success. The French delegation hoped that the Agency would continue 
its work of co-ordination in order to obtain the best possible return from 
those costly research tools. French technicians had participated in all those 
meetings, and France was always ready to open its research centres to the 
specialists responsible for operating national research reactors. The current 
year had seen the commissioning, at the Grenoble nuclear research centre, of 
the research reactor Siloe, which was at the present time the most powerful 
swimming-pool type reactor in the world. Another original research reactor, 



GC(VTII)/OR.84 
page 11 


Pegase, used for the full-scale study of fuel elements for gas-cooled power 
reactors, was proving very valuable in developing the nuclear power stations 
of Electricite de France,j the second of the stations at Chinon, EDF-2, had 
gone critical about a month previously. 

32. France had always believed - and nothing that had been said at Geneva 
contradicted that view - that nuclear power stations would first be developed 
in the industrialized countries, and that in most cases other countries would 
wait until two conditions had been fulfilled? a considerable increase in their 
consumption of power, and a decrease in the price of nuclear plants of low or 
average capacity. That was why the igency's technical assistance programme 
would continue? for a few years yet, to represent the core of its activities, 
which were broadly based on the use of radioisotopes. The French delegation 
particularly approved of the regional projects, such as those concerned with 
rice and maize, and France was prepared to contribute to them. On the other 
hand, it would prefer the number of small projects, whose practical use seemed 
relatively small, to be limited to a minimum. The same held true for certain 
research contracts whose subjects were too specialized or even too far removed 
from the field covered by the Agency. 
33. The French delegation wanted a reasonable development of the Agency's 
laboratories. In that connection he was happy to announce that France, in 
addition to its usual voluntary contribution, had decided to present the 
Agency's laboratory with a pulse height selector which, with its accessories, 
was worth 200 000 francs. France would continue to place experts at the 
disposal of the Agency, and to receive fellows at its research centres. In 
the course of the past year it had welcomed 30 of the Agency's fellows and 
14 French experts had taken part in technical assistance missions. 
34. Turning to a completely different subject, he said that the French 
delegation was closely following the revision of the Agency's safeguards 
system, and had noted with interest the growing number of bilateral agreements 
submitted to Agency control. It thought that control would assume-greater 
importance when it was applied to power reactors. However, he wished to stress 
once more the fact that, as long as safeguards were not universally applied, 
such control would mainly affect the developing countries; and would continue 

GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 12 


to present a grave political problem as long as the' largest Powers, and hence 
a large part of the world, were exempt from it. 


35- Although the Agency had not yet played the part of broker in nuclear 
materials and equipment that had been intended at its foundation, the development 
of its technical activities nonetheless seemed satisfactory. He attributed 
that success largely to the presence of a physicist of real ability at the head 


of the Secretariat^ that certainly justified the French delegation's decision 
in 196l to support the candidature of a technician from a country with a great 


scientific tradition. 


36. However, the French delegation recognized that the developing countries 
were not sufficiently represented in posts at the higher levels., that was why 
France had, for the time being, relinquished the Deputy Director General post, 
which had been occupied by a Frenchman since the establishment of the Agency. 
That had made it possible for the important field of technical assistance to be 
entrusted to an expert in the problems involved and for a representative of 
another part of the world to assume the office of Deputy Director General. 
37. The French delegation approved the shortening of the duration of the 
meetings of the Board of Governors and of the sessions of the General Conference, 
which was proof of the Secretariat's efficiency. It agreed that the considerable 
sum of money thus saved should be transferred to the technical assistance budget. 
The developing countries would thus be the first to benefit from the acceleration 
of the proceedings. 
38. In conclusion, he believed that, at the present stage of the development 
of atomic energy and of international collaboration, it was difficult to make 
the Agency follow a different path from that chosen for it by the Director 
General. However, he was certain that the Director General was fully aware, 
as were all the delegates, of the far wider field of action which the Agency 
might enter in a world in which nuclear disarmament had become a reality. 
39• Mr. DAGUERRE (Senegal) thanked the Director General for the support 
he had given the developing countries, and congratulated the new States which 
had just joined the Agency and welcomed them to it. 


40. The number of African Member States increased from year to year, a fact 
due not only to the part allotted in the Agency's programme to the improvement 
of social and economic conditions in the developing countries, but also to the 

GC(VIII)/OR.84 
page 13 


fact that those States were perfectly aware that political independence was 
inseperable from scientific knowledge and ability's they had realized that 
scientific and technical development constituted an essential complement to 
political independence and a powerful aid in the struggle with the three 
terrible scourges of Africa - poverty? ignorance and disease. They had also 
grasped the fact that national development programmes should be drawn up in 
such a manner as to place scientific and economic planning on an equal footing. 


41• 'The African countries had also realized that if they wished to keep abreast 
of scientific progress? which was one of the basic causes of the growing gap 
between them and the more advanced countries? they would have to join without 
further delay in the process of scientific discovery and would have to set 
about developing conditions conducive to the formulation of a scientific 
policy for Africa? starting y/ith the establishment of a reasonable balance 
between basic and applied science. Those had been the aims of the plans 
established in 1962 at Addis Ababa for education and training and at Tananarive 
for higher education? at Abidjan in 1963 for the teaching of science in primary 
and secondary schools and finally at Lagos in 1964 for scientific research and 
the training of scientific personnel. Those plans had shown the need for 
scientific and technical co-operation both regionally and for Afri whole. 
However? such co-operation could not be effective without assistance? not only 
from the international and non-governmental organizations? but also from the 
countries of other continents. 


42. The final requirement for such scientific and technical co-ordination was 
the creation of a political body to execute all resolutions or recommendations 
of national? regional or continental application? and that had been one of the 
aims of the Charter of the Organization of African Unity (CAU)? adopted in 
1963. The Charter was designed to reinforce the unity and solidarity of the 
African States? to co-ordinate and intensify their efforts to obtain better 
living conditions for the peoples of Africa and to promote international cooperation? 
in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter. 
43- '.Vithin OATJ? a scientific commission had been established to study effective 
means of co-operation in the fields of science and technology? it would replace 
the Commission for Technical Co-operation in Africa in January 1965. Its terms 
of reference covered the examination of all scientific and technical questions 
relating to the general development of Member States? promotion of basic and 
advanced training? establishment of a scientific policy for Africa? conducting? 



GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 14 


at the request of Member States, joint scientific and technical research 
programmes, integrating foreign aid in projects of mutual interest, establishing 
regional research and training institutes and collaborating in joint projects 
with scientific international organizations. The OAU Conference of Heads of 


State, held in Cairo on IT July 1964, had decided that the scientific policy 


of Member States should be aimed inter alia at increasing the use of radio


isotopes and drawing up a programme for developing the peaceful uses of atomic 


energy, 


44• The short summary he had given would demonstrate the degree to which the 
activities of the Agency and those of the Scientific, Technical and Research 
Commission of OAU were complementary5 the two organizations should therefore 
co-operate closely for the well-being of the African nations. 


45. The scientific policy of Senegal, based on the principles adopted by OAU, 
was determined by the desire of the Government to establish short- and long-term 
programmes of economic and social development- It was for that reason that 
the scientific programme was embodied in the four-year development plans, but 
the Government was looking to the future by developing the scientific infrastructure, 
both inside and outside university faculties. For example, 
increasing use was being made of radioisotopes in solving urgent problems 
connected with natural resources and medicine, and Dakar University, which 
already possessed a sub-critical assembly presented by the French Atomic Energy 
Commission, would soon be equipped with a research reactor. 
46. However, Government support for social and economic progress would not be 
effective unless the Agency became aware of Africa's special scientific problems. 
It had been noticed that many African countries .vere not represented at the 
Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy—', 
possibly owing to the fact' that only a few meetings had been devoted to problems 
of concern to them. As pointed out by the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations, the training of specialists had not even appeared on the agenda. 
Discussions had been devoted mainly to nuclear power and especially to highpower 
reactors, which did not at present interest most of the developing 
countries. 
l/ Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 



GC(¥III)/OR.84 
page 15 


47. It would be useful if the Agency would organize an international conference 
in Africa on the uses of atomic energy for the development of African States, 
so that its programme could he adapted to the needs of Africans. 
48. In the same connections he would warmly support any move to set up 
regional research centres. He shared the Agency's view that training and 
research were closely linked, and in his opinion the creation of regional 
centres was the most useful form of international co-operation- However, 
all regional centres should he of high standing and should fit into the 
scientific and technical framework;; they should also use the services of 
qualified local teachers and research workers. 
49. Scientific and technical knowledge could not be transferred from advanced 
countries to those in the process of development without being adapted to the 
latter's requirements, which varied from one region or ecological zone to 
another. As the economy of most developing countries v/as 80 per cent agricultural, 
the choice of sites for research centres was of major importance. It 
would be just as pointless, for example, to make a centre in humid tropical 
Africa responsible for agronomic research as to ask Sweden to carry out an 
investigation on olive trees, required by an agricultural district in the 
Mediterranean area. The Senegalese Government would therefore be unable to 
support any project for the creation of a regional centre in Africa which was 
not preceded by a thorough survey to determine, in the interest of all African 
peoples, the best location possible. 
50. As regards safeguards, the Senegalese delegation was opposed to any controls 
applying exclusively to the developing countries and thought it unnecessary to 
extend the existing system. 
51. Senegal was formally opposed to South Africa continuing to serve on the 
Board of Governors as one of the Members most advanced in the technology of 
atomic energy. 
52. During the Board's meeting on 10 June 1964, the Governor from South Africa 
had supported a project for the creation of a regional centre in Africa, whilst 
his Government turned a blind eye to the situation of the coloured peoples in 
his country, which he thus excluded from the African community, whose obligations 
had been defined by the OAU Charter. The South African Government refused to 
heed the repeated appeals addressed to it, especially by the Security Council 
and the General Assembly of the United Nations, but insisted on following a 

GC(VIII)/0B.84 
page 16 


policy incompatible with its political and moral obligations as a Member State 
of an international organization., thus endangering the peace and stability of 
the world and particularly that of the African continent. 


53. As it considered that all countries were in duty bound to support the 
accession of all African territories to independence, Senegal could not agree 
that Portugal be designated, under Article VI of the Statute, as a producer of 
uranium, when it produced none on its own soil. It therefore called for a 
revision of Article VI of the Statute and especially of sub-paragraphs A.l and 
A.2. He hoped that the Agency and the Board of Governors, recognizing the 
right of nations to self-government in accordance with the United Nations 
Charter, would take the necessary action. 
54. Senegal, which was a member not only of nearly all the international 
organizations, but also of inter-African organizations such as the African and 
Malagasy Union of Economic Co-operation and OAU, was perfectly aware that the 
problems involved in its economic and social development could not be solved 
without pooling all the limited resources and means possessed by the countries 
of the African community. That was why those countries stood to gain so much 
from international scientific and technical co-operation, and specifically that 
furnished through the International Atomic -bnergy Agency. 
55- Mr. HiiDAY^T (United Arab Republic), in welcoming the four new members 
of the Agency, expressed the conviction that they would make a positive contribution 
to'the Agency's activities. 


56. The United irab Republic had always believed that one of the Agency's most 
important tasks was to improve living standards in the developing countries. 
Conscious of the responsibilities and duties of the developing countries to keep 
pace with progress in the modern world, the United irab Republic was expanding 
the utilization of atomic energy for the benefit of its people and joining in • 
international efforts to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
57. The activities of the United Arab Republic's Atomic L'nergy Establishment 
included scientific programmes in various fields of nuclear physics, nuclear 
chemistry, nuclear engineering, reactor materials and metallurgy, the exploration 
and development of local ores, scientific instrumentation for research, production 
and application of radioisotopes and radiation protection and dosimetry. 
Attention was also being given to reactor development and to the introduction 
of reactor sciences at the universities. 

GC(VIII)/OR.84 
page IT 


58. At the invitation of the United Arah Republic's Atomic Energy Establishment 
an Agency panel had been held in Cairo the previous year to advise on the United 
Arab Republic's first nuclear power projectj the detailed technical investigations 
for the project ha,d been completed by a Siting Committee in May 1963Preliminary 
work on the site - on the Mediterranean coast 30 kilometres west of 
Alexandria - was already under way. The specifications of the nuclear power 
project had been subject to international adjudication, and it vreis hoped that 
the project would be in operation by mid-1969. 
59. The specifications called for a nuclear power station of 150 M/(e), .based 
on a power reactor of proven type? to be integrated with the 220 kV grid system. 
They also called for a fuel fabrication plant and for two experimental test 
loops. The specifications further included an invitation to tender for a 
20 000 m /day sea water desalination plant to be used in connection with a pilot 
agricultural project of 10 000 acres, the aim being to study the feasibility and 
economics of the use of desalinated water for agriculture under arid conditions. 
The United Arab Republic had submitted to the Agency a project for the use of 
desalinated water on a pilot farm, and considered that it could be properly 
taken up by the new Joint IAEA-FA0 Division. 
60. The United Arab Republic was co-operating in projects on the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy with the Soviet Union, Norway, Yugoslavia, Poland and India, 
and was exchanging experts and scientific data -vith other countries. 
61. One of many examples of fruitful co-operation between the Agency and the 
United Arab Republic was the help given by the Agency in converting the Cairo 
National Radioisotope Centre into a Regional Centre for the Arab countries, open 
also to African trainees and researchers. Since its establishment the Centre 
had already held three training courses, attended by 54 students from various 
African and Arab countries, and was just about to start a fourth. 
62. He welcomed the role played by the Agency in the Third International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy and hoped that the results 
of the conference would favourably affect the Agency's plans for the future. 
It might profitably embark on a survey of long-term world power requirements 
and resources and the role of nuclear power in that connection. He suggested 
the establishment of regional nuclear power demonstration projects under Agency 
auspices, as joint undertakings between one or more advanced countries and the 
developing countries of the regions concerned. In selecting projects, 

GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 18 


consideration should be given to the long-term requirements of the different 
areas. The idea of demonstration power reactors was not a new one, but he 
noted with regret that so far nothing had been done to put it into practice. 


63.. An example of the increasing importance of regional activities was the 
recent decision of the Arab League to establish a Joint Arab Council for Atomic 
Eeasearch for Peaceful Purposes under the League's auspices. Experience gained 
from the Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab countries, in 
Cairo; showed that it was necessary to provide trainees with equipment to enable 
them to introduce radioisotope techniques into their own countries and to 
contribute to regional research activities,, Also, the activities of the Regional 
Centre could and should be expanded to train personnel in other fields, such 
as protection and health and safety. 


64. On the -subject of regional activities he mentioned that the Organization 
of African Unity had established a Scientific, Technical and Research Commission 
whose main purpose was the development of science and technology in Africa. He 
hoped for close collaboration between that Commission and the Agency. Speaking 
of the. political situation in Africa in general, he stressed the importance of 
the declaration made earlier in the meeting by a group of African States, 
including the United Arab Republic, on the South African problem. 
65. His delegation considered that the subject of research contracts called. 
for a new approach. The Agency should prepare in collaboration with Member' 
States, particularly from the developing regions, a plan for Agency-supervised 
research that did not duplicate national research and laid stress on the 
solution of problems of interest to the developing countries, particularly 
regional problems. Technical assistance should be given to the developing 
countries to enable them to participate as much as possible in realizing that 
plan. He welcomed the emphasis ?/hich the Director General had laid on that 
point in his reference to the expansion of the tse-tse fly project and of insect 
x -,2/ 


pest control—7 . 


66. The United Arab Republic welcomed the steps taken by the Agency to create 
a special advisory service for the development of health and safety and waste 
management techniques, which it hoped would start functioning soon. 
2/ GC(VIII)/CR.83. para. 41. 



GC(VUI)/OR„84 
page 19 


67- The Agency could play an important role in facilitating and co-ordinating 
assistance in cases of nuclear accidents in Member States. Such assistance 
.should he rendered at international level5 on lines similar to those laid down 
in the Itfordic Mutual Emergency Assistance Agreement in Connection with Radiation 
Accidents—' , and with the help of other international organizations. 


68. His Government welcomed the decision of the Board of Governors to establish 
a Working Group to undertake a general review of the Agency's safeguards system. 
The United Arab Republic was one of those developing countries which held the 
view that the existing system represented a discriminatory control inimical to 
the development of atomic energy for peaceful uses in the developing countries. 
It was the policy of his Government to use atomic energy only for peaceful 
purposes. In accordance with that policy his Government had signed the Moscow 
Treaty Banning Nuclear ''/eapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under 
"/ater, and would welcome the complete banning of all nuclear tests, the destruction 
of existing nuclear weapons? and the utilization of the fissionable materials 
contained in weapons for peaceful and constructive purposes. 
6$* In his Government's opinion the reason why many countries had abstained 
from applying for the fissionable material made available in large quantities 
to the Agency was the existing safeguards system,, which had the effect of 
imposing restrictions on countries developing their atomic energy and in need 
of new sources of power. The Director General's reference to the fact that a 
simplification of the safeguards system would stimulate wider application of 
atomic energy— confirmed his Government's view of the hampering effect of the 
present system. Moreover, the attachment of safeguards to unprocessed source 
materials, equipment, non-nuclear materials, reactors and fuel fabrication 
plants was impracticable and unnecessary, par&icularly for the developing 
countries whioh lacked the know-how and resources to use nuclear energy for 
military purposes


70. He ann'ounced that the Government of the United Arab Republic, in addition 
to its contribution to the budget of the Cairo Regional Isotope Centre amounting 
to £E35 000, had decided to contribute a farther £5000 to the Agency's General 
Fund. 
3/ INFCIRC/49. 
4/ GC(VHI)/0E.83, para. 35



GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 20 


71. Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) said that his delegation categorically*condemned 
the criminal actions of the Governments of South Africa and Portugal, which were 
humiliating innocent peoples and destroying their happiness, and thus endangering 
peace. Under the terms of the Agency's Statute, South Africa represented 
Africa and the Middle iuast on the Board of Governors, while Portugal was a 
producer of nuclear soiirce materials. The Tunisian-delegation wished to stress 
that the present Government of South Africa in no way represented Africa and the 
Middle East and that that region did not wish to be represented by it, moreover, 
Portugal was not a producer of nuclear source materials. Accordingly, the 
Tunisian delegation asked that the Statute of the Agency be revised. 
72. Since the' seventh session of the General Conference the Agency had made 
great progress, the importance of which was manifest. It would take too long 
to review that progress, so he would confine himself to making a few comments 
and suggestions. 
73. In its present form, the safeguards system was a means of increasing the 
domination of the developing countries by the technically advanced countries. 
Consequently, Tunisia rejected it. On the other hand, a safeguards system 
applied to all Member States and to all nuclear equipment without distinction in 
other words, in the context of general and complete disarmament - would 
undoubtedly be more rational and more effective, and Tunisia would support it 
whole-heartedly and in all sincerity. 
74. The Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab Countries, set up in 1962 
under the auspices of the Agency, was functioning satisfactorily, but owing to 
lack of funds it had not been possible fully to implement the programme of 
activities it had recently adopted. The Tunisian delegation hoped that the 
Agency would be able to give the Centre more assistance in order that it might 
be completely successful and serve as an example. 
75. Reviewing the Tunisian Government's activities, he said that Tunisia was 
making a great effort to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy because 
that could make an effective contribution towards implementing the country's, 
economic and social development plan. 
76. For instance, buildings which had served as barracks for the Tunisian army 
were being converted' into research laboratories. The countries that were 
continually expanding their programmes for military uses of atomic energy shoulTl 
follow that wise example and reduce their military potential. 

GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 21 ' 


77. In Tunisia,, the use of radioisotopes in agriculture, industry and medicine 
was continuing to expand. Research on the extermination of the fruit fly had 
produced tangible results, although the Agency had not always been willing to 
provide assistance, in spite of the undoubted good will of the Tunisian 
Government. He asked the Agency to give greater consideration to those types 
of research^ which were vital to the Tunisian economy and to that of the whole 
Mediterranean basin. The object of research contracts should not be merely to 
utilize the laboratories and installations of Member States, but to help them 
undertake new projects of their own choice, not dictated by the Agency. 
78. After the adoption of the Resolution (GC(VII)/RES/152) submitted by the 
Socialist countries on technical assistance to the developing countries, 
Tunisia had made several applications to the Agency for one of the nuclear 
physics laboratories, so that it might further improve the training of its 
qualified staff. Unfortunately those applications had produced no result. 
79. The Board of Governors had just agreed that the six pnysics laboratories 
should be replaced by radiological centres. The Tunisian Government could not 
understand that decision, which it considered regrettable. The need to take 
more account of the problems of the developing countries should be impressed 
on the Agency. 
80. At the sixth session of the General Conference, Tunisia had brought to the 
Agency's attention, for the first time, the importance of the use of nuclear 
energy for desalting sea-water and brackish water*-/, and the Agency had set up 
a panel of experts to examine that problem at Tunisia's request. 
81. The Tunisian delegation had taken an active part in the first meeting, in 
March 196"3, an(i haci submitted the conclusive results of a technical and economic 
study of a reactor used for the simultaneous production of electricity and 
fresh water, thus making a useful contribution to the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. Moreover, desalination had been one of the main topics 
at the Third Geneva Conference, and the Director General should take the 
necessary steps to ensure that greater attention was devoted to it in the Agency's 
programme of activities. 
82. In accordance with the recommendations of the Agency's panel of experts, 
which had met in September 1963, Tunisia had, on 4 March 1964? invited 
preliminary tenders for the construction in the south of the country of a 
reactor producing 70 Mtf(e) and 20 000 m of fresh water a day. 
$J GC(vl)/OR.68, paras. 99 and 100. 


GC(VIII)/OR.84 
page 22 


83. By the end of July twelve tenders had been received and Tunisia had then 
asked the Agency to invite experts to assist the Tunisian technicians in 
examining them. The Agency had not responded favourable to two letters or to 
a telegram which had been sent to it. The Tunisian delegation deplored that 
attitude at an important stage in the development of the projects but Tunisia 
had called in foreign experts and the tenders had nevertheless been examined. 
The reactor was expected to go into operation at the end of 1970. The Tunisian 
Government vrould accept any form of assistance in carrying out the project, and 
negotiations were being conducted with various countries. 
84. On 30 June 1964, President Bourguiba had spoken of co-operation in the 
following terms. 
"Co-operation is a feature of our time which has no equivalent in the 


past in the organization of relations between communities and peoples. 


It is not simply a negative attitude, involving recognition of the 


existence of others and the respect of those concerned for each other's 


opinions, philosophies and religious beliefs? it is also a sincere 


desire to establish relations with one's partner, to communicate with 


him in order to understand him, to share his innermost thoughts, to 


help him and to grow closer to him." 


85. President Bourguiba had gone on to say that, understood in that way, cooperation 
could be a factor in bringing peoples together, the like of which had 
never been seen before. History had known a succession of civilizations, but 
each of them had been confined within a certain geographical area, so that 
mankind had been divided into t"/o parts: the civilized and the'barbarians. 
It now seemed possible that the area of twentieth-century civilization might 
cover the whole world. 
86. Whole peoples were sunk in ignorance and struggling against the horrors of 
hunger and disease. But small minorities within those peoples had achieved a 
level of development and maturity which enabled them to spread progress about 
them if they could obtain sufficient help and sincere support from the advanced 
nations. It was not simply a question of human duty, but of necessity, dictated 
both in the present and in the future by the recognized interests of all. 
$7. For its part, the Head of the Tunisian Government had added, Tunisia had 
shown a real desire to practise co-operation. 



GC(vill)/CR„84 
Page 23 


88. If co-operation allowed dominating positions achieved by coercion to be 
secretly maintained, or if it was designed to establish disguised' domination 
for the benefit of anyone, his country rejected it. But if it was not tarnished 
by ulterior motives, it would find no more sincere supporter or ardent defender 
than his country. Tunisia had proved that, in the past as in the present, and 
in times when there were few supporters of co-operation in the world. 
89. President Bourguiba had concluded by sayings 
"Tunisia is proud of the part it has played in the international 
sphere since gaining independence. It believes that it has 
contributed, within the limits of its means, to the promotion of 
fraternal and sincere co-operation between peoples with rival 
ideologies, different social systems, and extreme political 
positions." 


90. Co-operation in the project he had mentioned was all the more important 
because it concerned one of the widest of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
the technical and scientific results of which would lead to the solution of 
the water supply problem throughout the world, and particularly in the 
technically advanced countries. 
91. It was to be hoxaed that the countries concerned, and particularly the 
technically advanced countries, would appreciate the importance of co-operating 
in the execution of such a project. 
92. In conclusion, although the Agency's activities were, in general, progressing 
along the right lines, several problems remained to be solved. 
93. Tunisia was always prepared to contribute to their solution with the honesty, 
sincerity and devotion it had always shown. 
94- Mr. KAKAB (Afghanistan) said that Afghanistan had welcomed the holding 
of the Third Geneva Conference and had been proud to participate in it| meetings 
of that kind were essential to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
throughout the world. 


95. Afghanistan was engaged in developing the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy and had taken some initial steps in that direction. It greatly appreciated 
the essential help and assistance given in that %vork by the Agency. More 
assistance would be needed in the future as the country's plans developed. A 
nuclear physics laboratory had already been established In the Faculty of Science 

GC(VIII)/OR'.84 


page 24 


at Kabul University,'with equipment supplied by the Agency. His country was 
also grateful for the services of an Agency adviser on nuclear physics', with' 
whose help a course on nuclear physics had heen introduced which would serve 
as the basis for all future activities. His Government had already asked that 
the. expert's services be continued throughout'1965 under the Expanded Programme 
of Technical Assistance (KPTA) and was glad to know that the Agency was agreeable 
to supporting that request. 


96, Efforts were being made to set up research laboratories for radioisotope 
applications in medicine, agriculture, industry, and so on. Some work had 
already been done in regard to medical applications of radioisotopes, with the 
help of the Agency expert. Frogress was also being made on a project for the 


establishment of a research laboratory in medical applications and associated 


fields, as an extension of the present nuclear physics laboratory. 


97. 
In,that connection, Afghanistan had asked the Agency to provide a radiotherapy 
unit, together with an expert in hospital physics. That equipment, if 
furnished, would be of immense help to his country. The groundwork for its 
proper utilization had already been done. The request had most recently been 
renewed in the month of June and it was hoped that positive action would be 
forthcoming in the near future. 
98. A further request, under the Agency's regular programme of technical 
assistance for 1965? had been made for the supply of some equipment and the 
services of an expert for the establishment of a radiochemistry laboratory 
in the Faculty of Science. 
99" One of the most important steps towards developing atomic energy activities 


in his country had been the recent conclusion of a bilateral agreement with the 
USSR, under which Afghanistan would be provjded with a sub-critical assembly. 


The design and construction work were expected to be completed by the end of 
1965 and operation to start by the beginning of 1966. The services of more 


experts in various radioisotope applications would therefore be needed from 
1966 onwards. It was his Government's intention to submit a request to the 
Agency for that assistance, .which he hoped would be accorded a favourable 
reception. 


100. Afghanistan had taken part in several-conferences and symposia organized 
by the Agency in various-Countries and- expected to participate in many more in 
the future,.for one of which it would like to be the host country. 

GC(VIII)/OR.84 
page 25 


101. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that a full test-ban and nuclear 
disarmament treaty would soon be concluded., as earnestly desired by all nations, 
and that the -vast potential of atomic energy would in the future he devoted 
exclusively to peaceful purposes. 
102. Mr. FRANGELLA (Uruguay) said that Uruguay, a country.well known for 
its high level of organization and political stability, had always been a 
supporter of internationa.1 agreements, as testified by its participation in 
the Hague Conference, the League of Nations and the San Francisco Charter, and 
by the fact that it had been the second Latin American country to sign the 
Moscow Partial Test Ban Treaty. 
103. As far as the Agency was concerned, although Uruguay had accepted the 
underlying principles from the very beginning, it had requested admission 
only three years previously. He then proceeded to list the activities by 
which Uruguay had contributed to the development of nuclear energy between 
the seventh and eighth sessions of the Agency's General Conference.; 
(i) 
The First Conference of Eadiochemistry, held at Montevideo with the 
participation of 19 American countries, under the auspices of the 
Organization of American States| 
(ii) 
The "Atoms in Action" Exhibition, organized by the Atomic Energy 
Commissions of the United States of America and Uruguay, for purposes 
of teaching and publicity? 
(iii) 
Reconstruction and re-equipment of the Medical Faculty's biophysics 
laboratory, which had been burnt down| 
(iv) 
Prospecting for radioactive minerals, including the continued survey 
of the country using helicopters and highly sensitive detectors. In 
Uruguay there was an area where background activity was double the 
normal amount, and on the Atlantic coast there were exploitable 
thorium minerals3 
(v) 
The Chemistry Faculty had begun geochemical prospecting work? 
(vi) 
The Veterinary Science Faculty's Fisheries Research Institute was 
carrying out analysis of fish by radioactivation, which was of great 
importance in view of the fishery resources of the Rio de la Plata? 
(vii) 
The Engineering Faculty's Technology Institute was carrying out 
metallographic research ty radioactivation§ 

GC(VIII)/0E.84 
page 26 


(viii) 
Neutron radiation was being applied to research on solid state 
physics| 
(ix) 
Four laboratories were using radioisotopes, mainly for therapeutic 
2 
purposes; the MC , the Engineering Faculty's Physics Institute, 
the Ministry of Public Health's Radiological Institute and the 
Medical Faculty's Endocrinological Institute., 

(x) 
An 18 MeV betatron had gone into service, being the first of its 
type in the southern hemisphere. It was intended for the treatment 
of cancer, using accelerated electrons, and for physical and 
biological research. In addition Uruguay had four cobalt-60 bombs 
with sources of 1 and 2 kilocuries, 5 grams of radium, more than 
20 machines for fixed- and moving-field X-ray therapy and contact 
therapy and so on, and had offered the Agency two fellowships for 
therapeutic training using the betatron;; and 
(xi) 
A law had been enacted for the purchase of a research reactor, for 
the training of personnel and for ihe production of short-lived 
radioisotopes. 
104- Currency devaluations and the enormous cost of the necessary apparatus 
meant that the study and utilization of nuclear energy were ruinous items of 
expenditure for less rich countries and explained their backwardness in the 
various branches of nuclear science. For those reasons Uruguay accepted the 
Agency's generous assistance, being also convinced that the Agency was one 


of the roads that led to peaceful coexistence. 


105. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said that the Argentine delegation had 
been associated with the Agency's work since the very beginning, having 
participated in the Preparatory Commission itself. Although, during the 
years which had elapsed since then, the hopes which had attended the founding 
of the Agency had not been entirely fulfilled, nevertheless, that period had 
been far from sterile. Not only had a large group of countries, including 
Argentina, benefited from the Agency's work, but the latter had proved itself 
an organization indispensable for' the progress of mankind in the present 
nuclear era. The Agency was called upon to take full responsibility for all 
the functions envisaged by the Preparatory Commission and many others which 
could not have been foreseen. The Agency's work would continue to make-an 
ever-growing contribution to raising the standard of living of mankind. 

QC(VIII)/OR.84 


page 27 


106. The Third Geneva Conference had provided further evidence of the capacity 
of the atom to generate electricity and produce drinking water. Argentina was 
particularly interested in nuclear power generation and was at present studying 
the possibility of building a power reactor of some 350 MW(e) on the coast near 
Buenos Aires. Although the study was being performed with Argentine personnel 
and resources, the Agency's experience represented a valuable stimulus. 
107. His delegation approved the reorganization of the structure of the 
Secretariat, since in that way it would he able to operate more efficiently 
and expand its activities. 
108. In conclusion? he stated that Argentina would continue to lend its 
enthusiastic support to the Agency> and congratulated the Director General, 
Dr. Eklund, and his staff on the magnificent work they had carried out9 work 
which would have vital repercussions in the future. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



Internationa! Atomic Energy Agency GC(VIII)/OR.85 
8 January 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

General Conference 

Eighth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 15 September 1964, at 3.25 p.m. 


President: Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


10 General debate and report of the Board 1 — 101 
of Governors for 1963-1964 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
1 -8

Italy 
9 -20 


Yugoslavia 
21 -28 


Spain 
29 -38 


Israel 
Belgium 39 -56 
57 -69 


Philippines 
70 -77 


Poland 
78 -83 


Norway 
84 -89 

Switzerland 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 90 -99 
100 -101 


Kuwai t 


* GC(VIII)/285. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VIII)/INF/75/Rev 2. 


C A CCQ.C 


GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS POR THE YEAR 1963-64 
(GC(VIII)/270, 270/Corr.l, '270/Add.l, 2 and 3, 280)(continued) 


•1. Mir. SALVETTI (Italy) said that the year 1964 might he described as 
a highly important one in the history of atomic energy because, at both the 
regional and world levels,, major advances had been made towards new developments 
and further progress. The Third International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic, Energy had been the most noteworthy event and had shown the 
decisive role that atomic energy was called upon to play in the future. 
2. The forecasts made at the Second International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy in 1958 had been shown to be well-founded, and the 
intensive work of the ensuing years had surpassed the most optimistic expectations. 
Nuclear energy had become one of the essential elements of progress in 
science and technology and the Agency had come to occupy a leading position 
in the nuclear world. The opening of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste would provide it with a very efficient tool for carrying 
out the fundamental task of training experts, chiefly for service in the 
developing countries. 
3. Referring to the report of the Board of Governors for 1963-1964 
(GC(VIII)/270 and Corr.l and Add,!, 2 and 3)? he expressed his delegation's 
satisfaction at the Agency's sustained progress towards ever more specific 
and worthwhile goals in the work of its experts, scientists and administrative 
staff. 
4c The revision of the system of safeguards, of the regulations governing 
the transport of radioactive materials and of those governing health protection 
were indicative of the Agency's capacity for rapid adaptation to the new needs 
created by progress in science and technology. He hoped, however, that it 
would redouble its efforts to allocate more funds for technical assistance to 
the developing countries, and, in particular, that the request of the Congo 
for establishment of a regional radioisotope centre could be met in the near 
future o 


5. Italy's second five-year plan for nuclear energy called for a total 
appropriation of 160 000 million lire5 if approved it would come into effect 
on 1 January 1965. In the first phase of the plan, studies and analyses would 

GC(VIII)/OE.85 
page 3 


be made of operational experience with nuclear power plants such as the water 
reactors at Garigliano and Trino Vercellese and the gas-cooled reactor at 
Latina. The 175"-l£7(e) pressurized water reactor of Italy's third nuclear power 


station at Trino Vercellese had first attained criticality in June 1964* The 


second phase of the plan would begin with a medium-term programme lasting 
perhaps ten years and concerned with reactors derived from the first-generation 
plants, followed by a long-term programme in which the fullest use would be 
made of fertile materials in breeder reactors. 


6. Italy intended to make increasing technical and financial efforts in the 
nuclear sector^ since its future depended on the completion of its industrial 
evolution through scientific and technological progress. Italy's energy production 
pattern was characterized by a remarkable yearly growth of consumption 
(8$ in 1952-62), the progressive exhaustion of hydroelectric resources and 
the considerable burden on the balance of payments imposed by importing huge 
quantities of fuel for thermal plants. So far, no major deposits of uranium 
had been found on Italian territory, but even if Italy remained entirely 
dependent on foreign countries for its supplies, nuclear fuel costs would 
probably have a smaller incidence on its bal'ance*-of-payments position than the 
purchase of conventional fuels. Nuclear energy was therefore expected to 
occupy an increasingly important position in Italy's production of electricity, 
and it could reasonably be assumed that 2500-3000 IP(e) of nuclear power 
capacity would be installed during the next decade. 
7. 1,7hile implementing its own programmes, Italy would not fail to intensify 
and broaden its international relations, in particular with the various international 
agencies5 it would continue to give the fullest support to the work 
of the Agency. Twenty fellowships would again be sponsored in 1964 for 
scientists who wished to continue .their studies in Italy, and every effort 
would be made to help the Agency in its technical assistance programmes by 
finding the men and means required. Furthermore, Italy would be happy to 
place its experts and institutions at the disposal of the Agency in order to 
contribute to the success of surveys, the drafting of new standards and 
regulations, and any other activities within the Agency's field of work. 

OC(VIII)/OH.85 
page 4 


8, In conclusion lie expressed the hope that the eighth session of the General 
Conference would mark a further step towards' improved international relations 
with broader participation and renewed singleness 'of purpose, and that science, 
putting aside political and ideological differences, would make an' increasingly 


effective and decisive contribution to the welfare of mankind and the progress 


of civilization. 


9„ Mr. SiLOM-SUIOA (Yugoslavia) recalled that the seventh year of the 
Agency's activity had coincided with the improvement in the international 
situation following the conclusion of the Moscow Partial Test Ban -Treaty! that 
could hot he otinr than favourable to the evolution of the Agency!,s programme. 


10. The Moscow Treaty was the first major a tep towards disarmament and s.howed 
that even the most OO.T_I1GX problems could he solved by negotiation* Its 
immediate result had been to reduce humanity's fear cf radiation and radioactive 
fall-out, which had already reached a level dangerous to human healths 
now, one year later, radioactivity had considerably decreased and many 
radioactive elements had completely disintegrated11. 
During the current year, negotiations and efforts towards conciliation 
between "^ast and 'rest had continued. The Treaty had led to the conclusion of 
othe'r agreements and measures - such as the treaty forbidding the launching 
of satellites with nuclear warheads,, the declaration on the peaceful uses of 
outer space, the decisions of the United States, United Vingdom and Soviet 
Governments to cut dowa the production of fissionable material for military 
purposes, and the decisions of the TJnitea Stater., and Soviet Governments to 
reduce their military budgets -- which 7,-ouid gradually bring about the conditions 
necessary for the adoption of more effective disarmament measures. 
12. During the last few months, however; there had been attempts at interference 
in the internal affairs of countries in South East Asia, in Cyprus and 
the Congo, which had seriously endangered peace, but which had been severely 
condemned throughout the world and had been quickly brought to an end. 
15. In pursuing its active policy of peaceful coexistence, Yugoslavia would 
continue, as in the past, to work for the peaceful solution of all problem-^ 
for the elimination of causes cf world tension and. for respect for the equality 
of all nations. It supported all efforts that were being made in that direction 

GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 5 


and attached particular importance to agreements on disarmament measures. An 
understanding on that subject would favourably affect the development of international 
relations and co-operation? particularly within the United Nations and 
its specialized agencies. The Agency, therefore, should strive to make an even 
greater contribution to peace and the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, 
since peace was the very prerequisite of its existence and prosperity in peace 
the aim of its activities, 


14. The Yugoslav delegation noted with satisfaction that, in accordance with 
the decision taken by the General Conference at its seventh session—', the 
Agency had drawn up a, two-year programme, which was a more effective instrument 
for its purposes and would also enable Member States, when drawing up their 
plans, to make better use of the opportunities afforded thereu 
15. The expansion evident in the Agency's programmes, the two-year programme 
among them, was rather modest, and in some sectors there had even been reductions, 
owing to a rate of increase in funds which seemed somewhat inadequate in the 
light, say, of the way in which activities relating to the peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy were expanding in the advanced countries and in similar 
agencies. The expansion of the Agency's activities depended upon factors beyond 
its control, but it was clear that the funds available to it were not commensurate 
-with the importance of its work, and the Agency might well encourage its Members 
to provide financial and material resources for whose utilization Agency intervention 
would not be required., 
16. It remained none the less true that the gulf between the needs of Member 
States and the Agency's capabilities was still growing, and the fact that in 
1965 and 1966 the Agency would not even be able to meet JO^o of the raquests 
for technical assistance was bound to arouse anxiety. 
17. The Agency had indeed been able to provide valuable help to the developing 
countries, but that help could not be confined to research in physics, chemistry 
and biology, nor to the use of radioisotopes. It needed to be expanded in 
respect of the technological skills essential for economic and industrial 
development, so that nuclear energy could be used in new and much more widespread 
forms. 
1/ GC(VII)/RES/l54. 



ro(VH.[;/U.„^ 
page 6 


18., The Agency could only meet the ever-increasing number of requests which 
Y/ould be submitted if it had the support of those of its Members whose techni oal 


level was high, enough to enable them to make a valuable contribution. More 
attention should be paid to that aspect of the Agency's functions than to 
attempting an excessive intensification and diversification of its activities. 


19. The Agency should bear in mind that th^ ..umbo..' of countries producing 
nuclear power was steadily growing, even amongst the developing countries, 
and it should not allow itself to be outstripped by the course of events, 
20. The Agency had played an extremely valuable role in the past and the 
Yugoslav delegation hoped that it would be able, in the future, to realize 
the hopes placed by the peacsloving peoples of the world in the opportunities 
opened up by the use of atomic energy. 
2i* Mr. OTSRO KAVASCUSS (Spain) said that during the last few years, 
Spain, where fossi] fuels were generally expensive ard possibilities for 
hydroelectric development were limited, had stimulated the peaceful utilisation 
of atomic energy and the construction of large reservoirs and power stations, 


Thanks to nuclear power, which could now compete wixh thermal power in almost 
all parts of the country; it was possible to meet the rapid, growth of con


sumption, which was at present rising at a cumulative rate of 11. 5/^. 


22. The National Atomic Energy Board employed 1100 people, 270 of them hav.v.g 
higher degrees. Proven reserves of uranium were over 10 000 tons, but possible 
reserves were far greater. The first 150--JFr nuclear power station had alre-.dy 
been ordered and three stations of 300 M"? each would be installed before 1912, 
23. During the next few years a prototype pl^r.t would be submit led for Go r&Tr.~ 
ment approval. Priority consideration //as also being given to the problem of 
desalting sea water, with the ultimate aim of irrigating arid regions in tbo 
south and south-east, and v/ith the immediate purpose of developing tourist areas. 
24" Spain was collaborating //ith other countries \mder bilateral agreement.:,. 


Its laboratories were open to scientists from all over the world and to mary 


fellows from friendly countries.. 


25. Spain was participating in EUROCEEMIC, the joint European undertaking for 
developing the processing of irradiated, fuels, and was a member of the European 

GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 7 


Organization for "Nuclear Research (CERU). It hoped that the Agency would 
carry out its functions without excluding any country? and that the financial 
burdens would be equitably shared, 


26. It was desirable that the number of nuclear power stations should increase 
in the immediate future, hut many feared that such an increase might lead to 
the use of atomic energy for non-peaceful purposes and to a dangerous increase 
in the number of countries possessing atomic weapons. He hoped that the safeguards 
the Agency had to apply to its own projects under the terms of its Statute would 
be applied on an international scale. 
27. Spain was anxious that the Agency should quickly acquire experience in the 
administration of safeguards so as to be able to provide a substitute for the 
system of safeguards based on bilateral agreements, 
28. The safeguards system should be confined to those activities which might 
lead to utilization of atomic energy for non-peaceful purposes. On the other 
hand, if transactions involving natural uranium or the supply of equipment were 
subject to a system of safeguards, the price of nuclear power would in the long 
run rise. It vrould be much more practical to apply safeguards exclusively to 
transactions covering fissionable materials, such as enriched uranium or plutonium, 
and to their production. Safeguards were justified only in the final 
stages of the transformation of natural into enriched uranium or in the production 
of plutonium. All discrimination in the application of such safeguards as were 
necessary should be eliminated. The renunciation by all countries of the use of 
nuclear weapons would make possible the maximum development of atomic energy for 
the well-being of mankind and the most harmonious relations between States Members 
of the Agency. 
29. Mr. BERGMAIP" (Israel) said that the Israeli Government was grateful for 
the assistance and encouragement it had received from the Agency on the scientific 
and technical level. The Advanced Inter-regional Training Course on the Cellular 
and Molecular Aspects of Radiobiology which had been held in Israel under the 
auspices of the Agency had been attended by outstanding experts from twenty 
different countries. The success of the Course was in his opinion mainly due to 
the fact that its subject had been clearly defined, being limited to the molecular 
and cellular aspects of the problem. 

GC(VIII)/0E.85 
page 8 


30. The Israeli delegation would also like to acknowledge the advice and help 
given by the Agency in selecting suitable candidates under the fellowship 
programme initiated by.the Israeli Government, mainly for scientists from 
developing countries. The programme had been of benefit not only to the 
visitors but also to Israel, by helping to keep it in touch with:the main 
stream of nuclear research in the world. Fellowships available for the year 
1965/66 vmve to be increased from 60 to 90 man-months. 
31. Israel had given a partial picture of its achievements in the field of 
nuclear research in the papers it had submitted to the Third Geneva Conference, 
and he y^ould therefore confine himself to a few remarks 'regarding developments 
in the current year. Israel's first research reactor had been fully equipped 
for continuous operation at 5 M""7 and further additions had been made•to improve 
its utilization, such as a device to load and unload the thermal column without ', 
shutting down the reactor, and six rabbit lines to transfer the radiated samples 
from the central terminal to the various laboratories (one such line made it 
possible to have the sample at its destination within five seconds of leaving 
the core). 
32o In the physics group, the work on elementary particles had been continued, 
while the work on the resonance scattering of capture gamma rays had been 
considerably extended and had shown the existence of a "magic number effect", 
the resonances tending to occur in closed shell nuclei of 82 neutrons or 82 
protons plus 126 neutrons. 


33 • Ample use had been made of the reactor for isotope production and activation 
analysis, and many new uses, especially in regard to the occurrence of photoneutrons, 
had been discovered. A fairly extensive programme for the production 
of labelled organic compounds had also been put under way. 


34. Israel's reactor was now so fully occupied that a start had been made with 
the establishment of a new research centre around a second reactor, which had 
been under construction for some time. The new centre would make it possible 
to study, among other things, neutron diffraction, a method which, particularly 
in the field of organic chemistry, had not yet been exploited to the full. The 
number of problems awaiting such a tool as neutron diffraction had turned out to 
be was infinite, and it might be desirable for the Agency to promote and 
co-ordinate an international programme on the subject. 

GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 9 


35. The Israeli nuclear programme was not concerned only with pure research. 
The use of isotopes for medical, industrial and forensic purposes was increasing 
at a satisfactory rate, and a company was being set up to apply irradiation 
techniques to food preservation as an industrial venture, In that connection 
he thought the Agency was to ho commended for its Tork in regard to the 
successful development of irradiation techniques for insect eradication. 
Irradiation methods we?e only one facet of that complicated and important 
problem, a more difficult but essential task being to devise methods for 
rearing the insects in the very large numbers required, and to study their 
biological and ecological habits. It was also important to compare the results 
obtained with those obtained by other methods such as chemosterilization. In 
addition to the insect eradication projects on which Israel vms collaborating 
with the Agency, an attempt had been made to eradicate by the sterile male 
technique the ticks responsible for spreading relapsing fever. The insects in 
question lived so far below the ground that no insecticide spray could penetrate 
to them, and they could subsist for several years without food, so that their 
eradication had not hitherto been considered possible. Scientists in Israel 
were confident that the dispersal of laboratory-gro-wn sterile ticks in suitable 
numbers would provide a final solution to the problem. 
36. Israel attached great importance to the possible use of nuclear energy for 
the desalination of sea water and to the role the Agency could play in that 
regard, and had invited a representative of the Agency to be present at the 
deliberations of the joint United States-Israeli committee which had undertaken 
the study of a dual-purpose reactor in Israel. As he saw it, the purpose of 
such installations, bearing in mind the low population density of the arid 
zones, 7/as to produce water for agriculture, not drinking water. That meant 
large quantities - of the order of 100 million cubic metres per year - and a 
price to the consumer varying fr om 3 to 7 cents per cubic metre. Such quantities 
and prices could only be achieved with a very large reactor, the optimum size 
and type still being a matter for discussion, though it seemed that for a very 
large reactor the combination of natural uranium and heavy water had distinct 
advantages. The nuclear aspects of the" problem might well prove much less 
difficult than the mechanical and thermal ones| and if, as was hoped, the 
Agency were to play a directive and co-ordinating .role in that field, its 

GC(VIII)/0K.85 
page 10 


scientific staff would be well advised to study not only the reactor part of 
the problem but also the technology of the desalting processes, especially as 
no other agency was likely to take the initiative in that direction. They 
should also take into consideration as deserving serious study, all other 
factors affecting the global problem of water supply to agriculture, including 


the exact water requirements of the main crops, the inhibition of evapo— 
transpiration from the irrigated plants, the production of more salt—resistant 
plant mutants and the possibility of relieving the adverse effect of salt by 


the addition of other constituents to the fertilisers. 


37o It had been said that the developing countries would not need the large 
amount of electricity generated by very large reactors serving dual-purpose 
plants and that therefore the whole project would not be practical. Certainly, 
some attention would have to be devoted to the planning of electricity consumption 
in countries wishing to desalt sea water. However, the outlook from 
a long—term point of view seemed to him promising? agriculture in the arid 
centres of the world would require, in addition to sweet water3 fertilizers 
in very large'quantities, and large—scale fertilizer production entailed large 
quantities of electricity, 


38<, In keeping with its policy of collaboration with the Agency, the Israeli 
Government had agreed to negotiate with the Agency on the inspection of the 
swimming-pool research reactor which had hitherto been subject to safeguards 
applied under a bilateral agreement with the United States of America*, It was 
to be hoped that the Agency, in undertaking the' duties of inspection that were 
increasingly being transferred to it, would preserve its technical character 
as a specialized agency. If the Agency engaged in policing instead of promoting 
and regulating the activities of its If ember States it would, in his opinion, 
seriously prejudice its future usefulness as a means of transforming the dreams 
of humanity into the realities of everyday life, 


39o Mr, ERRERA (Belgium) thanked the Director General and his staff for 
the highly competent way in which they had performed the tasks allocated to 

them in organizing the Third International Conference in Geneva, In his view, 


the Conference had very largely justified the hopes that had been placed in it. 



GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 11 


40. One fact which, stood out clearly from the Conference was the increased 
importance of nuclear energy for the developing countries for power production 
and the desalination of sea water, and also in the field of radioisotope . 
techniques. The Agency was to be congratulated on the important role it 
continued to play in those spheres. 
41. The Conference had shown that the nuclear industry was gradually acquiring 
the status of an independent sector of the economy and it had confirmed that 
nuclear power could very soon be expected to become competitive. That fact 
had been fully appreciated by the Agency, whose programme for 1965—66 laid 
particular emphasis on the repercussions the Geneva Conference was likely to 
have on the power production aspects of its work. 
42. Belgium was also concerned with the development of nuclear power and had 
just established a nuclear programme for the period 1964-67. The programme 
had been drawn up in the light of the advances made in the nuclear industry 
and took account of the fact that large—scale power stations were now becoming 
economically viable„ The paramount consideration in drafting the programme 
had been to ensure that Belgium should take its place in the main stream of 
technological progress and basic scientific research and should concentrate 
its efforts on a limited number of tasks chosen as a function of their economic 
and scientific value* The budget foreseen for the programme amounted to over 
40 million dollars in three years, and contributions to international projects 
were of the same order of magnitude „• 
43o The main emphasis was on technological research and associated work, with 
priority being given to the Vulcain reactor* The latter was suitable as a 
land—based reactor or for marine propulsion and was ^aser) on the principle of 
variable moderation. It was of a particularly compact design, the entire 
primary circuit being enclosed in the reactor vessel. The development of the 
reactor was being carried out in Belgium as a joint project by the United 
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (U.K.A.E.A.), "kne Syndicat Vulcain and the 
Nuclear Research Centre at Mol, under an Anglo—Belgian agreement for co-operation. 
The work involved theoretical and experimental physics as well as conventional 
and nuclear technology. 


GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 12 


44. Other' Belgian activite's in the field of physics included the construction 
and operation of the V3MJS critical test facility (Vulcain Experimental Nuclear 
Study) at the Hoi'Nuclear Research Centre. The first experimental core had 
reached criticality on 30 April 1964. Tests were progressing satisfactorily 
and providing important data on the physical featiires of Vulcain—type cores, 
which were moderated by mixtures of heavy and light water,, In addition, the 
work of adapting the 10-MW(e) BR3 reactor for operation, with a Vulcain core . 
had been energetically pursued since 1962, The purpose of the BR3—Vulcain 
experiment was to investigate the ©volution of the physical .characteristics 
of a Vulcain core and to carry .out endurance tests on major components of such 
a core. It was planned to load the Vulcain core into BR3 at the beginning of 
1965. A few months would then be devoted to trials, after which the station 
would start to feed electricity into the Belgian power grid for a period of 
about three years. 
45. Parallel work was proceeding on the development and testing of the various 
novel devices used in the Vulcain reactor. In view of the commercial value 
of such a reactor, the results obtained had been used to draw up complete 
plans for a r]2~}J^H(-th.) prototype. . Thorough economic studies showed that, because 
of the low,estimated investment and operational costs involved, the use of 
Vulcain reactors on a competitive basis was already a feasible proposition, 
especially for the developing countries. 
45. A further aim of the programme was plutonium research, which fitted into 
the t-raditional pattern of Belgian industry and was expected to lead to the use 
of that fuel in thermal reactors and later in fast reactorsa Research was 
centred mainly on the study of fabrication processes for ceramic fuels based 
on mixed oxides, and carbides of plutonium and uranium* At the very outset of 
the project, EURATOM had placed a number of large-scale fuel development 
contracts with the Association Belgo-Nucleaire (I'ol Nuclear Research Centre), 
the aim being to make it possible to insert a dozen ITCu/PuO rods into the 
BR3 power reactor. The elements in question had already been withdrawn from 
the reactor following a burn-up of 6000 MWd/t. 
47. The development of the fuels had necessitated a whole range -of Investigations 
and the laboratory concerned was now one of the most complete in Europe 

GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 13 


for the development of ceramic fuels containing plutonium* It covered an area 
2 


of over 700 m and possessed more than 60 completely equipped glove boxes. 


48. The final aim of the current phase of the work was to carry out research 
on plutonium-enriched cores for use in water-moderated reactors, mainly of the 
PWE type. The programme would culminate in the insertion of a full UCU/PuOp 
fuel load in the BH3 power reactor in ahout 1969. 
,49• The short-term aims of the programme were concerned with the development 


of proven types of water-moderated reactors and the improvement of fuels, 


Longei-term projects included halogenation of irradiated fuels and the development 
of fast reactors„ for the former, the programme provided for the operation 


of a hot facility on a semi-pilot scale and the advanced study of methods for 


separating plutonium and uranium fluorides„ 


50„ In the case of fast reactors, the programme was aimed mainly at fuel 


development, the study of sodium technology, the conceptual design of a 


transient test reactor, investigation of neutron spectra in the cores of fast 


reactors and the development of a new design principle involving the use of 


superheated steam as coolant* 


51. In fundamental research, Belgium was participating in the work of CSPJtf at 
Geneva and was also carrying out a complementary programme of its own on 
problems of high- and low-energy physics, 
52. The Inter-University Institute of Nuclear- Sciences had also undertaken 
research on nuclear chemistry and plasma physics<. 
53. Clearly, the programme he had outlined would he modified if it should 
become necessary to do so, As it stood, it showed tnat his country was determined 
to forge ahead and promote the growth of a nuclear industry,, 
54. In addition to its voluntary contribution, Belgium was able to offer the 
Agency an additional six 10—monxh Type II fellowships annually* As most 
Belgian technicians and scientists knew English, even candidates who only knew 
English would be able to benefit from a study period in Belgium. 
55* In addition, Belgium was prepared to participate in the operation of the 
TRICO Centre in Leopoldville by sending teaching staff to organize courses in 



GC(VIII)/or?-83 
page 14 

French, and English and by establishing scientific co—operation on specific 
subjects of common interest to Belgian research workers and research workers 
of the Congolese Regional Centre,, 


560 The Belgian authorities greatly appreciated the Director General's efforts 


to establish closer collaboration between the Agency and specialised agencies 


such as the V/orld Health Organization (WHO) and the Food and Agriculture 


Organization of the United Nations (FAO), whose work in certain fields ran 
parallel to that of the Agency, 


57". " Mr, de CASTRO (Phil ippines) said that the Director General and the 


Secretariat of the Agency were to be congratulated on their contribution to 


the organization' of the Geneva Conference. His delegation hoped that its, . 


results would show the correct perspective and direction for the activities 
not only of the Agency but also of the national atomic energy authorities of 
Member States and that, as a result, the benefits of the peaceful uses of 


atomic energy would be still more effectively and efficiently realized* 


58<, Significant developments had taken place in the Agency during the past 
year. One of them, of particular interest to the developing countries, was 


the change in the organizational and functional structure of the Agency, 
involving the formation of a new Department of Technical Assistance„ The 
Agency's valuable contribution to the atomic energy endeavours of developing 


countries could not be over-emphasized. While the scope and'extent of its 
assistance had expanded over the years, the need for aid was expected to increase 
as more and more research centres were established in the less-developed 
Member States. The Philippine delegation accordingly approved of the reorgani


zation undertaken with a view to providing machinery for more effective and 


efficient utilization of the Agency's resources for technical assistance. 


59. It was not, however, enough that those changes had been made:; it was of 
equal and perhaps even greater importance that the Agency should be provided 
with "sufficient resources to meet the various requests for technical assistance 
from the less—developed countries. The present s^rstem of financing the technical 
assistance programme through voluntary contributions was inadequate, and 
as it had stated at the previous General Conference, his delegation would 
support any proposal calculated to stabilize the financing of the Agency's 
Operational Budget—' „ 
2/ GC(VII)/OR.79, para. 56. 



GC(VIII)/PB.85 
page 15 


60. As a Member of the Board of Governors, the Philippines had been privileged 
in the past to support the statutory principle of wider geographical representation 
in the staff of the Agency! his Government was gratified that a Deputy 
Director General from an Asian country now headed the Department of Technical 
Assistance and was sure he would serve the Agency well., 
61. The Philippine Government had agreed be transfer to the Agency the 
administration of safeguards for materials and facilities transferred to the 
Philippines under its agreement with the United States of America for co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Philippines, which had always 
supported the implementation of the Agency's system of safeguards, hoped that 
the transfer of that responsibility to the Agency would help to strengthen 
its role in establishing safeguards against the use of certain materials and 
facilities for military purposes. 
52„ A valid criticism of that part of the Agency's work, however, was that it 
was directed primarily against countries with no nuclear military potential 


and did not affect countries which were actual or potential nuclear Powers. 
It was hoped that those Powers might eventually be included in a truly international 
safeguards system which would put countries to the least possible 


inconvenience and yet still be effective* 


63o Among developments in the Philippine atomic energy programme, he would 
mention that the centre established for research work in such fields as agriculture, 
biology and medicine, industry and the physical sciences had continued 
to increase both its facilities and, its manpower. The research reactor, which 
had first reached criticality on 26 August 1963, had been available for use in 
research, in test production of radioisotopes and in training and education, 
even before it came into full-power operation at 1 M77 on 11 August 1964


64. At the Second Regional Study Group Meeting on Research Reactor Utilization, 
conducted under the auspices of the Agency in Manila in 1963, engineers and 
scientists of the Philippines had exchanged ideas and views with more experienced 
colleagues from other reactor centres in the region and from Europe and the 
United States, The Philippine research reactor was to be used first for 
isotope production and activation analysis, with a view to the effective 
application of radioisotope techniques to agriculture, medicine? science and 
industry. 

u0 ^ V X-LX i j i,.d.U7 

page 16 


65. In co-operation with, the Agency, the Philippine Government had completed 
arrangements for the regional training course on the medical application of 
radioisotopes to he given in Manila from 19 October to 11 December- 1964. All 
scientists and doctors of the region who wished to participate would be very 
welcome. 
660 The Philippine Government had recently .joined the Government of India 
and the Agency in a five-year trilateral agreement for a regional training 
and. research programme„ The Philippines would provide appropriate facilities 
at its atomic research centre, for which India would provide a complete working 
neutron crystal spectrometer with ancillary equipment, and the services of a 
technician and a senior scientist for at least six months„ The Agency would, 
provide support for the Indian technician and scientist as well as training 
fellowships for qualified nominees of Governments participating in the programme. 

67. In the field of nuclear power, the Philippines was at present studying the 
power supply situation in Luzon,, the principal island, with a view to determining 
when it would he most advantageous to introduce nuclear power into the 
island's expanding grid. That study was a United Nations Special Fund project, 
for which the Agency was the executing agency, and substantial progress had 
already been made'in it. It was hoped that before the next session of the 
General Conference nuclear power would have taken its logical place in the 
power development programme of the Philippines, and his delegation wished to 
express its gratitude for all the assistance given by the Agency, 
68. In response to a suggestion made at the Study Group Meeting on PLesearch 
Reactor Utilisation held in Manila, the Philippines Atomic Energy Commission 
had agreed to undertake the bi-monthly publication of an Asian Atomic Newsletter 
for one year. The third issue was due to appear in September 1964? and the 
Philippine Government hoped that the Newsletter would become an important means 
of promoting closer regional and international collaboration in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
69. In conclusion he assured the Conference of the_ continued support of the 
Philippines for the Agency's objectives and activities. 
70. Mr. BILLIG (Poland), speaking of the significance of the Third 
Geneva Conference, said that it had again highlighted the basic problems 

GC(VIII)/0E.85 
page 17 


associated with the development of nuclear power production and had provided 
an outline of future developments based not only on the hopes prompted by 
large-scale scientific discoveries but also on the accumulated experience and 
major achievements of various countries in the practical uses of atomic energy. 


71. As far as the Agency's future activities were concerned, one major conclusion 
emerged? during the new phase that had been ushered in there was a 
need for a long—term programme designed to provide all countries, and especially 
the less—developed ones, with effective and extensive assistance in the practical 
development of atorrd c ?ri6i^'- Ivery country and ovary area of the world had 
its own particular requirements- Some countries would be interested more 
particularly in the development of nuclear power production, others in the 
wide application of isotopes and yet others in techniques for the desalination 
of water. The Agency's assistance had to be extremely varied and geared to 
the specific conditions and needs of individual countries„ 
72„ The Polish delegation considered that economic problems would emerge as a 
priority item on the Agency's programme of work in the near future and proposed 
that such problems be given careful study. It was possible that in about two 
years' time a special conference would have to be organized under Agency 
auspices to consider the economic aspects of the development of atomic energy. 
In view of the different methods practised in different countries, it might 
also be worth considering the creation of a unified system of costing. 


73. It would also be useful to arrange for extensive studies of an economic 
nature to be carried out to investigate various aspects of the use of atomic 
energy on an industrial scale„ 
74- International collaboration was playing an increasing part in the use of 


atomic energy for peaceful purposes, and one example of close co—operation and 
mutual assistance in that field was afforded by the Council for Mutual Economic 
Aid, The Agency too had a special part to play in that sphere, but it was 


important that its role should expand. Poland and a number of other countries 
were at present engaged in negotiations aimed at ensuring international 
collaboration for a programme of work on the physics of the fission process and 
neutron diffraction, Poland was also interested in collaboration in regard 
to the techniques of nuclear fuel fabrication and metallurgy, questions of 
vital importance for the future development of nuclear power. 


GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 18 


75. The Agency had undoubtedly rendered useful service in the field of 
training. In his opinion, however, the resources and methods applied for 
that'purpose were no longer sufficient. He was all the more perturbed at 
the recent evidence of a tendency to curtail that branch of the Agency's work, 
76,• In that connection he recalled the proposal to set up in various countries, 
through the intermediary of the Agency, reactor centres (with various types 
of reactor) where fellows could be sent for training purposes and for work 
in connection with the training of personnel to service the expanding programmes 
for reactor construction and nuclear power, 


77o The recent conference of eminent scientists in Geneva, to consider how 
atomic energy could best be used in the service of mankind, had coincided, for 
the Polish people5 with the twenty-fifth anniversary of the outbreak of the 
Second World War and the invasion of Polish soil by Nazi Germany, "Conventional" 
weapons and "conventional" methods of warfare had sufficed to eliminate one fifth 
of Poland's thirty million inhabitants. The glow from the atomic bomb dropped 
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki had provided a terrible curtain-fall to the Second 
World War, His delegation had accordingly decided to remind the General 
Conference at its present session of the fearful threat that hung over all 
mankind and to take the present occasion to urge yet again that work on the 
drafting and signing of an agreement on complete and universal disarmament be 
speeded up in order to ensure lasting peace on earth, 


78o Mr, RANDBPtS (Norway) said that the Norwegian Government was happy to 
observe the steady progress made in what it considered the most useful 
activities of the Agency, namely technical assistance, safeguards against 
the military use of atomic energy and international regulatory functions, 


79o He considered that the time was approaching when early planning of large 
atomic installations in developing countries might become an important aspect 
of the Agency's technical assistance programme, although the actual erection 
of industrial or other facilities was not a task suited to international 
action and far exceeded the financial resources of any existing international 
organization. Nevertheless, help in co-ordinating the assistance given by 
several countries to a developing country for atomic energy purposes certainly 
came within the scope of the Agency's work. Funds for the Agency's technical 
assistance activities should be made available in the form of assessed contributions 
to its budget. 



GC(VIII)/0E.85 
page 19 


80. The difficult task of ensuring that atomic energy was not used for military 
purposes was one of the Agency's essential tasks. However, the Norwegian 
Government felt that any action that could he taken by international agreement 
to reduce the possibility of further atomic weapons production - in addition 
to steps taken hy the Agency under its Statute - was desirable„ It therefore 
considered that all nations should voluntarily report their fuel transactions 
to an international body such as the Agency. 
81. Referring to the Agency's current review of its safeguards system, he 
said that the principal aim of such a system must be the control of highly 
enriched fuel, which alone represented a direct danger as a potential nuclear 
explosive. If the system was discriminatory, as some had claimed, that was 
true only in the sense that it tried to prevent those who did not have atomic 
weapons from being able to get them. The new system of control - which would, 
after all, not be the final one - would probably have its shortcomings, but 
it should be given a chance to prove its value. 


82. One of the Agency's most important tasks, and one which it alone could 
perform, was the drafting of rules and regulations concerning various aspects 
of atomic energy. International agreements were necessary in connection with 
the transport of radioactive materials, civil liability, health protection, 
waste disposal into the sea and elsewhere, and so forth. 
83. The Agency should not be over-afraid about the overlapping of its work with 
that of other international organisations§ a certain amount of overlapping 
was often desirable, especially in the field of scientific research. Moreover, 
co-ordination sometimes involved more effort than was actually involved 
in carrying out the same work in more than one place. The Agency should 
therefore not hesitate to attack a number of important problems which called 
for urgent solution. 
84. Mr. HOCKSTB ASSISE (Switzerland) said that since the Third Geneva 
Conference had provided an opportunity for an exchange of views on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and for a review of the various countries' programmes, 
he would restrict himself to the technical problems related to the Agency's 
activities. 
85. First, he wished to compliment the Director General and his staff on the 
work done in the past year and in particular on the successful organization of 

GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 20 


the scientific part of the Geneva Conference, The Swiss scientists who had 
participated in Agency symposia in the period under review had profited greatly 
from them. Effective co-ordination of the meetings organized hy the Agency 
and other institutions was most important, and he particularly welcomed the 
co-operation with the International Council of Scientific Unions' Joint 
Commission on Applied Radioactivity in organising a symposium on isotope mass 
effects in chemistry and biology,, Increasing participation of scientific 
societies in the organization of such meetings would ensure their usefulness 
and success, 


86. He recalled that the Agency was at present devoting considerahle attention 
to the matter of safeguards* As Switzerland might embark in the near future 
on the construction of full-scale nuclear power plants, it was particularly 
concerned that a simple and effective inspection system should be developed,, 
Although the speedy introduction of nuclear power stations was highly desirable, 
it was not yet absolutely necessary to use that source of power, and he felt 
that by exaggerating the requirements of its safeguards system the Agency 
might discourage rather than promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. His 
delegation hoped that the current review of the present system would dispel 
such fears. 
87. His delegation shared the regret expressed by the authors of the programme 
for the next two years that the Agency would not be able to meet all requests 
for assistance, fellowships, etc., as a similar situation also existed in his 
own country. There, too, it had been necessary to make choices and introduce 
priorities in the face of ever-increasing demands. In that respect his delegation 
noted with regret that the largest increase in the 1965 budget was in 
administrative expenses. He hoped that efforts would be continued to abolish 
certain non-essential posts and to restrict the number of posts at higher grades. 
88. Governors and delegates could also play their part in cutting administrative 
costs by settling their business more quickly and efficiently, so that some of 
the considerable sums currently devoted to financing the General Conference 
and the meetings of the Board of Governors could be put towards scientific 
and technical assistance to the developing countries. A welcome step in that 
direction was the decrease in recent years of time lost in discussing political 
problems outside the Agency's scope. 

GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 21 


89. The Swiss Government had decided the year hef.ore .to make a .voluntary . 
contribution calculated on the same basis as its regular assessed contribution. 
It would follow the same policy in 1965.. In addition,, it had offered two 
fellowships to enable scientists from developing countries to spend one year 
at the new International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, It had 
also given various items of equipment to the Agency's laboratory at Seibersdorf, 
The total of those offers represented more than double Switzerland's voluntary 
contribution., 
90. Mr. SAV5LEV (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that not much 
more than a year had elapsed since the signature of the Moscow Treaty Banning 
Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Undar Water, during 
which time there had already been some evidence of increased mutual confidence 
in relations between States. As a result further progress had been possibles 
in particular outer space had been closed to the military uses of atomic energy 
and.there had been some decrease in the flow of fissionable materials into 
national stockpiles of nuclear armaments. As the Head of the Soviet Government, 
Mr. Khrushchev, had pointed out, the last-mentioned development made it possible 
to devote a greater quantity of fissionable material to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy - in nuclear power stations, in industry, agriculture and medicine, 
and in implementing large-scale scientific and technical projects, for example 
for the desalination of sea water. That meant that the conditions for the 
Agency's work we're improved, though in view of the fact that there were still 
areas where international tension was likely to erupt, it was the Agency's 
duty to make a greater contribution to strengthening international peace than 
it had done in the past. 
91- Referring to the vrork done by Ukrainian scientists in seeking means of 
solving the more important theoretical problems and developing new uses of 
atomic energy, he said that construction of a new 2—06?" linear electron 
accelerator had recently been completed'in Kharkov. 


92. In Donetsk, the centre of the coal industry, it had, after a number of 
experiments, been decided that radioisotopes could usefully be employed in 
underground signalling equipment. Radioisotope equipment was used in the 
Ukraine in blast—furnace processes and in rolling mills as well as for automatically 
measuring the thickness of continuously rolled steel plate, gauging 

GC(VIII)/OR.85 
page 22 


the thickness of films and coatings, controlling coal beneficiation processes 
ani calculating and checking the* quantity of finished products. Radioinotopes 
were also of inestimable help in carrying out geophysical research and in 
surveying the Ukraine's geological deposits of petroleum, gas, coal, metals 
and other minerals. 


93. The use of radioisotopes and radiation in Ukrainian agriculture was at 
present mainly at the research and experimental stage. Radioisotopes were 
used in the Ukrainian Agricultural Research Institute's agrochemical laboratory 
to investigate the most effective use of fertilisers and to work out a system 
of applying fertilizers in the crop rotations of the wooded and wooded-steppe 
zones, as well as to study the effect of fertilizers on the yield of leguminous 
. 
crops. 


94. He welcomed the co-operation that had been initiated between the United 
States and Soviet scientists in the desalination of sea water. Progress in 
that matter was of great importance to the southern areas of the Ukraine adjoining 
the Black Sea,.and in particular the Crimea, where suitable nuclear stations 
could supplement the existing artificial •irrigation systems. Another area that 
was in particular need of fresh water was the Donets basin (Donbass), where a 
water deficit was expected by 1970. The minehead washing plants in the Donbass 
gave rise to considerable quantities of salt water and up to 600 million cubic 
metres were wasted every year. If that water could be desalted by means "of 
atomic energy, that would go a long way towards solving the Ponbass water supply 
problem. 
95. Turning to the question of the need for concluding an agreement on complete 
and universal disarmament with strict international control, he said that the 
Ukrainian Government was opposed to any attempt to substitute the control of 
armaments for an agreement on disarmament. In that connection, he drew 
attention to the United States' proposal to the Committee of Sighteen, designed 
to turn the Agency into an organ for inspecting the production of fissionable 
materials. Similar proposals had already been pu* forward by the Western 
Powers at the disarmament negotiations, but had led to nothing. The Agency had 
its own tasks, laid down in the Statute, and it would be a fundamental error 
to use it for carrying out functions which were entirely alien to it. 

GC(VIII)/ORo85 
page 23 


960 The statement made by Senator Williams in the United States Senate in 
March showed that the United States' proposal to place the Yankee reactor under 
Agency safeguards was designed to place the United States in a position where 
it could demand of the Soviet Union that it admit inspectors to its reactors. 
It was, in fact, another attempt on the part of certain circles in the United 
States to use the Agency to impose on the Soviet Union inspection without 
disarmament* All such attempts were completely unacceptable to-his delegation, 


97. Referring to the part which the Ukraine could play in implementing the 
socialist countries' proposal for a programme of technical assistance to 
developing countries, he expressed regret that the Western Powers had shown 
no inclination to take part in that programme, which had undoubtedly delayed 
its implementation and obliged the developing countries to seek means of 
obtaining what they needed outside the Agency,, 
98<, The socialist countries' decision to modify their initial proposals - by 
supplying, instead of the six physics laboratories, an equivalent (in terms of 
cost) number of radiological laboratories, and by making experts available, up 


"to the limits of the fellowships that had been earmarked, to assist in installing 
the laboratories and training local personnel - stemmed from careful studjr of 
the requests which the developing countries had presented. Their proposal 
was a material contribution to the work of the Agency, and his delegation hoped 
that it would now be implemented* 


99. In conclusion, he pointed out that the Agency had so far devoted little 
attention to nuclear power. Moreover, the figures showed, for example, that 
it spent more on supplying experts and professors than on equipment. However, 
the primary need of countries in receipt of assistance was for equipment. He 
was also perturbed at the tendency to a diminution in the amount of resources 
devoted to training purposes* In his view, it would also be desirable for the 
Agenc3>- to take a more active part in studying methods of waste disposal other 
than disposal into the sea and in drawing up suitable recommendations. 
IOC Mr* AL-MHSD (Kuwait) thanked all Members who had supported his 
country's application for membership of the Agency. Kuwait would do all in its 
power to further the Agency's aims* 



GC(VIII)/ORo85 
page 24 


101. Kuwait had recently begun using radioisotopes for medical purposes and a 
radiotherapy centre and cobalt unit were already in operation* A study of 
underground water reserves was being carried out in co-operation with other 
Arab countries., 
The meeting rose at 5*55 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(VIII)/OR.86 
14 January 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 


General Conference 

Eighth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 16 September 1964; at 10.50 a.m. 


President: Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda* 


Tribute to the late Mr. Tuomioja 
1 -7 


10 
General debate and report of the Board 8 - 104 
of Governors for*1963-64 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Czechoslovakia 8 -27 
Ceylon 28 -39 
Pakistan 40 -47 
Canada 48 -60 
Union of Soviet Socialist 


Republics 6] -81 
Indonesia 82 -88 
Australia 89 -100 


Closing date of the session 101 
- 104 


* GC(VIII)/285, 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VIII)/INF/75/Rev.2. 


64-6690 



GC(VIIij/OR.86 
page 2 


TRIBUTE TO THE LATE MR. TUOMIOJA 


1. The PRESIDENT reminded the. .General'Conference that Ambassador' 
Sakari Tuomioja of Finland, an outstanding statesman and diplomat, had died • 
on 10 September 1964. 
2. On several occasions Ambassador Tuomioja had held cabinet posts in the 
Finnish Government. Besides being an economic and financial expert, who had 
occupied important posts both .in his own country and in the United Nations 
Economic Commission for Europe, he had served his country as ambassador in 
London and Stockholm.. 
3. During the last years of his life he had rendered outstanding services 
to the United Nations, as personal representative of both the late and the 
present Secretary-General. His important role as a United Nations mediator 
was well known. 
4. Those who had attended the fourth regular session of the General Conference 
would remember that Mr. Tuomioja .had spoken on that occasion on behalf of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations.—' 
5. Ambassador Tuomioja had dedicated his life to-the cause of peace. His 
personal devotion and relentless application to his tasks had exacted too 
great a toll on his health. His untimely passing was a great loss to all 
Members of the' United Nations family and, indeed, to all who were working for 
economic progress and peace. 
6. As his state funeral was taking place that day in Helsinki, he, the 
President, had sent a telegram, on. behalf of the General Conference, to the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, expressing its profound regret at 
Mr. Tuomioja's death and asking that its sincere condolences be conveyed to 
the Finnish Government, as well as to the family of the deceased. 
7. Mr. WARTIOVAARA (Finland), in'the name of the Government of Finland 
and"on behalf of the family of the late Mr. Tuomioja, expressed deep gratitude 
to the General Conference for thus honouring the memory of his great fellowcountryman. 
.' 
l/ GC(l7)/OR.36, paras. 61 to 68'< 



OC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965-64 (GC(VIII)/270, 
270/Corr.l, 270/Add.l, 2 and 3, 280) (continued) 


8= Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) congratulated and welcomed the four 
new Members of the Agency - Cyprus, Kenya, Kuwait and Madagascar -, whose 
admission symbolized the changes that were taking place in the modern world. 
He hoped he would soon have an opportunity of welcoming other new members from 
among those countries which had not yet freed themselves from colonial rule 
and from among other sovereign nations which had not yet been able to take 
part in the work of the Agency, 


9. He recalled that the Agency was pledged to the noble aim of accelerating 
and enlarging l'the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world".. That could only be achieved if genuine collaboration 
were developed between States irrespective of differences in their social 
systems and if co-operation were based on mutual trust and directed towards' 
the maintenance and strengthening of peace throughout the world. The conclusion 
of the Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer 
Space and Under Water, which had been signed by over 100 States, had doubtless 
contributed to the attainment of that aim. Thanks to that agreement the 
atmosphere and the waters of the seas were no longer being contaminated by 
destructive and noxious radioactive products. Similarly, an agreement had been 
reached between the United States of .America and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics banning the release into space of objects equipped with nuclear or 
other weapons of mass destruction, and had been approved by the General Assembly 
2/ 


of bhe United Nations-7 . In addition, the United Kingdom, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and the United States of America had decided to limit their 
production of fissionable materials for military purposes. 


10. His delegation considered that the various measures he had mentioned would 
increase mutual confidence between States and help to reduce international 
tension. They did not, however, constitute a solution for the main problem of 
the modern world, which involved the vital interests of the whole of mankind 
2/ General Assembly Resolution i884(xrai). 



GC(VHl)/OR.86 


page 4 


and whose solution would-have-a -direct bearing on the whole- future• of the 
Agency, viz* the problem of averting the" danger of a thermonuclear war and 


establishing a firm and lasting peace. The- only reliable means of achieving 


that aim was to accept universal and complete disarmament.. 


11. His delegation considered it fitting that the Agency should contribute to' 
the" implementation of that task and it welcomed the report presented by the 
xl 

Director General on the economic and social consequences of disarmament-^ . The 
report was far from being" exhaustive but the information it contained was quite 
remarkable, for example on the question of plutonium and enriched uranium 
stockpiles and the possibilities of using them for the peaceful production of 
nuclear energy, so vital for technological development and for the elimination \ 
of poverty, disease and suffering, especially in the developing countries. . 
The report rightly drew attention to the possibilities available and. to those 
concrete tasks on which attention should be concentrated. 


12. His delegation was convinced that a further study of the economic and 
social consequences of disarmament deserved the highest priority in the Agency's 
future programme of work. It would support any proposals submitted at the 
Conference with a view to encouraging such work and would actively participate 
in helping to implement them. 
lj. Referring to the results of the Third International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy^, he pointed out that under certain circumstances 
nuclear power stations could now be used at the same cost level as conventional 
thermal plants. The Conference had made an objective assessment of the prospects 
for different types of reactors and thus of the future development of nuclear 
power. 


5/ " ' 


14. He noted that the Agency's Programme for 1965-66 made little provision 
for work on nuclear power. Although the relevant documents underscored the 
importance of its work in that field, the Agency's role was not specified in 
the Programme to the same extent as, say, the Agency's activities in connection 
with the utilization of radiation and radioisotopes in science and industry. 
It was essential that section III of the Programme be expanded and that more 
definite data be included. 
3_/ GC(VIH)/INF/7I. 

dj Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 
5/ GC(VIII)/275. 


GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 5 


15o In the opinion of his delegation, the Programme devoted insufficient 


attention to the question of assessing the importance of plutonium in power


reactor technology. More intensive work should be carried out by the Agency 


on that subject in future. The Agency's work should also be stepped up as 


regards' the construction of nuclear power plants, e.g. it could make assess


ments of the economics of nuclear and thermal stations and draw up regulations 


for the safe operation of nuclear reactors, similar to those governing the 


safe transport of radioactive materials„ It would be useful if a general 


report could be prepared summarizing the results ohtained to date in various 


branches of technology and giving an economic analysis of those results„ 


I60 His delegation was favourably impressed by the activities of the Agency 


since th'e seventh regular session, particularly in connection with health and 


safety problems. Work had finally been concluded on the regulations for the 


safe transport of radioactive materials, for the protection of Individuals 


engaged in work with nuclear materials, etc. 


17= Czechoslovak scientists had taken an active part in a number of scientific 


meetings held during the period under review and his delegation fully supported 


the Agency's work In that direction. In the present year a Symposium on the 
Use of Radioisotopes in Animal Nutrition and Physiology was due to be held in 
Czechoslovakia and his delegation wished to suggest that one of the 1965 \ 


scientific meetings also be held in Czechoslovakia? he hoped that the Agency 
would' accept that proposal. 


18. It would be useful if the Agency could devise some more systematic and 
far quicker means than hitherto for informing Member States of the results of 
panel meetings and of assignments and missions entrusted to Secretariat staff 
members. For their part. Member States should do more than they had done in 
the past to make available to the Agency free-of-charge scientific data likely 
to be of value to other Members of the Agency. 
19. At the seventh regular session, his delegation had offered to make available 
to Member States, through the Agency, complete documentary material on the 
use of sensor elements for the automatic control of reactors.—' That material 
would be handed over in the course of the present session. A sum of 700 000 
Czechoslovak crowns had been spent on the solution of the problems involved. 
6/ GC(VII)/OR.75, para. 64. 



GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 6 


20. His delegation approved of the Agency's activities in the- sphere of 
training and for 1965 was offering five long-term fellowships at higher 
educational establishments i.n Czechoslovakia and five long-term fellowships 
at technical colleges at the intermediate level. Czechoslovakia was also 
prepared to perform, without payment, a certain amount of research work on 
problems related to the Agency's Programme for 1965-660 
21. Together with the other socialist countries Czechoslovakia was participating' 
in a programme for the provision of medical centres for the developing 
countries. That programme, originally submitted at the sixth regular session, 
had been discussed at the last regular session of the Conference, which had 
7/ 


adopted a resolution requesting the Board of Governors to consider the 
programme bearing in mind that one third of the resources required for- it,• 
amounting to 700 000 roubles (approximately $770-000), would be contributed 
by the socialist countries. The resolution also expressed the hope that 
further offers would be forthcoming to provide.the equipment, apparatus and 
fellowships for, or the financial resources required to implement, the 
remaining two thirds of the programme., Despite the resolution, however, the 
capitalist countries, and in particular, the Great Powers, had so far failed 
to take any positive action with regard to the programme and had done nothing 
to help implement it. 


22. Since many countries had shown great interest in the medical.centres, the 
socialist countries had submitted a new amended proposal at the last series 
of Board meetings,. In that connection he wished to draw the attention of the 
Conference to the fact that, on the basis of the programme in question and 
pursuant to a decision taken by the Board at its February series of meetings, 
the equipment for a therapeutic unit worth about US $63 000 was being supplied 
to" Algeria. His delegation hoped that other iiember States which had been asked 
in the resolution to contribute two thirds o"f the cost of the programme would 
follow that example and thus help the developing countries to benefit from the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
2/ G0(VII)'/HES/152. 



GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 7 


23. Keferring to the achievements of his country during the period under 
review, he said that Czechoslovakia had completed an experimental 18-MeV 
betatron for medical use| the machine in question was more powerful than anyother 
of its type in existence. Work had been completed on an experimental 
helium condenser and the technology of producing superconductor materials had 
been mastered. The results obtained would help to further the development of 
nuclear physics, the physics of solid materials and other tranches of science. 
Work had also been completed on a new type of irradiator, the "Ghisobalt", 
whose potentialities were far superior to those of the present "Qhisotron". 
The "Chisobalt" and the betatron would enahle Czechoslovak scientists to 
intensify research in radiobiology, radiotherapy and nuclear medicine. 
24. Czechoslovak scientists had also teen involved in the discovery of element 
No. 104 in the periodic table at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research atDu^
na. Good results had been obtained in the application of .radioisotopes in 
industry, scientific research and the dosimetry of ionizing radiations. 
25. Particularly important results had been obtained in nuclear medicine.• 
Czechoslovakia possessed a number of well-equipped facilities designed for the 
medical uses of irradiators and radioisotopes. Several nuclear clinics incorporating 
the most up-to-date techniques were also under construction and would 
serve as centres for the use of radioisotopes and radiation in medicine, both 
for routine therapeutical work and also for research on new therapeutic 
techniques. For the implementation of its programme, his country was able to 
call on the services of a number of highly qualified experts. His Government 
had therefore decided to propose the establishment of an international centre 
for training in the medical use of radioisotopes.- The establishment of such 
centres was provided for in the Agency's Programme for 1965-66. 
26. Such a centre could be used for training experts to handle equipment in 
+v,o ^^dical centres to be supplied to the developing countries under the 
socialist countries' technical assistance programme. 
8/ GC(VIII)/27|j/ para, 2J. 



GC(viIl)/OR.86 
page 8 


27. 'Referring to the -statement of the Director General at the 83rd meeting, 
and in particular to his remarks on the subject of safeguards, he said that 
in the view of his delegation, the Agency's present work on safeguards was to 
he viewed solely in the context of the Statute and should also be designed 
to improve' supervisory techniques. It was important that the problem of 
financing safeguards activities should be carefully studied and solved with' 
the minimum of delay. 
28. Mr. PBRERA (Ceylon) said that Ceylon had an Atomic Energy Committee 
which had been functioning for some time under the National Planning Council, 
and the Government had now decided to set up a statutory body responsible for 
activities in the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, with the object of 
making the' Committee's work more effective.' The need for a body of the kind, 
together with the necessary regulations to govern its functioning, could not 
be over-emphasiaed. 
29. The radioisotope centre at the country's main university had been set up 
with the help of technical assistance from the Agency and its operation had 
also benefited from' the services of a radi'ochemist and an electronics expert 
"provided by the Agency. 
Regular training courses at the undergraduate and the 
post-graduate level were conducted at the centre. Recently, a six-months 
regional training course in electronics had been held there, for personnel 
from Ceylon and ten other countries in Asia. Research work in agriculture, 
on fertilizer uptake by such important crops as rice, had also been undertaken, 
as' well as studies on mutation caused by radiation. At the moment, 
an Agency'adviser on agriculture was engaged in assisting the centre and the 
Department of Agriculture in organizing agricultural research using isotopes. 


30. On the health side, the centre, in close association with the Department 
of Health 'Services, was conducting research on filariasis, whose eradication 
was one of the country's main'tasks at'the moment. Tea production had also 
benefited from biochemical studies of the tea plant, carried out in association 
with the Tea Research Institute. The centre was also used for regular environmental 
monitoring and radioactive analysis experiments connected with 
the preservation of Ceylon's rich heritage of antiquities5 the results of 
those experiments were now being closely studied. 

GC(VIII)/OR.Q6 
page 9 

31. The cancer hospital near Colombo had a cobalt-60 source for radiotherapy 
and also used isotopes of iodine, phosphorus and gold in the treatment of 
cancer cases. An Agency expert was attached to the hospital and a radiological 
protection service was being set up with his assistance. 
32o The Agency had also provided two experts to help in setting up a laboratory 
at the Geological Survey Department for radiometric studies in that field a 
matter of importance to Ceylon whose mineral wealth was still awaiting full 
exploitation. 


33. He had some comments to make on the report of the Board of Governors 
(GC(vTIl)/270 and Corr.l and Add.l, 2 and 3, 28o), which were intended purely 
to serve as a guide in the Agency's approach to problems common to the developing 
countries in his region. The appointment of a regional officer in Bangkok 
was greatly appreciated and the results of his contacts with authorities in 
Ceylon were awaited with interest. It was hoped, however, that the Agency 
would as soon as possible set up a regional office, with a small staff, to help 
the officer in his growing volume of work. He was fully aware of the financial 
implications of such a step5 hence, the emphasis on a small staff only, which 
could draw on the scientific and technical expertise available at Headquarters. 
The importance of a regional office for maintaining contact with the work 
going on in the region and keeping xhe Agency informed of specific problems 
could not be over-emphasized. 


34. Under present arrangements, country advisers sent out by the Agency 
remained for too short a period5 sometimes, even, their term of service 
ended before the specific project on which they were engaged was completed. 
If possible, they should be made available for longer terms, in order to be 
able to see the work well through and to train local personnel to carry it on. 
35. Equipment provided by the Agency - a useful service - at times was 
received too late to be of full benefit in the work being undertaken. An 
effort to remedy that situation should be .made, moreover,, if at all possible, 
some uniformity should be maintained In regard to the equipment supplied, in 
order to simplify the procuring of spare parts. Then, too, countries like 
Ceylon often had difficulty in obtaining spare parts from abroad and to obviate 
such obstacles to the continuous utilization of equipment supplied, the Agency 
might consider setting up a central fund to cover the cost of necessary 
replacements. 

GC(vTIl)/OR.86 
page 10 


360 • On the question of choice of projects, his Government considered that 
the Agency should preferably engage on organizing and co-ordinating large 
projects of national importance concerned, for example,, with agriculture or 
medicine, rather than on projects designed to meet short-term isolated 
problems. He was glad to note that the French delegation took a similar 
view. In that connection, regional projects with ample provision for a free 
exchange of results and personnel could he very advantageous. 


37. There was urgent need in the countries of his region for further 
regional courses such as the one on electronics he had already mentioned5 
two possible subjects of interest were radiological protection and the use 
of isotopes in agriculture and medicine. The radioisotope centre in Ceylon 
was specially equipped to undertake training of the kind and might with 
advantage be utilized for that purpose, especially given the central location 
of the country within the region. 
38. The Director General was to be congratulated on the effective- implementation 
of the Agency's programme for the past year. Ceylon greatly appreciated 
the close and continuous interest shown in meeting the needs of the developing' 
countries, within the limits of the resources available. The Director General's 
broad humanitarian approach to all problems, scientific, technical or 
administrative, had undoubtedly been conducive to their satisfactory solution. 
39. He particularly welcomed the Director General's comments on the need for 
an impartial international civil service, and agreed that that could best be 
secured by a wider geographical representation on the Agency's staff at all 
levels. He also wholeheartedly agreed that a rotation of posts was essential 
to the attainment of that end. The Director General had appealed for help 
in achieving those objectives and it was for Member States to respond to that 
appeal in the spirit in which it had been made. 
40. Mr. SALAM (Pakistan) said that, as would be seen from the report 
of the Board of Governors, the Agency after seven years of operation had come 
to maturity under the able leadership of its Director General. 
41. He would like, at the outset, to express Pakistan's appreciation for the 
help given to its Atomic Energy Commission in evaluating the bids for its first 
projected 70-MW power reactor at Rooppur. Assistance of the same kind would 
be of great value to other developing countries undertaking nuclear power 
programmes. 

GC(VHl)/OR.86 
page 11 


42. Secondly, Pakistan welcomed the reorganization of the Department of 
Technical Assistance, which should ensure efficient handling of technical 
assistance requests within the Secretariat. It was also satisfied with the 
fellowship programme, as now functioning. Hov/ever, with regard to research 
contracts and the supply of equipment, it was of the opinion that laboratories 
in developing countries should receive a greater share. The developing 
countries had reached a stage of maturity which meant that there was now much 
less need for experts to accompany equipment received from the Agency. The 
Agency's efforts in connection with the establishment of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics were also appreciated5 the Centre appeared 
to he warmly welcomed by the physics community of the world. 
43. The Third Geneva Conference had foreshadowed the coming of the nuclear 
age. It had been heartening to learn that the promise of cheap and abundant 
power was likely to be fulfilled in the near future5 also that the technological 
revolutions heralded by low-cost sea-water desalination and the 
Plowshare projects might soon be realized. It was a gratifying prospect that 
as early as 1970? &f. of the world's power requirements might be met from 
nuclear resources and that as much as 4000 MW of the total might be produced 
in regions outside Europe and North America. It seemed that the "military" 
atom was-indeed close to being harnessed for peaceful purposes. 
44" But alongside that optimism a new and insistent fear was arising? that 
a growth in the capacity of nuclear weapons might follow in the wake of a 
civilian nuclear pcwer programme. The four nuclear Powers apart, the world 
was divided into two groupss the'semi-industrialized countries which already 
had or were planning to procure in the near future foreign power reactors? 
and the industrialized nations - mainly in Europe - which possessed sophisticated 
nuclear industries that could be used, if the wish were there, to embark on 
serious weapons programmes. Barring some exceptions, such as India, Japan 
and Canada, not all countries had unequivocally declared their nuclear intentions. 
It was true that most countries had signed the Moscow Partial Test Ban Treaty, 
that the mere possession of a nuclear power reactor or a plutonium separation 
facility was no proof that a nation intended to manufacture weapons, and that 
SLich weapons were still cripplingly expensive to produce, but despite all that. 



GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 12 


the world' dared not forget that by 1970 civilian power reactors alone would 
be producing more than 25, tons of high-grade plutonium a year, in countries 
at present outside the "nuclear club"., Nor should it be overlooked that 


technology was never static5 it was fully conceivable that there might soon 
be as big a breakthrough, in weapons technology as had been witnessed recently 


in nuclear .power technology. Those were sobering thoughts that could be 


ignored only to the world's peril.. 


45. The question arose as to what the Agency, which had been set up for the 
purpose of promoting "safe" nuclear power, could do 'to reduce the suspicions,. 
tensions and insecurities which the mere existence in any region of a large 
uninspected nuclear facility was bound to generate Clearly, the first step 
was to urge Member States to make an unambiguous declaration of their peaceful 
nuclear intentions. The Agency, admittedly, was not the ideal forum for 
action of the kind but it certainly was the right one for the inevitable 
corollary of such a declaration, namely, announcement of the opening of 
national facilities to international inspection and safeguards, by both the 
developed and the developing countries. A second corollary was that the 
Agency's safeguards system should be simple, straightforward, practical and 
effectiveo It was heartening to learn that the Yforking Group to Review the 
Agency''s Safeguards System was aiming precisely at such a system in its 
recommendations. 
46. Last but not least, the Agency could and should urge upon countries 
exporting power reactors and fuel fabrication facilities to recognize their 
immense responsibility to rule out competition in so far as safeguards were 
concerned.. In plain words, no large reactor facility should be offered in the 
world market until and unless some standard - regional or international safeguards 
and inspection practice had been devised and operated- No bilateral 
system could ever give the requisite sense of, security that the world needed47• 
In his address at the Third Geneva .Conference, Mr- Smyth of the United 
States had made a plea- for recognition of the fact that in the use of nuclear 
energy the whole world was involved., And the whole world- had to be assured 
that no material in a .nuclear power plant was being diverted to the making of 
bombso It was in that spirit that-the Pakistan delegation-recommended that the 



OC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 13 


General Conference and the Board of Governors should use their influence to 
ensure that, as a first step, countries exporting manufactured nuclear 
facilities reached agreement on a standardized, non-discriminatory safeguards 
system. In that matter, the larger interests of mankind transcended narrower 
national, political or commercial considerations. 


48. Miss' MEAGHER (Canada) said that the Canadian delegation approved 
the report of the Board of Governors which showed that, during the past year, 
the Agency had made a worthwhile contribution to the development of nuclear 
energy for, peaceful purposes throughout the, world. At the seventh regular 
session of the General Conference a long-term plan covering the Agency's 
work over the following five years had been approved, and detailed blueprints 
for the first two years of that five-year period were now before the Conference. 
Such biennial programming in the framework of a long-term plan was a sound 
approach, which would enable the Agency to make the most effective use of"its 
funds and manpower. 
49• The Agency's resources, however, were strictly limited and had to be 
carefully budgeted so as to produce the maximum results. The programme of 
conferences, symposia and seminars should therefore, be drawn up with a view 
to.attracting scientists of the,highest calibre and should, concentrate on 
subjects of particular interest. Care should be exercised in awarding 
research contracts% and strict priorities should be applied to the programme 
of work in the Agency's laboratories. The eminent scientists who served on 
the Scientific Advisory Committee were to be congratulated on the assistance 
they had rendered in those respects to the Director General and the Agency 
as a whole. 

50. The Canadian delegation was ready to co-operate, as in the past, in 
assisting less-developed countries in establishing and developing their atomic 
energy programmes, for which the essential foundation was a core of trained 
personnel and the acquisition of expertise. The recent tendency to favour 
fairly large-scale technical assistance projects was perhaps unwise, as it 
could benefit only a few countries and might lead to an undesirable concentration 
of resources. 

GO (VIII)/OR,86 
page 14 


51. Perhaps the Agency's most important regulatory activity was that of 
establishing and administering safeguards5 as a Member of the Board of 
Governors, Canada vra.s participating in the work of the Working Group to 
Review the Agency's Safeguards System,, 
52. The Canadian delegation warmly welcomed the proposed establishment of a 
joint IAEA-FAO division, which symbolized the recognition of.-the increasing 
need for the Agency to work more closely with other specialized agencies 
concerned in the application of atomic energy techniques in particular spheres. 
53. For the past two decades, Canada had concentrated on the development of 
the natural-uranium heavy-water power reactor, and it was heartening that 
full-scale commercial power stations were now being built which were competitive 
with alternative sources of power. 
54. All the difficulties experienced in connection with the 20-MW nuclear 
power demonstration reactor (NPD), which had been in operation for two and 
a half years, had been overcome5 on-power refuelling of the reactor had 
become a matter of routine? no fuel failures had been encountered and present 
reactivity indicated that the predicted high burn-up would be achieved0 
Heavy water losses had been reduced to acceptable levels5 and the NPD reactor 
had been operated continuously since the beginning of the year with a capacity 
factor of 84?.> 
55. Capital costs of the 200-MW power station at Douglas Point, Ontario, 
equipped with a CANDU reactor, were within the original estimates, and the 
station would come into operation in the following year. 
56. It had recently been decided to build a 1000-MW station with two CABDU-type 
reactors. The cost of power from the station would be less than 4 mills/kWh. 
To ensure minimum-cost heavy water the Canadian Government had supported the 
construction of a heavy-water production plant with a capacity of 200 tons per 
year. 
57. There had been a notable increase in the use of gamma-ray medical therapy 
units of Canadian design and manufacture, and also in the demand for large 
cobalt-60 irradiators to sterilize surgical sutures - a development of great 
industrial significance. A large number of versatile laboratory-size 

GC(viIl)/OR.86 
page 15 


irradiators had been produced, one of which - a gamma cell 220 containing 
14 000 curies of cobalt-60 - had recently been donated by Canada to the Agency's 
laboratory at Seibersdorf. Such irradiators had been used in the production 
of -vaccines, in the manufacture of cotton textiles resistant to rot and in 
the irradiation of staple foods to prevent sprouting and other spoilage. 


58. Many foreign experts had visited Canadian atomic establishments and 
Canadian experts had exchanged experiences with colleagues in many countries„ 
Canada's ninth bilateral agreement had been signed with Spain only the previous 
week. 
59. Canada continued to co-operate with India in the nuclear energy field, 
and an agreement had recently been signed for the construction of a 200-MW 
CANDU power station in Rajasthano 
60o The Canadian Government intended to co-operate fully in making the Agency 
an effective international instrument for the development of the peaceful uses 


of atomic energy* It wholeheartedly supported the Director General's view that 


there should be rotation of senior posts in the Secretariat and that retiring 


officers should not automatically be replaced by candidates of the same 
nationality. As was known, Canada had been opposed to compulsory assessments 
on Member States to support the operational programme, but it agreed that the 
Agency could not carry out its proper functions without the loyal financial 
support of all Members, and urged all States to contribute to the General Fund 
on a voluntary basis so that the operational programmes could be fully and 
effectively implemented„ 


61. Mr. BMELYAMOY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that the 
Agency should draw the necessary conclusions for its future work from the 
exchange of ideas, knowledge and experience between scientists and specialists 
from different countries at the Third Geneva Conference, 
62„ For the continued development of international co-operation - within the 
framework of such conferences as those held at Geneva or, on a more permanent 
basis, within the framework of the International Atomic Energy Agency - a stable 
international situation was the first necessity,. International tension had 
lessened, thanks partly to the conclusion of the Moscow Partial Tost Ban Treaty, 
as a result of which for more than year there had been no testing of atomic 



CO (VIII)/OH.86 • 
nago 16 


weapons either in the atmosphere, under water or on land and radioactive 
contamination of the atmosphere had been halted. It had been agreed not to 
put nuclear weapons into outer space .and to curtail the production of fissionable 
ma.te.rial for military purposes. Ho welcomed those first steps which 
showed that where good-will was present ways could he found to resolve even 
the rn^st corplicated prchlems„ However, his delegation wished to express its 
anr./icty a; the facb that among seme nations there had been increased evidence 
of foTces at work which were deeply hostile to the interests of peace and 
co-operation| that could only hinder collaboration in the use of atomic energy 
fo. peaceful purposes. 


63• Turning to the matter raised by the delegations of several African 
countries concerning sanctions against the Republic of South Africa and Portugal, 
he oh^eT-ved that the question of those countries had heen the constant preoccv-.-
atien of the United. Nations for many years, and that in numerous 
resolutions the C-Ov"er:.im.a'; of bhe Republic of South Africa had heen urged to 
diocor.tirue itJ criminal policy of racial discrimination and apartheid and the 
Cov-rnment of POT tvgal had heen caller1 i^cn to implement the Declaration on 
the Crani Ing of Indep end once to Colonial Countries and Peoples., The Soviet 
&•-. og'i tic-i .'/a' •vovy sympathetic to the demands of the African countries, and 
she red thi'LI-'" eep a^x:' ety at the policies practised by the Republic of South 
.Africa and Per I'ugcl. 


64. ^penkirg of the .Agency's activity over the past year, he recalled that for 
i i.o f.'.rvt '• trie the /gciicy had taken an active part in the organization of a 
Gereve Conference on the • laooful'Uses of Atomic Energy, and had acquitted 
.'tself salnsfacic-'i'iv. C":;efuJ work had heen carried out relating to the 
training of pe^so^ncl arid tne air change of .information, in particular the 
o.vgv., issaticn of "."..ric'j'j scLenrjfj.c and technical conferences attended by 
so? : -/-, is trs and cpec.'.aT' c t 3 fro;-, mauy countries. The Agency's activity in 
regard -to rad-ionscrcp; applications should, promote the wider use of isotopes 
in agriculture, indue.-,?y a- d, ncro especially, in therapeutic medicine. A 
ce:;T,ain amount of work had. been done on the revision of the Agency's safeguards 
oj'Stc.M, by a working-group appointed by the Board of Governors. But that was 
only a beginning, and tie work in question must be developed'and co-operation 
of e\ or., kind increased. 

GC(VIII)/OH.86 
page 17 


65= An example of such co-operation was the meeting of specialists from the 
United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to 
consider the problems of water desalination. Agreement had been reached on the 
precise form the scientific and technical co-operation between the two countries 
should take, including the exchange of scientific papers and of experience 
gained in work on experimental plants. The specialists of both countries had 
agreed that such scientific and technical co-operation was of benefit not 
only to the two countries concerned bu also to many countries where there was a 
shortage of fresh water. 


660 Co-operation within the framework of the Agency could develop in the 
context of joint projects such as the programme proposed by the socialist 
countries for the establishment of medical centres and physics laboratories 
in the developing countries„ In putting forward that programme in 1962 the 
socialist countries had assumed that it would be a combined project. From the 
very beginning the socialist countries had expressed their willingness to 
defray one third of the total cost. That had not prevented their proposal 
meeting a cool reception from the Western Powers, while receiving a good 
response from the developing countries, many of which had expressed an earnest 
wish to see such centres constructed. 

67. Analysis of the requests received from various countries, together with 
the discussions held on the matter in the Board of Governors, showed that it 
was no accident that the developing countries were more interested in the establishment 
of radiological centres than of physics laboratories. The information 
collected by the Agency regarding-available radiologi-'al centres 
indicated that there were very few such centres in the developing countries. 
Out of 698 cobalt plants in use in the world, there were, fo±- example, only 
two in Africa, in Asia (excluding Japan) - 18, and in Latin America - 38. 
68* When the proposal had been discussed by the Board at its September meetings, 
the socialist countries had accordingly proposed that the physics laboratories 
be replaced by an equivalent (in terms of cost) number of medical centres. 
However, on that occasion too, the Western Powers had declined to take part in 
the programme. The United States had proposed an amendment to the draft 
resolution submitted to the Board, which referred to what was to be done about 
one third of the resources only, namely that part offered by the socialist 
countries% about the remaining two thirds the resolution had nothing whatever 
to say. 


GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 18 


69. He recalled that in resolution GC(VII)/RES/l52 the General Conference had 
expressed the hope that further offers might be forthcoming to provide the 
equipment, apparatus and fellowships for, or the financial resources required 
to implement, the remaining two thirds of the programme.. In that connection 
he reproached the Secretariat for not having displayed the necessary energy 
to carry out the project in full, but rather having concerned itself with 
studying purely formal questions, without taking any effective action. 
70. Although the Western Powers were unwilling to participate in the project, 
the socialist countries had decided nevertheless to offer that help to the 
developing countries which were Members of the Agency. They were placing at 
the disposal of those countries equipment for the construction of the number 
of radiological centres provided for under the terms of their proposal, i.e. 
up to a value of 700 000 roubles, regardless of whether the Western Powers 
took part in the programme or not. 
71o The resolution adopted by the Board of Governors left two possible 
courses opens either to place the programme on the same footing as the Agency's 
regular technical assistance projects, or to handle it on a bilateral basis, 
outside the Agency. If the Western Powers did not participate in the programme 
proposed by the socialist countries, or if the developing countries themselves 
did not wish to become involved with the whole complicated bureaucratic system 
of obtaining help through the Agency, then thero was no alternative for the 
socialist countries but to provide such help on a bilateral basis.' In any case 
the socialist countries would consider that they were providing the help in 
question as their voluntary contribution to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. 


72. The Soviet delegation had more than once pointed out the connection between 
the prospects for the Agency's activity and the progress in disarmament 
talks, and called upon the Agency to help in settling that most important 
problem. Two years previously the Agency had finally got round to studying 
the question of the economic and social consequences of disarmament. That study, 
had resulted in the first draft of a document that would graphically demonstrate 
the advantages disarmament would bring to mankind in regard to the development 
of nuclear power. However, although the study had been continued during the 
past year, very little had been accomplished in practice. -No thorough study 

GC(vIIl)/OR.86 
page 19 


of the economic and social consequences of disarmament was at present being 
carried out in the Agency„ Moreover, the Western Powers were not in favourof 
any such study, as had emerged at a meeting which the Director General had 
held with representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom and the 
Soviet Union*. The Agency was .being allotted the role of consultant to the 
United Nations. Meanwhile, a serious study of the economic and social consequences 
of disarmament could have been embarked upon, and might have helped 
to mobilize support for solving the problem of disarmament as soon as possible. 


73. After listing the Agency's activities over the past year in the field of 
safeguards, he declared that the Soviet delegation was in favour of safeguards, 
and therefore considered that the decision to extend the safeguards system to 
large reactors was a step in the right direction, as it would have been 
illogical to impose controls on small reactors and to leave large reactors 
uncontrolled. The decision to carry out a general review of the safeguards 
system was also correct, as the present system was difficult to apply. 
74. However, in that connection, certain tendencies had appeared against 
which it was necessary to be on guard. For example, some members of the 
Working Group to Review the Agency's Safeguards System evidently thought that 
the Agency should be used for the purpose of controlling nuclear disarmament. 
His delegation could not support that view. In its Statute it was laid down 
as the Agency's objective "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". 
75. The representatives of certain Western Powers were more and more frequently 
heard to remark that the Agency's main task was to discharge controlling functions. 
He could not agree. He disagreed even more strongly with the idea that the 
Agency should be used for controlling nuclear disarmament. 
76. As regards the practical application of safeguards, the Agency had a 
number of things to be controlled and the necessary control machinery. But how 
did that machinery work? It comprised a staff of ten inspectors, approved by 
the Board of Governors. In all, twenty-two inspections had been carried out on 
eight inspection missions. A national of Argentina had participated in all 
twenty-two inspections,, while a national of the Soviet Union had not participated 
in one. While he had nothing against the representative of Argentina who 

GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 20 


was taking part- in such important work, he was concerned that neither the 
Soviet representative nor the representatives of certain other countries had 


taken part' in the inspections. As far as qualifications were concerned, the 
Soviet member of the staff was a specialist in reactors and had worked for 
many years on atomic power stations. 


77• In political language that would he called "discrimination", and that was 
what he had had in mind when he had urged that the principle governing 


selection of the inspection teams should he clarified, 


780 Concerning the application of safeguards to bilateral agreements, although 
the Statute empowered the Agency to discharge the control functions envisaged 
by such agreements, it also provided for the parties to the bilateral agreement 
to pay the expenses the Agency incurred in connection with the 
implementation of such safeguards. 


79- The United States of America had recently placed several of its bilateral 
agreements under Agency safeguardss those with Japan, Norway, Austria and 
other countries. In that connection it was surprising that the Agency had 
taken upon itself not only the responsibilities but also the expense, thereby 
freeing the United States from both. That was not good practice. It should 
he borne in mind that the Agency's expenses in that respect- might well rise 
considerably in the future. During consideration of the question in the 
Board one Governor had said that the Agency's budget might reach fifty to one 
hundred million dollars a year. It was therefore important to take the right 
line on the matter in question from the very outset. 


80. It was agreed that the Agency's safeguards should be regarded as a means 
of preventing the spread of nuclear weapons? but there was no point in perfecting 
the safeguards system so that the Agency's assistance should not be 
used for promoting the spread of nuclear weapons, while at the same time 
turning a blind eye to the fact that there were other channels open which 
could also ultimately lead to the spread of nuclear weapons. 
81. In conclusion he wished success to the eighth regular session of the 
General Conference and expressed his hope that a spirit of co-operation and 
good-will might govern its work. 

GC(VIII)/OR,86 
page 21 


82, Mr. SUDARSOHO (Indonesia) warmly welcomed Cyprus, Kuwait, Madagascar 


and Kenya as Member States of the Agency but regretted that the People's 


Republic o.f China was still not represented and that Africa was represented 


on the Board of Governors by South Africa, whose apartheid policy his country 


condemned, 


83= In Indonesia, the Atomic Energy Institute had been set up in 1958. Because 


of the absence of scientific manpower, one of its first tasks had been to 


create training centres, twc of which were being set up under the first fiveyear 
programmes one at the University of Jogjakarta, equipped with a sub


critical assembly, a radioisotope le.brratory, a gamma irradiator and a reactor 


simulator5 and the other at Eandung, whose activities would be centred on a 


TRIGA reactor, The centre at Jogjakarta was completed, while that -at Bandung 
was waiting for its first shipment of fuel and should be in full operation 


early in the coming year. 


84. Work had already begun on two research centress one of which, at Serpong, 
near Djakarta, would have an IRT reactor and various laboratories1 while the 
other, at Pasar'Djumat, would specialize in research into minerals and materials 
and the application of radioisotopes, 
65. Preliminary surveys for radioactive minerals had been carried out in Java 
and Kalimantan,' The Atomic Energy Institute had conducted a number of courses 
on health physics, the medical and agricultural applications of radioisotopes 
and reactor operation, A nationwide seminar had been held in March 1962 and a 
study group on atomic energy policy in March 1963. The X-ray clinic at the 
Djakarta General Hospital, intended for medical applications of radioisotopes, 
was being extended, and work was being resumed on a radioisotope distribution 
centre at Pasar Mihggu* 
860 Progress on the whole had been satisfactory, but much of course remained 


to be done. His delegation believed that the Agency could be of great assistance 


in at least three respects. One was the fellowship programme. The Agency had 
been largely instrumental in increasing the number of qualified scientists and 


engineers in Indonesia, but the length of time that candidates for fellowships 
had to wait before receiving a decision from the Agency had led to a number of 
withdrawals, and that had affected the Institute's programme. Secondly, he 



GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 22 


hoped that the Agency would play a more active role in encouraging the 
establishment of a radioisotope training centre, which would help to stimulate 
scientific activity in a developing country like Indonesia. Thirdly, while 
many developing countries- already possessed experts in certain fields - thanks 
partly to Agency help - they lacked the foreign exchange necessary for obtaining 
equipment. The Agency should explore possibilities of making outright 
grants of equipment, instead of sending experts with some equipment. That 
would save effort and expense all round, as countries sometimes requested' 
experts primarily with a view to obtaining equipment. 


87. The Third Geneva Conference had revealed that economic comparisons of 
methods of providing nuclear power were as conflicting as ever. The Indonesian 
delegation proposed that the Agency - which had already made some studies of 
nuclear power generating costs - should assist Member States which were still 
in the process of formulating their nuclear power programmes by providing 
technical evaluations of existing nuclear power stations of different types.' 
880 Indonesia was emphatically opposed to the use of atomic energy for 
military purposesy it had signed the Partial Test Ban Treaty and was therefore 
not opposed to safeguards in principle3 but the existing safeguards system 
was highly discriminatory in that it was directed only towards States receiving 
assistance, i.e. the developing countries, which in any case lacked the 
resources for nuclear weapons programmes.- The latest proposal of the Working 
Group to Review the Agency's Safeguards System was to extend safeguards to 
equipment, services, facilities and information. That would be highly 
detrimental to developing countries, as it would probably lead to long delays 
in the provision of Agency assistance, if not to its complete cessation, which 
was wholly contrary to the purposes and aims of the Agency. 

89. Mr. BAXTER (Australia), commenting on the Agency's activities, notod 
with satisfaction the continued expansion of its work in South East Asia and 
the Pacific. The Agency had greatly stimulated the progress of nuclear 
technology in that area, and the,.conferences held had afforded Australia a newinsight 
into the problems facing the development of tire peaceful uses of atomic 
energy- in that part of the world. 

GC (TIH) /OR. 86 
page 23 


90o Referring to the use of atomic explosives in civil engineering, the first 
of three aspects of the peaceful use of atomic energy which he particularly 
wished to mention., he considered that that revolutionary technique was of 
special interest to countries which still had to undertake major development 
work. Australia was heartened by the progress being made under the United 
States Atomic Energy Commission's "Plowshare" programme. 


91= The second aspect he wished to mention was a far more familiar one, 
namely the use of radioisotopes in agriculture, medicine and industry. That 
was another area in which atomic energy could contribute to solving vital 
human problems. 


92o Although Australia's main effort in the field of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy was power reactor development, to which he would refer subsequently, 
the country was also producing a wide range of radioisotopes from 
high-activity cobalt to short-lived isotopes for medical and biological 
research - for both domestic use and export,. Powerful radiation sources 
were being used regularly in industry for sterilization, and very promising 
research had been in progress for some time on the reduction and control of 
the fruit fly and on the extension of the storage life of fruit and other 
foodstuffs. 


93o Australia was also examining the possibility of using radiation to dis


infest cereal products. There was already considerable evidence to show 


that radiation disinfestation in no way affected the wholesomeness of grain, 


and the principal outstanding problem was to devise a process of radiation 


disinfestation which was acceptable from the point of view of cost. Much 
work remained to be done in that field. 


94. In civil engineering extensive use had been made of isotopes in the 
solution of silt problems in estuaries and harbours, and a most important study 
of that type had just started in Botany Bay. 
95• The Australian authorities realized that public reaction to the use of 
radioactive materials in engineering and in industry generally was a most 


important matter, and an investigation o,f public feeling on the subject had 
recently been initiated. 



GC(VIII)/OR.86 
page 24 


960 He then turned to the subject of power reactors, the third aspect of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy to which he wished to refer. It was expected 
that 'the immediate role'of nuclear power in Australia, would he small unless it 
could be produced at costs significantly below those expected from current 
types of reactor. However, although nuclear power could not compete with 
cheap coal in Australia, a number of nuclear power stations would probably be 
built in the near future, with the object of providing technical experience, 
serving special localities and perhaps providing test facilities.. 


97. Australian scientists had for some years been working on a very hightemperature 
reactor system and agreed with views expressed at the Third 
Geneva Conference that the ultimate low-cost, high-efficiency power reactor 
would probably be developed on the basis of that system.. * 
98„ The Australian delegation was pleased to note the progress made during 
the year in the field of regulatory activities, particularly with regard to 
the revision of the Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive 
Materials, the Code of Practice for the Provision of Radiological Protection 
Services, and the Code of Practice for Personnel Monitoring. Those regulations 
and manuals would prove of considerable value, and Australian regulations and 
procedures were broadly compatible with those formulated by the Agency. He 
had, however, to confess to misgivings about some aspects of the Regulations 
for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials. Their effect should not be 
to restrict everyday transactions unnecessarily or to place nuclear technology 
at a disadvantage relative to other technologies which might well be regarded 
as less safe. While on the subject of the transport of radioactive materials, 
he wished to place on record his Government's appreciation of the co-operation 
received from countries involved in Australia's international transport of 
those materials. 


99. Turning to safeguards, he said that his delegation considered three points 
of cardinal importances firstly, the Agency's system should be simplified? 
secondly, it should embrace relevant facilities and equipment as well as nuclear 
materials5 and thirdly, provisions relating to quantities, sizes and so on 
should be based on realistic considerations, both as regards the circumstances 
of each case and the state of development of nuclear technology. 

GC(VIII)/OR,86 
page 25 


100. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Agency for inviting Australia to 
sit on some of the panels which had worked on the Agency's regulatory codes. 
His Government was pleased to assist in that work and looked forward to the 
day when the Agency's Safety Series would he universally accepted hy Member 
States. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 


101. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure, 
the Conference was required to fix the closing date of the session in the 
light of a recommendation hy the General Committee. 
102. The General Committee had discussed the question and had unanimously 
agreed that sufficient time must he allowed for thorough discussion of all 
items on the agenda. It had been recognized that it would he undesirable for 
a closing date to he fixed which would in any way limit the amount of time 
available for discussion of any item and particularly for the general debate. 
103. The General Committee had authorized him to propose a closing date, once 
the general debate was well under way. He was accordingly now suggesting that 
the Conference should provisionally set Friday, 18 September, as the closing 
date of the session. I?" during the course of Friday it became apparent that 
more work remained than could reasonably be completed during that day, the 
session would continue, without question, until such time as all business had 
been disposed of in good order. 
104• The President's suggestion was accepted. 


The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(VIII)/OR.87 

19 January 1965 


- GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

Eighth regular session 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 16 September 1964, at 3.25 p.m. 

President: Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report of the Board of 1 - 85 
Governors for 1963-1964 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 


Federal Republic of Germany, 1-1 1 
Congo (Leopoldville) 12 - 19 . 
Hungary 20-26 
Gabon 27 - 33 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 34 - 49 
Nigeria 50-59 
Sweden 60 -66 
Japan 67 - 73 
China 74 - 79 

Thailand 80 - 85 

*GC(VIII)/285 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(VIII)/INF/75/Rev.2. 


64-6694 



GC(vIIl)/OR„&7 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1963-64 (continued) 
(GC(VIII)/270, 270/Corr.l, 270/Md.l, 2 and J, 280) 


1. Mr. SCHULTE-MEERMAM (Federal Republic of Germany) regretted that 
the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, 
which had eclipsed the seventh anniversary of the Agency by attracting the 
attention and interest of a worldwide public to a greater extent than did the 
annual sessions of the General Conference, had not been organized by the Agency 
itself. The latter should have had the honour of adding that important event 
at the head of the impressive list of scientific meetings which it organized 
under its programme of exchange of knowledge in the field of nuclear sciences. 
However,, that regret did not lessen his satisfaction at noting that the Geneva 
Conference had achieved valuable results in promoting the application of 
atomic energy to the service of mankind, and he was glad that the responsibility 
for the scientific aspects of the Conference had been entrusted to the 
Director General of the Agency. 
2. Things had augured well for the Geneva Conference. Progress by the 
nuclear power stations towards the stage when they would be economically 
competitive had been particularly rapid during the past year. In its annual 
report to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, the Agency 
had been able to state that nuclear power now seemed competitive even in areas 
where conventional power sources were cheap. Thus, a new factor now existed 
which would be decisive in the future of the Agency. 
3. The rapid, almost revolutionary, development of nuclear technology had 
also facilitated implementation of the plans drawn up under the Federal 
Republic of Germany's medium-term programme for the building of nuclear power 
stations. Once the construction of research reactors had provided the 
necessary foundations for training and research, efforts had been concentrated 
on building experimental nuclear stations. A boiling water reactor had been 
in operation at ICahl since i960. A high-temperature gas-cooled pebble-bed 
reactor and a multi-purpose pressurized heavy-water research reactor would be 
put into operation in 1965 at Julich and Karlsruhe respectively. 
4. Meanwhile, a nuclear power station demonstration programme had been 
launched. A 2^-lM boiling water reactor was being built at Gundremmingen, 
and would be completed by the end of 1965. A 250-MW boiling water reactor 

GC(vni)/OR.87 
page J 


with, oil-fired superheat near Lingen, a 280-MW pressurized water reactor at 
Obrigheim and a 25-MW steam superheat experimental reactor at Kahl were planned 
for 1968„ An experimental sodium-cooled reactor and a gas-cooled heavy water 
reactor, of 100 MW, were under consideration*. Under the Federal Republic of 


Germany's long-term programme, there was provision for the development of a 
fast neutron breeder reactor at Karlsruhe and of a high-temperature thorium 


reactor at Julich. Finally, in June 1964 the ore-carrying vessel "Otto Hahn" 
had been launched, which would be equipped with a pressurized water reactor of 


an advanced type and would begin its trials in 1967


5-> His delegation's particularly favourable assessment of the future activity 
of the Agency was not based only on the promising developments in the field of 
power. There were other reasons for an optimistic view. With the end of the 
term of office of its first Director General, Mr. Sterling Cole, the Agency's 
"shakedown" period had come to an end| and it had been necessary to adapt the 
isgoncy's work and its internal structure to the many changes which had taken 
-place since its establishment in the areas of science, technology, economics 
and politics., All delegations had then agreed that a period of consolidation 
should follow. The documents submitted to the present session showed that the 
process of consolidation was now in its turn complete. The fact had of course 
to be faced that the resources of the operational budget would not exceed 
02 million, but the Programme for 1965-66—' was well balanced, and, thanks to 
the judicious selection of priorities, considerable success seemed quite 
possible, even with extremely limited financial means. The German delegation 
hoped that the first practical test of the biennial programme would justify 
that expectation, and that the programme would ensure continuity while still 
permitting the modifications necessary to meet new developments, 

6, The Agency's financial difficulties affected more particularly technical 
assistance to the developing countries, which rightly held a position of 
priority. However, the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany was 
convinced that better co-ordination of the three essential elements of technical 
assistance - expert services, provision of equipment and training of fellows and 
the administrative measures taken in that respect by the Director General, 
namely the creation of the Department of Technical Assistance, would give 
satisfactory results. 


1/ GC(VIII)/275o 



GC(VIII)/0E..7 
page 4 r 


7. In that field of.activity, special mention should be made of a new 
experiment providing for the conclusion of aid-to-research contracts with the 
developing countries, enabling experts returning from training 'courses abroad 
to use on the.spot the knowledge they had gained. Those contracts could form 
an important contribution-to-the faster modernization of the developing 
countries. 
8. In a similar vei'n, his delegation had suggested at the seventh regular 
session that there should be co-operation on the basis of "pairing off" nuclear 
centres in' advanced countries with corresponding centres in the developing 
2/ 


ones.,—' It would now like to make a firm proposal in order to take that 
suggestion-further. The Federal Republic intended to offer a number of 
fellowships at the Garching Eesearch Centre, near Munich? the holders would be 
able to install experimental equipment there which would subsequently be 
transferred to a centre in their own country. Experts at Garching would be 
ready to give their full support to the fellows for their work at their 
national centres. 


9. The annual report of the Board of Governors to the General Conference 
expressed the hope that the Agency would be able to submit a number of other 
reports on experience resulting from the design, construction and operation of 
nuclear power stations. The Federal Republic was prepared to draw up such a 
report on the experimental nuclear centre at Kahl-am-Main, in collaboration 
with the Agency. 
10. The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany had always been well 
disposed towards the research work conducted by the Agency itself. For that 
reason it welcomed the successful development of the Laboratory of Marine 
Radioactivity at Monaco. It was ready to agree to judicious continuation of 
the work of the Seibersdorf Laboratory, and to the proposals for expansion 
put forward in the long-term programme. It would also support the setting up 
of a safeguards laboratory if that seemed appropriate and necessary. 
11. He was pleased to be able to conclude, on the present occasion also, by 
affirming his Government's confidence in the future of the Agency, and its 
readiness to give the Agency full support. . . 
2/ GC(VII)/0E.78, para. 61. 



GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 5 


12. Mr. TSHIMBALAHGA (Congo (Leopoldville)) said that the Congolese 
delegation unreservedly approved the declaration made in the name of all the 
3/ 


African States condemning the policy of apartheid practised by South Africa.—' 


13'. At the close of the Third Geneva Conference it had been clearly apparent 
that the most urgent problems for the developing-countries were the methods of 
applying nuclear science rather than the acquisition of theoretical knowledge. 


14. Those countries had to set up without delay the planning bodies to evolve 
a scientific policy possessing the highest possible degree of autonomy. In 
that difficult task, which would enable them to reap all the benefits of 
discoveries in nuclear science, the technical and financial assistance of the 
advanced countries and of the Agency was destined to play an ever more 
important role. In that connection, one fact had to be recognized at the 
outsets a country's means of scientific production increasingly involved 
considerable investments as well as continuing items of expenditure for 
maintenance and depreciation. The scale of nuclear activity and the material 
resources it demanded made it a veritable industry of discovery, invention and 
practical application. To solve the financial problem which nuclear activities 
posed, the developing countries must necessarily move in the direction of 
regional co-ordination of effort. 
15. The efforts of the United Arab Republic and those of the Congo (Leopoldville) 
were firmly based on a regional outlook. The Congolese Government was proud of 
the endorsement given to those efforts by the decision of the Board of Governors 
to transform the Trico nuclear centre at Leopoldville into a regional centre. 
16„ The shortage of experts, of qualified staff and of training facilities 
remained the main difficulty to be resolved. The aid given by the Agency, 
although valuable, was still on too modest a scale. It should be increased, 
and the regional centres should be given more substantial assistance. The 
present arrangements limiting the contribution of the Agency to a maximum of 
$40 0C0 should be revised. In the absence of an immediate decision, a "fund 
for the exploitation of the nuclear power resources of the developing countries 
of Africa" should be created, and endowed on the one hand by voluntary 
contributions and on the other by the surplus from the Agency's regular budget, 


±/ GC(VIII)/OR.84, para. 3. 


GC(VIII)/0E.87 
page 6 


which in the current year was $50 000. The Director General--co-u-ld he 


authorized by the Board of Governors to set that sum aside for financing 
regional projects,' instead of...sharing it among Member States. As for the 
.voluntary contributions, the special fund he had in mind would more easily be 
provided with resources if the aid given involved no restrictions on the 


receiving countries or the methods of use, and if it was supported on .a more 


stable basis than that of the annual goodwill of governments. 


17. The Agency's technical assistance tended to make too clear-cut a 
distinction between expert services and the supply of equipment., -Freedom to 
make transfers between the ijwo should be possible, and when savings could be 
effected on expenditure on experts, they should automatically be assigned to 
supplying equipment, 
18. The Congo would like to have the Agency restrict to a minimum the number 
of research contracts of an over-specialized nature. Those contracts, which 
were of benefit only to the advanced countries, should be replaced by more 
modest projects. - Contracts of that kind could be concluded with the developing 
countries, for they represented an excellent means of training scientific 
personnel. 
19. The extension of the Agency's safeguards to reactors of more than 
100 megawatts should not make the system unnecessarily interfering. The Congo 
did not support the extension of safeguards to the auxiliary equipment of 
power stations. 
20. Mr. TBTBFYI (Hungary) said that the lessening in international 
tension brought about by the Moscow Partial Test San Treaty had had a favourable 
effect on the Agency's activity and on the consolidation of international 
co-operation. The agreement of the major atomic Powers not to send nuclear 
weapons into space and to' reduce the production of fissionable materials for 
military purposes was a further achievement in that direction and contributed 
tc the solution of the most important problem - the attainment of universal 
and complete'disarmament. In that respect the Agency had by no means used all 
the means at its disposal to bring about a positive solution to that question. 
21. On the programme of technical assistance, he said that the Secretariat 
was not doing its best to satisfy the demands of certain of the developing' 
countries, which had long been asking the Agency for installations that could 

GC(VIII)/ORo87 
page 7 


be supplied them on the basis of the proposal made by the socialist countries—' „ 
It was one of the Agency's tasks to give aid to the developing countries„ It 
should therefore help ensure that, as far as the use 6*f atomic energy was 
concerned, the developing countries should not have to follow that long and 
costly, road by which the rest of the world had arrived at its present 'level 
of knowledge. 


22. The admission of another six countries to membership was evidence of the 
growing interest of the developing countries in the Agency's activities and 
underlined the increasingly important role of those countries in international 
organizations. 
23. An analysis of the Agency's activities had led him to the conclusion that, 
of late, the solution of specific problems was becoming of major importance. 
The conferences, symposia? seminars and panels organized by the Agency had 
proved nuocessful. In most cases those undertakings had produced valuable and 
useful results for a number of countries. He valued highly the work that had 
been done- in connection with the analysis of the savings effected by the use 
of isotopes. The 1963 Salzburg Conference on the Application of Large Radiati.on 
Sources in Industry had produced very useful results. The choice of subject 
matter and the quality of the articles in the Agency's publications deserved 
high praise. 


24. -As far .as its resources allowed, Hungary was prepared to participate in 
measures designed to .solve problems relating to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, with special attention to work in the interest .of the developing 
countries. The proposal put forward by the socialist countries at the September 
series of meetings of the Board of Governors would help greatly in implementing 
the programme of assistance to developing countries. By the terms of that 
proposal, the countries offering technical assistance under the programme 
would send experts to help assemble equipment and place it in operation, train 
local personnel and the like. 
25. The Hungarian delegation, in accordance with a proposal it had made at 
the seventh regular session of the General Conference,*^ had prepared and mad 
available to the Agency relevant information on the results of its scientific 
6j GC(vi)/COM.1/67/Rev.1. 
5/ GC(VII)/0H.78, para. 113. 


GC(VTIl)/OR.87 


page 8 


research work. In his opinion, the Hungarian People's Republic could continue 
to play a useful part in the solution of the Agency's scientific and technical 
problems. Hungarian experts had achieved significant results in nuclear 
research and in the application of nuclear technology. The use of isotopes was 
widespread. In 19&3 the Isotope Centre had dispatched about 4000 consignmentsf 
the number of users in the country itself was almost 200, Hungary had begun 
the production of hundreds of isotope preparations and labelled organic compounds. 
Radioisotopes were being used in agriculture., industry and scientific research. 
Scientific research work was being carried out in nuclear physics, chemistry 
and power production and also in applied fields, Detailed reports on the 
results of that work had been made to the Third Geneva Conference. 


26, In conclusion, he wished to reiterate the readiness of the Hungarian 
People's Republic to take an active part in international co-operation in 
matters relating to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 


27, Mr. H'GUEMA NTXMG (Gabon) thanked the Director General for the 


assistance given to Gabon when it had requested admission to the Agency. 


28, Gabon supported the declaration concerning South Africa, 


29. Gabon now occupied an important position among the uranium-rproducing 
countries of Africa? the deposit at Mounana enabled it to make annual exports 
of ore equivalent to 400 tons of uranium metal, and prospecting was being 
continued. That was one of the reasons why it had applied for membership of 
the Agency. He expressed the gratitude of Gabon to the Board of Governors and 
to the delegates of Member States who had declared themselves unanimously in 
favour of its admission. 
JO, The essential objective of the Agency, which was to promote the peaceful 


uses of atomic energy, was in accord with the aspirations of all countries 


which desired progress and peace, and consequently of all the developing 


countries. The manpower, technical and financial potential of Gabon was still 


small, but it had large mining and industrial resources, and it intended to 


increase its contribution to total world resources as much as possible, on the 


understanding that those resources would be used exclusively for peaceful 


purposes, 



GC(VXIl)/OIU87 
page 9 


31. As to the raw materials of energy, Gabon had sufficient quantities of 
natural gas and petroleum to meet its present electricity requirements. Its 
hydroelectric potential was also to be exploited in the near future, and it 
could therefore be expected that over the next ten years conventional energy 
sources would be sufficient to satisfy all the country's needs. Hence there 
was no need to envisage the construction of a nuclear plant in Gabon. 
32. On the other hand, it seemed that every effort should be made to promote 
the use of radioisotopes, particularly in the timber and oil industries, in 
biology and in tropical medicine. Gabon would no0<•?. equipment for that purpose 
and would, above all, have to train personnel, which would probably lead the 
Government to ask for training fellowships. Later on, the Gabon Polytechnical 
Institute, which was in the process of being set up, would be able to undertake 
the training of specialists, and might eventually form the nucleus of a 
scientific centre with a wider regional function. 
33. The Government of Gabon considered that a thorough preliminary study should 
be made before any decision was taken on setting up regional training centres in 
Africa. It was also of the opinion that, in view of the diversity of conditions 
and requirements in the different countries, the Agency should arrange for some 
particular body to study the specifically African problems relating to the 
production and use of nuclear materials. 
34.. Mr. SBVCHBNKO (By elorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) supported the 
declaration by the representatives of African countries condemning the policy 
of apartheid and colonial oppression followed by the Governments of South Africa 
and Portugal. 


35. The eighth regular session of the General Conference was taking place at a 
moment when international tension had somewhat diminished following the 
signature of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in 
Outer Space and Under Water. The Treaty had been welcomed by all progressive 
forces everywhere and had been signed by over 100 States. Peace-loving peoples 
had learnt with great satisfaction of the agreement reached between the Soviet 
Union and the United .States nal; to .place devices with nuclear warheads in orbit 
and of the decision of the three nuclear Powers - the Soviet Union, the United 
States and the United Kingdom - to limit the production of fissionable materials 
for military purposes and to extend their application to peaceful uses. 

GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 10 


36, However, he stressed that the fundamental problems of disarmament were far 
from having been solved by the Moscow Treaty' or the agreements reached on those 
matters. The prolonged negotiations on disarmament at Geneva;, despite the 
great efforts of the socialist and neutral countries, had so far not yielded 
the desired positive result. • 


37, International co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy had 
already increased as a result of the improved international situation following 
the conclusion of the Moscow Partial Test Ban Treaty. That improvement had 
taken the form, in particular; of wider contacts between atomic scientists from 


different countries, exchange' visits between experts and an agreement for 
meetings between Soviet and United States experts on the problem of the use of 
atomic energy for water desalination. The first meeting had already taken 
place in Washington and had proved most useful to both sides, 


38, The Geneva Conference had once more demonstrated the importance of 
scientists exchanging ideas, information and experience on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 


39- As far as the achievements of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
in that field were concerned, a research reactor had come into operation in 
1962 and was being used for experiments in different branches of physics, 
chemistry, biology and medicine. A research laboratory for zero-power reactors 
had recently started operations and would considerably augment the experimental 
facilities of the Byelorussian Atomic Centre. A radiochemical laboratory 
associated with the reactor and for the production of short-lived isotopes and 
labelled compounds would start operation at the end of the year and would permit 
of a considerable increase in the use of short-lived isotopes and labelled 
compounds in scientific research and, more especially, in industry and medicine. 
A universal gamma radiation installation for the irradiation of various 
substances was in the process of assembly. 


40. Commenting on the Agency's work, he noted that during the past' year some 
progress had been made in preparing a long-term plan. Greater attention was 
being given to scientific and technical problems-'and considerably more was being 
done to disseminate the experience of different countries in the construction 
and operation of nuclear power stations and in rendering them more economic, 

GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 11 


as well as in the dissemination of scientific and technical information and the 
organization of conferences, symposia and seminars. 


41. However, the Agency was still doing little to further agreement on disarmament 
and it was not accidental that the Board of Governors' annual report 
to the General Conference made no mention of the fact that the past year had 
seen the conclusion of the Moscow Partial Test Ban Treaty. Nor did it refer 
to the declaration by the Heads of Government of the Soviet Union and the United 
States on 21 April 1964 ahout curtailing the production of fissionable materials 
for military purposes, though that had a direct hearing on the Agencyfs work, 
42. The Agency's activity during recent years showed an increasing tendency towards 
establishing an independent centre for undertaking scientific research. That was 
shovm in particular by plans to expand the Agency's Laboratory, by the fact that 
the Board of Governors had the year before extended the Monaco laboratory 
agreement for five years, etc. The result of all that was a dissipation of 
funds and, in the long run, a reduction of the actual assistance that could be 
granted to countries needing it. 
43. In his opinion, the Agency should not try to become a scientific research 
centre engaging in a wide range of work. Fundamentally, it should be an organ 
for co-ordination and the dissemination of information in the field of scientific 
research, and actual scientific research should be dealt with by Member 
States, which had much better facilities for doing so. The Secretariat, however, 
oblivious of the criticism of a number of delegations, was planning to enlarge 
the Agency's Laboratory and it was proposed to allocate another I36O 000 for that 
purpose. His delegation could not agree to that, nor to the fact that it was 
planned to cover up to 70^ of the cost of maintaining the Laboratory from the 
assessed contributions of Member States, which was contrary to the Agency's 
Statute. 
44. The same comments applied to the matter of safeguards. In violation of 
the Statute, the Agency was using its own budget to meet expenses involved in 
applying safeguards under bilateral agreements and in respect of four reactors 
voluntarily placed under Agency safeguards by the United States of America, 
Carrying out the latter operation alone would cost the Agency $20 000 yearly. 
If that state of affairs continued, the Agency would have to pay several 
million dollars yearly just to cover expenses connected with safeguards. 

GG(VIII)/OR.87 
page 12 


45. Similarly, he did not agree that placing the reactors of some State under 
Agency safeguards could he regarded as a step towards nuclear disarmament. Such 
an approach would only create the illusion that the risk of nuclear war could 
he averted or reduced without disarmament and without the abolition of nuclear 
weapons. 
46. By themselves? the Agency's safeguards would have no value as a means of 
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons throughout the world, if other 
channels for the distribution of nuclear weapons wore not blocked. The very 
countries that were calling for an extended system of safeguards were intent 
on establishing multilateral nuclear forces, through which the Federal Republic 
of Germany would gain access to nuclear weapons. Such a situation was not 
logical and would not lead to disarmament. 
47• At the same time, the Agency was not paying sufficient attention to its 
basic functions. The training programme was being reduced and the proportion 
of financial resources allocated for that purpose was decreasing. In 1963 the 
resources for activities financed under the Expanded Programme for Technical 
Assistance (EPTA) had dropped to 2<jfo as compared with 36.2% in 1962 and from 
40.8^ to 37*5/^ in the case of activities financed from the Agency's own funds. 

een


ia^ ^


The number of applications for fellowships in 19&3 •1- "kke same as in 1962. 
The Secretariat attributed the reduction in the training programme to 
insufficient funds. However, the funds allotted to technical assistance were 
not being fully used. Of $5 364 000 provided for granting technical assistance 
in the years 1958-63 only $3 8l8 000 had been used, i.e. JCffo of the total 

allocated funds. And altogether only about one third of the allocation had 
been used for the 1963 programme, 

48. His delegation drew attention to the principle governing the distribution 
of assistance amongst the various countries and areas. Thus, for example, ten 
African countries were obtaining assistance from the Agency (including assistance 
under EPTA) to a value of about $200 000 yearly, while the puppet regimes 
of Taiwan, South Yiet-Nam and South Korea had received $160 000 in 19."349-
Tn conclusion, he regretted to note that, despite the adoption of two 
resolutions supporting it—' , the socialist countries' proposal for a programme 


of technical assistance had so far not been given effect, owing to the 


6/ GC(VI)/RES/131 and GC(VH)/HES/l52, 



GG(VIII)/OR.87 
page 13 


unwillingness ofvarious countries to join in executing it. The Western Powers 
did not wish to co-operate with the socialist countries in expanding the Agency's 
technical assistance. In those circumstances,the socialist countries were 
compelled to seek other ways of implementing their proposal, in particular that 
part of the programme which they had undertaken to implement themselves. His 
delegation hoped the developing countries, which were interested in receiving 
Agency assistance in the form of equipment, fellowships and experts, would 
appreciate at its true worth the consistent attitude adopted by the socialist 
countries in that matter, 


50. Mr. ABUBAKAR (Nigeria) welcomed those States which had just heen 
admitted to the Agency. 
51. A question that might arise in some inquiring minds was what useful role 
some of the developing countries could play in an international organization 
such as the Agency. Did they confine themselves to making requests, or had 
they also something to offer? The answer to that question was that those 
countries hoped that in*the not too distant future they would he contributing 
substantially to man's scientific achievements. Delegations from the developing 
countries came to the General Conference well aware that co-operation was essential 
for the peaceful coexistence of nations. Although the world was roughly 
divided into the "haves" and the "have nots'1, neither group could disregard the 
existence and the welfare of the other. 
52. Nigeria felt encouraged by the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
However, more of that assistance was needed by the developing countries, 
especially for purposes of applying atomic energy to their development problems. 
Their industries needed power, and they were faced with problems relating to the 
control of pests and diseases, plant breeding, combating soil sterility, and so on. 
53. The Agency should endeavour to supply the developing countries with more 
experts to study their needs and resources in the nuclear field, to help them to 
acquire equipment and implement their programmes and to train their personnel. 
54. The lack of trained personnel was one of the most serious problems facing 
the developing countries. Nigeria therefore wished to suggest that the Agency 
should launch a bold educational programme to includes (l) the training of 
technicians, laboratory assistants and reactor operatorsp (2) post-graduate 

GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 14 


instruction for scientists, physicians and engineers in the application of 
nuclear science to their respective fields| (3) specialized training courses 
in preparation for specific new projects5 (4) occasional short courses or 
symposia for non-technical personnel concerned with the broader aspects of the 
application of nuclear science and atomic energy. 


55* 'IThe endorsement by the Agency of a request by the Government of the 
Congo (Leopoldville) for the establishment of a regional radioisotope centre 
intended for training and research was an eloquent expression of the Agency!s 
goodwill towards the developing countries. He hoped that adequate resources human, 
material and financial - would be made available to the centre and 
that more such centres would be set up. He observed that the'Agency's budget 
for 1965 had 'been increased by 6^, and felt that the increase should be 
reflected in the allocations for technical assistance to the developing countries. 

56. Ee suggested that a special committee should be constituted to make a 
thorough on-the-spot study of the developing countries' needs and to determine 
how atomic energy could best be adapted to meeting them, 
57*' The Nigerxan delegation was opposed to the safeguards system as operated 
by the Agency because it was directed against the developing countries;.and 
belittled their ability to fulfil their obligations under the Statute. He 


asked which country was more likely to divert its atomic energy to military 
uses, a developing country which was struggling with limited resources against 


disease.,, poverty and hunger, or an advanced country without any of those 


problems.-. The safeguards system imposed domination by the technically advanced 


countries on the developing ones, and discouraged the latter from acquiring 


nuclear plants because the safeguards violated their hard-won sovereignty. If 


safeguards had to be applied, they should be applied equally to all countries 


and to all atomic installations. 


58. Supporting the declaration regarding South Africa made by the African 
.countries, he said that his delegation took a serious view of the election of 
that country to the Board of Governors as representative of Africa and the' 
Middle Bast. The fact that South Africa had been accepted as a Member of the 
Agency was bad enough, but its selection to represent Nigeria, among others, 
on the Board was most objectionable, and his delegation viewed the matter with 

GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 15 


grave concern. If regional representation on the Board and on committees 
continued to mean that Nigeria was represented by a State which had not the 
slightest interest in the welfare of the African countries, then the Statute 
should be amended to remove such a gross anomaly inherent in geographical 
representation. 


59. Nigeria was grateful that some of its requests to the Agency for 
assistance had been met, and hoped that others would be satisfied in the near 
future. 
60. air. BRYNIELSSON (Sweden) said that Sweden had followed with great 
satisfaction the progress of the vrork of the Agency as reflected in the report 
of the Board of Governors to the General Conference for 1963-64? a^d approved 
the programme proposed for 1965-66, In particular, the drawing up of a twoyear 
programme would help the Agency to plan its activities efficiently and 
would also assist the Director General to streamline the administration. 
61. The Third Geneva Conference had shown how the Agency could help in promoting 
the exchange of technical information. His delegation congratulated • 
the Director General and his staff on their highly efficient work in organizing 
the Conference. Sweden appreciated the high technical value of the more 
specialized conferences and symposia held under the auspices of the Agency 
and would be happy to act as host for such a meeting. 
62. As regards fellowships, Sweden wished to repeat the offer it had made at 
the seventh regular session and his delegation would hold consultations with 
the Secretariat concerning various, technical fields of interest to Member 
States, for the purpose of extending Sweden's special contribution in the form 
of fellowships. 
63. The A'gesta nuclear power station had been brought to full power some six 
months previously and its performance had been very satisfactory. That had 
confirmed Sweden's belief in the good prospects for its heavy-water reactor 
concept, and the construction of the full-scale station at Marviken was well 
under way. 
64. Sweden was anxious to extend its collaboration in the nuclear field and to 
share its experiences with other Member States. His country also intended to 
contribute to the facilities of the Agency's Laboratory in Seiborsdorf, 

GC(vitt)/OR.87 
page 16 


65* With regard to safeguards, Sweden was a- determined supporter of the 
principle of international control, and recognized the important role which 
the Agency could play in that respect. 


.... 7 / 


66. The unanimous adoption at the seventh regular session of the resolution-*-' 
on the extension of the Agency's safeguards system had been greeted with great 
satisfaction by Sweden, The rapid industrial development now taking place 
called for safeguards procedures which could he applied to large power reactor 
systems. Sweden considered it possible for simple and practical rules relating 
to an effective Agency control system to be worked out, and had submitted proposals 
in that respect. However, if such a control system was not rendered 
technically and politically acceptable it would not gain the wide support 
needed for it to fulfil its purpose. Sweden thus attached great importance to 
the efforts in that direction being made by the Board of Governors and hoped 
that all interested Member States would be given further opportunities to 
express their viev/s before the Board took a final decision, 
67. Mr. UCHIPA (Japan) said that there had been remarkable scientific 
.and technological progress in the peaceful uses of atomic energy since the 
Agency had been established. The rapidity of that progress in recent.years, 
particularly the technical development, construction and operation of power 
reactors, had been brought to light at the Third Geneva Conference. Many 
speakers at that Conference had expressed the view that power reactors would 
soon be producing electricity economically. Nations which had been" among the 
developing countries when the Agency had been set up were now beginning to regard 
power reactors as an important source of energy for their future economic 
development programmes. That being so, he thought that the Agency should place 
greater emphasis on nuclear power in its future activities. 


68. Interesting work had been done by a meeting of consultants on assessment 
of the technical and economic aspects of tenders for nuclear power projects, 
held in July at the request of the Government of Pakistan. Such technical 
evaluation might be made more frequently by the Agency with a view to helping 
developing countries in their reactor programmes. 
69. With the increase in the number of power reactors, the disposal of radioactive 
waste would become an acute problem, and a basic code governing such 
waste disposal should be drawn up. 
2/ GC(VII)/HES/144. 



GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 17 


70. His delegation vras glad to note that an increasing number of-countries 
were asking for the Agency's safeguards system to be applied to their bilateral 
arrangements. It was the sincere hope of the Japanese people that the day 
would come when atomic energy would be used solely for peaceful purposes, The 
Agency's safeguards system, if properly applied? could be of great assistance 
in reaching that goal. 
71. Referring to technical assistance activities, he felt that although the 
Agency had made' a valuable contribution in that field, much still remained to 
be done and the available funds should be spent in as effective a manner as 
possible. The Agency should bear in mind the economic plans and future 
industrial prospects of the various developing countries and should give 
appropriate advice regarding fellowships, experts, training courses and 
equipment. Japan was ready to make an active contribution to such technical 
assistance activities of the Agency. Ho mentioned in that connection the 
regional training course on the application of radioisotopes which had been 
held in Tokyo in August 1964. He also mentioned that in regard to the use of 
isotopes for rice cultivation, Japan had sent experts to the rice-growing 
countries in Asia with useful results. 
72. The demand for nuclear power in Japan was increasing greatly and it was 
expected that a nuclear power generation capacity of 1000 MW(e) would have to 
be developed by 197.. 
75. As stated in a note by the Director General—' , the Japanese Government had 
invited the Agency to hold the ninth regular session of the General Conference 
in Tokyo in September 1965? and he sincerely hoped that the invitation would 
be accepted. 
74. Mr. LEE (China) recalled that at the seventh regular session of the 
General Conference the Chinese delegate had stressed the importance of disseminating 
scientific knowledge and promoting possible uses of atomic energy in 
the developing countries. It was encouraging to note in that connection that 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on the Application of 
Science and Technology for the Benefit of the Less Developed Areas had recommended 
the development of a scientific infrastructure in the developing countries. 
The Director General of the Agency had also seen the need for research reactors 
8/ GC(VIII)/269. 



GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 18 


and the'facilities associated'with them to he used to help form the nucleus of 
a'new generation of technicians and scientists. "The problem was obvious to all 
concerned, and the Chinese delegation would' like to see the Agency accord early 
attention to the matter. • 


75• The Agency was a scientific and technical body, with the main function of 
promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy among its Member States,, and it 
was up to the Members to ensure that the limited financial resources available 
continued to be devoted wholly to that end. The harmony demonstrated at the 
Third Geneva Conference should be maintained and enhanced., which would well 


accord with the age-old traditions and desires of the Chinese people. . 


76. In the memorandum on long-term planning^ submitted jointly by the Board 
of Governors and the Director General to the seventh regular session of the ' 
General Conference., special mention had been made of the value of the Agency's 
rendering assistance in the utilization of research reactors. 'In paragraph J>6 
of the Agency's draft programme for l$6^—66 it was also pointed out that "the 
Agency's work on research reactor utilization will, to a great extent, be 
pursued on a regional basis". That approach would be most welcome in those 
regions where research reactors were in operation. At the present time, in 
the South—East Asia and Pacific area, research reactors -were operating in more 
than ten countries, and if the Agency were to make those States a specific 
offer of assistance in using the facilities in! question, it was quite certain that 
the response would be immediate arid positive. The main problem perhaps lay in 
selecting a team of qualified nuclear scientists to help organize and direct the 
research activities of the reactors. . Another important problem, that of financing, 
could no doubt be solved under the Agency's long-term programme. It was at all 
events certain that the provision of assistance in research reactor utilization 
would ensure the fullest possible use of all such facilities in the region in 
question and would also contribute to the development of national nuclear power 
programmes. 
77. The Agency's plans for research in physical sciences were also of great 
importance and would certainly contribute substantially towards the development 
of nuclear science in general. China was also interested in the Agency's programme 
of research contracts. The Institute of Nuclear Science at Hsin—Chu had 
9/ GC(VH)/227. 



GC(VIII)/0E.87 


page 19 


been engaged. in radioisotope production and in studies on radiation protection 


and v/aste disposal, radiochemistry and radiation chemistry, and reactor physics. 
The Agency's assistance in those studies would greatly stimulate further 


development in the fields concerned, 


78, As had been said by both the Director General and the head of the United 
States delegation,, seventeen countries receiving materials and equipment from 
the United States had agreed in principle to the application of Agency safeguards 
to the assistance provided. The Chinese Government had just agreed to 


enter into a trilateral agreement with the Agency and the United States 


Government on those lines. 


79. In conclusion? he wished to say that the Chinese delegation welcomed the 
Director General's plan for the establishment of a post of regional officer 
for the South-East Asia and the Pacific and Far East areas. 
80. ' Mr. SRISUKH (Thailand) said that the Thai atomic energy programme, 
implemented with the direct assistance of the Government of the United States of 
America, was making satisfactory progress. He wished to acknowledge the consideration 
which Thailand, as one of the developing countries obtaining 
technical assistance from the Agency, had received from the Board of Governors 
and from the Secretariat. 
81. He stressed his country's support for the Agency's safeguards system and 
announced that safeguards under the United States-Thai bilateral agreement would 
be transferred to the Agency within a matter of days. 
82. His delegation also wished to inform the Conference that the Atomic Energy 
Commissions of Israel and Thailand were collaborating very closely and that 
co-operation with the atomic energy authorities of Japan had never been more 
thorough and sincere. 
83. His delegation wished to express its appreciation of the Agency's success 
in organizing the International Centre for Theoretical Physics and the various 
regional training projects. It also wished to express its approval of the 
Agency's appointment of a regional officer for Asia and the Far East, who had 
provisionally established his office at Bangkok during the present year. 
Although it was certain that other countries in the region endorsed, in principle 

GC(VIII)/OR.87 
page 20 


the appointment, it was not yet definite whether the Agency would establish a 
permanent regional office, a decision on that point awaiting the outcome of the 
present' experiment. In 1965 ^e regional expert on hospital physics would also 
make Bangkok his administrative centre, 

84. Since it was still often difficult to obtain the services of various 
categories of experts, his delegation wished to propose that, if possible without 
ultimately incurring additional expenditure, the Agency should establish a small 
regional office at which a number of experts, in such special fields as reactor 
technology and radioisotope applications in agriculture and medicine, would be 
stationed and would be available to assist the countries in the region requiring 
their services. 
85, With regard to power, Thailand was utilizing its hydroelectric potential, 
and nuclear power for the generation of electricity was not at present urgently 
needed. However, his delegation was gratified that the Agency was considering 
a fresh evaluation of the feasibility of nuclear power in Thailand, which would 


surely be of great value. 


The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m. 



international Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VIII)/OR.88 
28 January 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

Eighth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 17 September 1964, at 10.50 a.m. 


Presidents Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda* 


10 
General debate and report of the Board 
of Governors for 1963-64 (continued) 1 - 103 


Statements by the delegates ofs 


Bulgaria 1 -10 
Mexico 11 -16 
Romania 17 -33 
United Kingdom of Great Britain 34-51 

and Northern Ireland 
Algeria 52 -60 
Republic of Korea 61 -72 
Austria 73 -80 
Ghana 81 -90 
India 91 -103 


* GC(VIII)/268. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VIII)/INF/75/Rev.2. 


64-6698 



GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965-64 (GC(VIII)/270, 
270/Corr.l, 270/Add.l,'2 and 3, 280) (continued) 


1. Mr. NADJAKOV (Bulgaria) extended a'welcome to the new Member, States. 
2.-Re was pleased to-note that-the-efforts made by the Agency had produced •
•• • 
results which had enhanced its prestige and proved that it was capable of 
playing an important part in the further development of science and technology. 
He wished to mention particularly the drawing up of codes and standards, the 
awarding of fellowships, the organization of symposia and conferences on the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and, above all, the organization of the Third 
International Conference -on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy-' , which had 
been an event of major importance in the scientific world, 

3. The activities of the Agency were bound to become even more extensive in 
the future and, in that connection, he wished to make a number of suggestions. 
4. The Agency's efforts in regard to the use of radioisotopes in medicine, 
agriculture, radiobiology, hydrology, chemistry and physics had already borne 
fruit. However, his delegation considered that the Agency, while continuing 
those activities within the limits of its material'and technical resources, 
should nevertheless address itself with greater determination to a thorough 
study of all aspects of nuclear power production, the increasing possibilities 
of which should be borne clearly in mind. 
5. The training of experts had always been, and must remain, one of the 
fundamental tasks of the Agency, He regretted, therefore, that the sums 
available for that purpose had decreased steadily since 1962. His delegation 
wished to suggest that more fellowships be offered and to point out that the 
candidates of certain countries, including Bulgaria, were at a disadvantage in 
relation to the candidates of countries receiving assistance under the Expanded 
Programme of Technical Assistance; one should not confuse pure technical 
assistance, which consisted in supplying equipment to laboratories or medical 
centres, with the awarding of fellowships, the main object of which was to 
train experts. 
l/ Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964* 



GC(VHI)/OR.88 
page 3 


6. In order to solve the problems encountered in various branches of nuclear 
science - for example, in nuclear povrer generation and in nuclear fusion, or 
the direct conversion of atomic into electrical energy - all countries needed 
highly qualified experts, and here the Agency had an essential part to play. 
For that reason it was important that the Agency should not dissipate its 
efforts or continue, for example, to extend the activities of the Agency's 
Laboratory, which had been set up tc serve Member States and not in order that 
it might become another new research centre. 
7. His delegation was also of the opinion that the number of research contracts 
should be reduced and that efforts should be made to establish even closer 
collaboration with national institutes, some of which had already offered to 
place at the Agency's disposal, free of charge, the results of research in the 
field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The resources freed in that way 
could enable a larger number of fellowships to be offered to Member States. 
8. With regard to safeguards and inspections, the Bulgarian delegation 
considered that the Agency was undertaking tasks which it had no business to 
assume and it could not approve the expenditure involved,, 
9. The Agency's activities in the field of technical assistance appeared on 
the whole to be satisfactory, but they would have been even more effective if 
the Secretariat had made full use of the sums intended for that purpose. Only 
l&fo of the money available had been used, so restriction by the Agency of its 
technical assistance activities could not be put down to lack of funds. In 
that connection, his delegation could not approve the proposal to introduce 
a system of assessed contributions by Members of the Agency to the Operational 
Budget. Finally, he wished to draw attention to the programme of technical 
assistance to developing countries proposed by the socialist countries-^ and 
to note that that programme had been welcomed by a number of countries. 
10. He did not wish to conclude without referring to the Third Geneva Conference, 
which had focussed attention on the prospects which the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy would offer to mankind in a world from which war and the weapons 
of war had been banished. The signing in Moscow of the Partial Nuclear Test 
Ban Treaty represented a step in the right direction, as did the action taken 
2/ GC(VI)/C0L1. l/67 /Rev. 1. 



GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 4 


by the Agency in response to the request of the Secretary-General of the 


United Nations regarding the study of the economic and social consequences 
3/ 


of disarmament^ . He hoped that the International Atomic Energy Agency would 
place its authority and prestige in the service of that cause. 


11. Mr, CABRERA MACIA (Mexico) expressed appreciation to the Director 
General and the Secretariat for the excellent work done by the Agency in 
organizing the Third Geneva Conference. 
12. Referring to the annual report of the Board of Governors (GC(VHI)/270, • 
270/Corr.l and Add.l, 2 and 3 s 280), which attached particular importance to 
the subject.of research and services in the life sciences of medicine, 
agriculture and radiobiology, he thought that similar emphasis should be 
placed on the Agency's work in the physical sciences, particularly in the 
field of hydrology. He was pleased to note the advances made in work on 
nuclear power generation and nuclear technology. Progress made in connection 
with these problems, particularly on the economic side, was of obvious benefit 
to Member States. 
13. His delegation shared the views expressed in the report of the Board on 
the development of nuclear power production over the next fifteen years. 
Because of the geographical conditions obtaining in Mexico, his country was 
particularly interested in any advances in. connection with dual-purpose power 
plants, especially those capable of generating electricity and producing fresh 
water by desalting sea water. Mexico, whose territory included vast areas of 
arid land, placed great hopes in the possibilities of utilizing nuclear energy 
for that purpose and therefore attached particular importance to the constructive 
work being carried out by the Agency. 
14. He wished to express his Government's appreciation for the technical assistance 
received from the Agency in the form of the provision of fellowships abroad, 
the seconding of experts and the supply of specialized equipment. Referring to 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, he noted that his 
delegation had from the very beginning supported the project for the establishment 
of such an institution. Nov/ that the Centre had come into being, his delegation 
l] GC(VIII)/INF/77O 


G0(VIII)/OR.88 
page 5 


was convinced that it would achieve the purposes for which it had been set up 
and that it would help to create in the developing countries that scientific 
tradition which was a necessary condition for their proper utilization of 


atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 


15. In Mexico work had begun on the construction and installation of the • 
country's first nuclear research centre, Preparatory work had already been 
going on for several years and over a hundred experts had received special 
training in the advanced countries. The centre would possess a TRIGA III 
research reactor and a van de Graaff tandem accelerator, which would help to 
provide scientific and technological training in various branches of the 
nuclear sciences. 
16. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the valuable v;ork done by the 
Agency would continue undiminished and that it would have every success in 
carrying out its vital task of developing the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
for the benefit of mankind. 
17. I£r. HULUBEI (Romania) said that the General Conference was taking 
place in a mood of optimism that would certainly facilitate the task of 
devising solutions to the problems of economic and social development, general 
and complete disarmament and.the elimination of the threat of thermonuclear war. 
However complex those problems might be, Romania was convinced that they could 
be settled by peaceful means and was working unceasingly for peaceful coexistence 
between all countries, without distinction of social or political 
regime. He recalled in particular his country's proposals relating to the 
establishment of the Balkans as a missile- and nuclear-free zone. 
18. The past year had seen encouraging progress1 a joint declaration by the 
three major nuclear Powers to reduce plutonium production for military purposes5 
a resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations banning the launching 
of satellites carrying nuclear warheads—' 5 and the signing of the Partial 
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. Efforts should be made to conclude treaties banning 
underground nuclear explosions and the spread of nuclear weapons, etc., with 
the ultimate aim of obtaining an agreement on general disarmament. 
4/ General Assembly resolution l884(XVIII)„ 



GC(VIII)/OR088 
page 6 


19. The Agency was in a position to make a contribution to facilitate the 
progress of the present disarmament discussions. It could appoint groups of 
experts to undertake scientific studies of the problems involved and to examine 
how the economic resources released as a result of disarmament could he best 
used to help the developing countries. 
20. The previous year? the General Assembly of the United Nations had 
unanimously adopted a resolution concerning the International Co-operation 
5/ 
Year.4-7 The Agency should not disregard that resolution and the Romanian 
delegation, together with the delegations of Algeria, Ceylon, India? Ghana, 
Indonesia? Nigeria, the United Arab Republic and Yugoslavia? had submitted 
to the Conference a draft resolution relating to the International Co-operation 


6/ 


Year and the twentieth anniversary of the United Nations.—' 


21. The Agency was making constant efforts to reduce the gap that existed 
between the advanced and the developing countries. It was pledged to keep 
track of new developments in the peaceful uses of atomic energy? as well as 
to study those developments and make information available•on them. - It had 
on the whole succeeded in performing that task within the limits of its 
possibilities but it was faced with numerous difficulties that were a direct 
result of the role played by atomic energy in world politics„ 
22. Under its Statute? the Agency was obliged to ensure that those nuclear 
power projects which it helped to co-ordinate were devoted exclusively to 
peaceful purposes. In that connection, praiseworthy efforts had been made to 
improve the safeguards system. It was important that the Agency should 
continue to work out a safeguards system that was politically, technically 
and economically acceptable to all countries and that would not hold up the 
development of the peaceful uses of•atomic energy. 
23. The Third Geneva Conference had shown how necessary it was for the Agency 
to evolve suitable machinery to enable it to promote nuclear research and the 
large-scale use of atomic energy in scientific and technical establishments 
throughout the world. 
5/ General Assembly resolution 1907(XVIII). 
6/ GC(VIII)/COM.1/88 and Corr.l (adopted as GC(VIII)/RES/l75) , 



GC(VHl)/OR„88 
page 7 


24. The Agency's efforts in organizing and maintaining regional projects of 
the NORA type and regional centres such as those in Trieste, Cairo and 
elsewhere should he continued. Go-ordination of the Agency's activities with 
those of specialized agencies like the World Health Organization (WHO), and the 
Pood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (PAO) was also useful 
and effective. 
25. Radioisotopes could he used for a multiplicity of purposes. As far as 
atomic energy generally was concerned, one of the most important uses was for 
the desalination of sea water. The implications of nuclear desalting techniques 
were eonsiderahle and the dangers of fresh-water shortages, not only in arid 
regions? lent particular significance to them. It was to he hoped that the 
Agency would continue to pay close attention to that prohlem. 
26o He wished to emphasize the value of the work done in the fields of 
agriculture, food preservation and pest control, the importance of which was 
ohvious to everyone. 


27. Participants were unanimously agreed that the work done at the Third 
Geneva Conference had been of considerahle importance. Nuclear power stations 
would he in a position to offer the world the energy it would need in the very 
near future, when enormous power requirements and a shortage of conventional 
fuels could he expected. More than ^Cjfo of the energy used towards the end of 
the twentieth century would, without douht, he provided hy nuclear fuels. 
The Agency had already accomplished a great deal in that field and would 
increase its efforts when it had had time +0 study all the implications of 
the Geneva Conference. 
28. The information given on the Agency's technical assistance during the 
past year—' showed a marked improvement in those activities in comparison with 
previous years, and he was pleased to note that that tendency was being 
maintainedo The resources at the Agency's disposal were too limited for it to 
he ahle to emhark on a really large-scale assistance programme, hut existing 
possihilities had not yet heen completely exhausted. 
29. The Romanian delegation approved the recommendation made \sj the Board at 
the request of certain of the developing countries to the effect that greater 
7/ GC(VIII)/INF/72. 



GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 3 . 


flexibility should be displayed in connection with the provision of equipment 
and that there should he a reduction in the amounts payable for the services 
of experts, who would only he provided at-the express request of the .receiving 
States... 


8/ 


30„ In the Board's report? as well as in the Agency's Programme for' 1965-66—' , 
particular importance was attached to the need for providing Member States, 
and especially the developing countries, with personnel trained in the. uses 
of atomic energy. It was imperative, as U Thant had pointed out at the 
opening of the Geneva Conference, that those countries should have precedence. 
Romania took pleasure in announcing its intention of awarding five more fiveyear 
fellowships, as from 1965? as a contribution to the programme for 
providing trained personnel for the developing countries. 


51. The Agency was to be congratulated on the useful work it had done in 
elaborating regulations and standards governing work with radioactive 
substances, the dosimetric control of personnel and the transport of radioactive 
materialso Experience would show the extent to which the standards 
that had been laid down required amendment,, As they stood, they were of 
unquestionable utility. However, radioactive waste disposal into the sea 
presented difficulties,. and the standards established by the Agency failed to 
take sufficient account of the pollution of rivers and streams. 
32o Romania had had a certain amount of success in nuclear research and in 
making practical use of nuclear energy, especially in the field of metallurgy 
and mineral oil prospection. It had thus been able to effect considerable 
savings and to improve working conditions. Fundamental research work had also 
produced very satisfactory results. Furthermore, te.ams of physicists, chemists, 
engineers and technicians were ready to embark on comprehensive studies with 
a view to the utilization of nuclear energy for the production of power and 
for use in agriculture, hydrology and pest control. 


33• Romania wished to co-operate fully in the Agency's activities and it 
thought that the Agency was to be congratulated on the way it had discharged 
its duties during the past year. 


8/ GC(VIII)/275o 



GC(VIII)/OR„88 
page 9 


34. Sir William PENNBY (United Kingdom) said that, while it was- too early 
to draw conclusions about the value and the effects of the Third Geneva 
Conference3 the United Kingdom shared the view that nuclear power was entering 
a new phase where, in favourable circumstances, it could be competitive with 
conventional power* However, it also felt that much hard work still remained 
to he done, in the form of eliciting definite figures for costs in various circumstances, 
before free rein was given to optimism ahout the near future-
Looking further ahead, the United Kingdom had absolutely no doubt about the 
important contribution nuclear power would make in adding to the energy 
available to all countries* 
35. The Third Geneva Conference had certainly been of great value in affording 
the opportunity for meetings between nuclear scientists, engineers, economists 
and administrators from man;/ countries. In particular, the Agency staff who 
had attended woaid have greatly added to their experience" and that would 
materially assist them in the performance of their important duties, 
36. Future international conferences on nuclear power and related problems 
should form part of the Agency's normal programme of conferences and symposia. 
However, the occasional large conference under United Nations auspices on 
scientific matters of significance in the world scene should not be precluded 
and some of the reactor systems now in the early stages of development might 
provide a suitable topic in due course, 
~^7• Turning to the annual report of the Board of Governors, he said that his 
Government considered that it reflected a satisfactory state of affairs| the 
Agency had successfully continued with its many normal activities, besides having 
shouldered the additional heavy burden laid upon it by the Geneva Conference, 


38, The important work done by the Agency in the matter of safeguards was well 
regarded in the United Kingdom, Everyone was aware that one of the great 
problems of the time was how to achieve growth in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy while avoiding the military risks inherent in possible misuse of the 
reactors and plants that were a necessary constituent of such growth. The 
problems were more political than scientific, but the contributions which the 
Agency was making in regard to safeguards methods would help the world in using ' 
and controlling atomic energy. 



GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 10 


39 • The Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty had. been warmly_j7,elpomed by the 
British Government and people. The connection between the objectives of that 
treaty-and the "objectives-of safeguards must be recognized by all. The 
United Kingdom was continuing scientific work on fissile material control and 
on the monitoring of nuclear tests, with particular emphasis on discrimination 
between underground tests and certain types of earthquake. As information 
improved-, it would from-time to time publish the results obtained, 

40. The United Kingdom well understood the political objections to the 
Agency's safeguards syst em5 but that was not tantamount to agreeing that the 
system constituted a hindrance to or imposed restrictions on the development 
of atomic energy in the developing countries or elsewhere. Those beliefs had 
been examined and disproved on a number of occasions. If it was to carry out 
effectively its duties under the Statute, the Agency had to have available a 
detailed and up-to-date s-et of procedures for doing so, which would cover 
projects established by the Agency itself or else brought within its safeguards 
system at the request of Member States. Furthermore, th.e system.must 
be capable of being easily understood, so that the States asking for its 
application and the inspectors applying it would know precisely what their 
obligations and duties were. It was -for that reason-that the United Kingdom 
had welcomed the extension of the system in 1963 to power reactors of over 
100 MW and was happy to participate in the review at present being- carried 
out under Resolution GC(VII)/RES/l44. 
41• As the use of nuclear power became more widespread, more and -more 


attention would have to, be paid to well-devised waste management procedures. 


The Agency had a duty to ensure that, in bringing the benefits, of nuclear


power to a greater number of people, it did nothing that would endanger the 
health of man or prejudice his environment. The United Kingdom welcomed the 
work done on the subject by the Ad hoc Panel on Radioactive VJaste Disposal 


into the Sea and felt that the time had come when the results of scientific 


investigations into waste disposal procedures should be brought together for 


the further guidance of Member States. 


42. On a similar theme, the; United Kingdom-had been closely involved in the 
review of the Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive .; • 
Materials, The length of time taken to complete that task was a measure of 

GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 11 


the rate of technical progress and the thoroughness with which new methods 
and information had been evaluated* Publication of the new Regulations 
would he an important milestone in the development of sound transport practice 
and would encourage the harmonization of regulations in the international 
transport field. 


43• Exciting possibilities were opening up for using nuclear power 
simultaneously for the generation of electricity and other purposes. Much 
attention had recently been paid to its use for desalting sea and brackish 
water. The technology of distillation plants using conventional fuels 
had made substantial advances over the past decade, in which British industry 
had taken a leading part. The United Kingdom was now examining how distillation 
plants could be linked with nuclear power stations. The Agency had 
become a focus of international discussion on the subject. The United 
Kingdom had been glad to co-operate and would continue to give the Agency 
the benefit of its practical engineering experience. Also, it might in the 
future co-operate with various countries in further studies of the matter. 
It would be several years before it was known whether fresh water could be 
produced from salt water at a price acceptable for agriculture. 


44• There was one change in the internal organization of the Agency which he 
particularly welcomed, namely the action taken to bring the various Secretariat 
divisions concerned with technical assistance more closely together, pursuant 
to the resolution adopted by the General Conference in 19&3 on co-ordination 
of atomic energy activities-^ . 


45. The United Kingdom could claim to have supported the Agency's technical 
assistance programme to the full, quite apart from its contribution to the 
General Fund. Since 1962, it had received 106 fellows and 22 more were due 
in the current year| during that time, too, it had run a training^course for 
hospital physicists, attended by 15 students. Furthermore,, the United Kingdom 
Atomic Energy Authority, at its laboratory at Yfantage, and the Central 
Electricity Generating Board, at its nuclear power stations in various -parts 
of Britain, had offered special fellowships, of which 13 had been taken up 
since 1958 • Those facilities were, of course, free of charge to the Agency. 
9/ GC(VII)/RES/149. 



GC(VIII)/QR.88 
page 12 


46. In the broader field of Agency panels and the provision of individual 
experts to help the developing countries, from 1962 to date the United Kingdom 
had made available the services of 31 technical experts. In addition, a 
considerable number of United Kingdom nationals were employed by the Agency 
in its own technical projects in those countries. 
47• His Government had also continued to support the Agency's research 
programme and the work going on in its laboratories. HoY/ever, it would be 
a retrograde step if the placing of research contracts were to be regarded as 
a form of technical assistance. The subjects of those contracts should be 
governed by the Agency's agreed research objectives and the contracts should 
be placed with institutions which could effectively undertake the work, though 
preference should, of course, be given where possible to research institutions 
in the less developed countries. 


48. He wished that he could be optimistic about the resources available for 
technical assistance - a subject of concern to the General •Conference an.?. the 
Board of Governors for more than two years past and one that, regrettably, 
was no nearer to a solution than at the beginning. The United Kingdom position 
was clears the Agency's operational activities should be supported by 
contributions from Member States in such a form that the Agency would be free 
to' use" them in whatever way it chose and in whatever part of the world. 
Unfortunately it had not proved possible to obtain the agreement of a 
sufficient number of Member States to make contributions of that kind, either 
on a voluntary basis or under assessment. A situation therefore existed in 
which the funds available for the Operational Budget fell short of the target> 
whereas the demands on it were growing. 
49. Among those demands, the commitments which the Agency undertook whenever 
the establishment of a regional centre was approved had to be borne in mind. 
Although those centres were intended to be a response to the desires of the 
countries concerned and, as such, to depend for their main financial support 
on contributions from those countries, the Agency had, among other obligations, 
undertaken to provide a number of fellowships at the centres for some years 
ahead, 
50. It would be necessary to consider the cumulative "effect on the budget of 
proposals for expenditure of that kind. One possible procedure might be that, 
where a region wished to establish a centre with Agency assistance, the 

GC(7III)/0H.88 
page 13 


individual members of the region woL\ld have to be prepared to accept some 
reduction in the assistance they received as individual States, Regional 
centres might be the most effective method wherehy the Agency could provide 
technical assistance to the less developed countries5 nevertheless,, the 
financial aspects could not be disregarded, 


51. For its part, the United Kingdom proposed to continue its support for 
the Agency's operational activities in the coming year as in the past. It 
would pledge itself to make a voluntary contribution to the Operational 
Budget for 1965 i-n ^^e same proportion as that of its assessed contribution 
to the Regular Budget. But he had to warn the Conference that the United 
Kingdom would have to consider its position carefully the following year,, if 
adequate support was not forthcoming from the Member States, The plan approved 
in 1963 for the Agency's activities over the period 1965-7-0 involved a 
considerable expansion. The Agency was doing a good job and its status was 
steadily increasing. The opportunities offered by the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy were immense. The Agency would be able to make its proper contribution 
only if Member States provided the necessary finance, 
52. Mr. RAHMOUIII (Algeria) thanked all Member States of the Agency for 
having admitted his country to their number. As Algeria wanted all countries 
to join the Agency and to contribute to the development of nuclear science, it 
welcomed the admission of Kuwait, Kenya, Madagascar and Cyprus, 
53o It had greeted with relief the signature of the Moscow Partial Nuclear 
Test Ban Treaty and was striving for a total ban. The second advance towards 
that goal had been the first Conference on Denuclearization of the Mediterranean 
Area, held at Algiers on 5 July 196A. It was the Agency's duty to participate 
in such efforts to achieve world peace, 


54. At the Third Geneva Conference the Algerian delegation had noted the 
widening gap between the advanced and the developing countries. The industrialized 
countries were certainly to be congratulated, on the enormous advances which had 
been made in so few years and deserved thanks for contributing a large part of 
the Agency's budget, but it v/as surprising that they should disregard the 
research projects of general interest'which the developing countries were 
endeavouring to carry out with the Agency's assistance0 Similarly, the Algerian 

GC(VIII)/0E.88 
page 14 


delegation regretted that the Agency concluded contracts with the advanced 
countries for research in limited fields, instead of devoting its resources 


to research contracts with regional centres and the developing countries'. 


55. In 1964 Algeria had devoted its main attention to the training of 
scientific staff. It had not requested fellowships' from the Agency, as it 
much preferred to carry out training on the spot, so as to bring together the 
students with the technicians who were already in posts, and would not leave 
them for long periods. His country therefore intended asking the Agency to 
send teaching staff. The Algiers Nuclear Research Institute, which was 
continuing to instal new equipment, offered all the material' prerequisites 
for training in various branches of nuclear science. The prospective teachers 
would achieve better results if they could stay for fairly long periods. 
56. . The Algiers Nuclear Research Institute had in 1964 established a 
Department of Nuclear Applications which was intended to provide the theoretical 
infrastructure for all atomic energy applications in medicine, agriculture and 
hydrology.in particular. The Cancer Research Centre at Algiers was using its 
cobalt bomb for research purposes and Oran hospital had,, through the Agency, 
been supplied by Czechoslovakia with cobalt teletherapy equipment for use in 
tumour research, 
57• I*1 the sphere of agriculture, Algeria was planning to use gamma-rays for 
food preservation and for insect studies. The irradiation centre was already 
built, but an expert was needed to advise on the internal arrangements and 
safety, 


58, In hydrologyj Algeria was continuing to devote attention to the low 
moisture absorption of forest soils. The severe climatic conditions in the 
north of the Sahara made forest survival very difficult. However, hydrological 
research carried out with the help of tritium supplied by the Agency had borne 
fruit and would be extended to studying the waters of the salt lakes in 


southern Algeria. Algeria was thus endeavouring to collaborate in the Agency's 
work to the maximum of its ability. 


59o It hoped that the Agency would simplify the procedures and composition of 


the Board of Governors, so as to enable numerous States to acquire a better 
understanding of their responsibilities within the Agency, Algeria could not 



GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 15 


understand why the "floating11 seat on the Board of Governors was always 
allotted to a European country; it would prefer the seat to be "rotating" 
rather than "floating". The desire for responsibility was not a desire for 
power, but a desire that all the countries of the world should, in accordance 
with the Agency's Statute, participate in efforts in the field of atomic energy 
research and application. 


60. Algeria, as one of the newly independent countries, was carefully seeking 
the best methods of work and of collaboration. The Agency, a body devoted to 
science and peace, was an exemplary model for a young country, 
61. Mr. YU¥ (Republic of Korea) expressed his sincere gratitude to the 
Director General and his staff, and to the Board of Governors, for their 
vigorous and constant efforts to develop the Agency's programme and for the 
care given to meeting the needs of the developing countries. 
62. In its atomic energy programme, his Government was endeavouring to develop 
means of making the maximum possible use in industry of Korea's TRIGA Mark II 
reactor, which had come into operation in March 1962, Grea.t emphasis was also 
being placed on the application of radioisotopes in current production (l9 
different kinds) to agriculture, which constituted an important part of the 
country's economy. In that way, Korea was endeavouring to do its share, to 
the best of its technical capacity., in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
63. As to developments concerning radioisotope applications in medicine, the 
Division of Nuclear Medicine, which had been set up in the previous year at the 
Korean Atomic Energy Research Institute, had been expanded to become the 
Radiology Research Institute. Extensive research work was being conducted on 
radioisotope applications in the treatment of cancer, thyroid disorders, etc, 
with the help of the Institute'^ cobalt-60 teletherapy unit. The results 
obtained had brought significant progress in medical science in Korea. 
64. To give a fillip to agricultural technology, it was planned to set up a 
radioisotope centre for agriculture in 1965s the programme for recruiting and 
training the necessary technical personnel was already established, and the 
constructional work for the centre was to start in 1965 under Korea's two-year 
plan. The centre was expected to facilitate progress in the utilization of 
radioisotopes in Korean agriculture. 

GC (¥111)7011088 
page 16 


65. Another project in hand was for the construction of a nuclear power plant 
with a 'capacity of 150 WJ, which was expected to he completed around 1970. 
The Agency had sent out a preliminary survey mission in October 1963 in connection 
with that project and his Government was planning, on the basis of the preliminary 
mission's report, to request that a site survey mission he sent out in 1965. 
It hoped that the request would be given favourable consideration, and the 
Agency could be assured that any assistance provided in the matter would be 
highly appreciated. 
66. Under the Agency's regular programme of technical assistance, three experts, 
in nuclear physics, electronic engineering and nuclear medicine, were at present 
serving in Korea.. Their advice and helpful co-operation was much appreciated 
by Korean research workers at the Atomic Energy Research Institute and the 
College of Medicine of Seoul National University. 
67o In the light of his country's experience, he had come to realize that full 
training of the required number of scientific and technical personnel was the 
most effective way of promoting a developing country's atomic energy programme; 
the provision of technical know-how could hardly be over-valued as far as the 
advancement of such countries was concerned., It was to be hoped that greater 
emphasis would be placed upon the training programme rather than the provision 
of expert services, since the former was of superior importance for the 
developing countries. 


68. In line with its consistent stand, his delegation again urged that a 
regional .training centre be established in the Asian and Pacific region and 
that research contracts be awarded mainly to the developing countries, It 
trusted that action would be taken as soon as possible to set up such a centre 
under Agency auspices. 
69. The four research contracts awarded to Korea under the 1962-63 programme 
had given great encouragement to the research workers concerned and had served 
to generate even greater enthusiasm for the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy. He accordingly made a plea that the further seven research contracts 
for which Korea had applied be awarded to it. He also hoped that the current 
contracts would all be renewed to cover completion of the programme. 

G0(YIIl)/OR,88 • 
page 17 


70.. It was hoped that the Asia and Far East Regional Study Group oh Research 
Reactor Utilization would facilitate co-operation-among the participants, 
especially in the matters of reactor operation and radioisotope production. 
His delegation would he glad if a future meeting of the Group could be held in 
Korea. 


71. It further hoped that the Agency a-nd the Regional Officer for the area 
would take an active part in encouraging and promoting the regular exchange of 
up-to-date scientific and technological data and information on current 
developments and activities under the programme% such an exchange would he 
highly beneficial to developing countries in their efforts to raise their 
technological standards. 
72. In conclusion, he once again thanked the Agency for the work it had 
accomplished and for its continued efforts to promote the peaceful uses of 
atomic'energy, 
Mr, HAYMERLB (Austria) welcomed the delegations which were .participating 
in the General Conference for the first time; he expressed his delegation's 
satisfaction that the General Conference had approved the applications for 
membership submitted by Cyprus, Kenya, Kuwait and Madagascar. 


74. After the recent review of achievements and of the challenging problems 
remaining to be solved which had taken place at the Third Geneva Conference, 
delegations would be in a position to examine the Agency's activities with 
perhaps an even keener appreciation of their responsibilities than before. 
His delegation wished to congratulate the Director General on the inspiration 
and guidance he had given to the Agency during the past year. It had been 
impressed by the progress made in the fields of medicine, agriculture and 
radiobiology. The Austrian Government was particularly interested in the 
Agency's programme on food irradiation, and he was pleased to be able to inform 
the Conference that an agreement had been signed the previous day between the 
Agency', the European Nuclear Energy Agency and the Osterreichische Studiengesellschaft 
fur Atomenergie on a programme of international co-operation in 
that field, 
75• Although serious accidents in the operation of nuclear facilities were 
rare because of the precautions taken, his Government was greatly interested in 



GC(VIII)/OR,88 
page 18 


the Agency's offer to act as an intermediary in transmitting requests fors or 
offers ofj assistance in an emergency, and to send staff members to the site 
of any accident. It was also carefully studying the Nordic Mutual Emergency 
Assistance Agreement referred to in the report of the Board of Governors. 


76, The principles laid down by the Board and the Director General in the 
joint memorandum on Long Term Planning—' were acceptable to the Austrian 
delegation, which also supported the Agency's increased efforts in the various 
fields in which nuclear energy could he practically applied, such as medicine, 
agriculture, radiobiology, power generation and water desalting. Those efforts 
should he complemented by increased co-operation between the Agency, the 
United Nations and the specialized agencies to ensure greater efficiency and 
co-ordination of effort. The Agency should play a leading part in all activities 
involving the use of atomic energy, and the Austrian delegation therefore 
welcomed the setting up of a joint IASA/FAO Division, which was an important 
step towards better co-ordination of the activities of the various organizations 
in the United Nations family, 


77• The Agency's scientific and training programmes had been very useful and 
substantial results had been achieved. The Austrian Government's plans for 
co-operating more closely in those programmes had been put before the General 
Conference at its last session. Since then, the facilities of the Seibersdorf 
Reactor Centre, including the 5-&W ASTRA r.eactor, had been put at the Agency.)s 
disposal on a part-time basis. During the first eighteen-month course, which 
had been inaugurated in October 19'53? some 20 post-graduate students from 
several countries had received training. Those efforts would be supported to 
an even larger extent during 1964* Three fellowships were to be awarded, and 
it was hoped that the post-graduate fellows concerned would arrive in Vienna 
within the next month. Furthermore, subject to Parliamentary approval, Austria's 
contribution to the General Fund would be greater than hitherto5 the Austrian 
Government hoped that in future it would be able to contribute in accordance 
with its assessed contribution. 

10/ GC(VII)/277. 



GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 19 


78, The Austrian delegation had been pleased to note? from paragraph 181 of 
8/ 


the proposed Programme—'s that the co-operative efforts of the Agency and the 
5sterreichische Studiengesellschaft fur Atomenergie at the Seihersdorf Reactor 
Centre had led to practical investigations in non-destructive determination of 
nuclear fuel burn-up. The work carried out had been partly financed by the 
Agency* 

79> On the question of safeguards., he was pleased to be able to say that 
Austria had been one of the first countries operating a reactor to accept 

international safeguards„ The advantage of international safeguards over 
bilateral agreements had already been mentioned during the debates and his 
delegation hoped that the review of the Agency's safeguards system which was 
being undertaken would lead to a generally acceptable system. 


80. On 28 July 19645 he had been privileged to signs on behalf of the Austrian 
Government., an agreement between the Agency, the Government of the United States 
of America s,nd the Government of Austria on the transfer of the responsibility 
for administering safeguards from the United States of America to the Agency. 
The Austrian delegation believed that the signing of that agreement had a 
symbolic significances the fact.that authority in such a delicate matter 
could be transferred to an international body, and that it could be transferred 
with the consent of all Great Powers, reflected the existing international 
detente and the increased co-operation between Bast and 7/est. He hoped that 
the Agency's v/ork would continue to be marked by that spirit of mutual 
understanding and co-operation? which was indispensable to the attainment of 
the high objectives and ideals embodied in the Statute. 
81. Ih?. GRANT (Ghana) said that the Third Geneva Conference had provided 
a splendid example of inter-agency co-operation^ and that credit for its 
outstanding success was due to the Director General and staff of the Agency. 
The Conference had thrown light on the more spectacular and highly sophisticated 
uses of atomic energys and though not all the new developments were within 
easy reach of the developing countries they provided a stimulus. It had been 
interesting to learn from the papers presented to the Conference that nuclear 
power was on the 'way to becoming competitive with conventional forms of power, 
and in view of the increasing number of reactors in use,, he was glad to note 
that the Director General had established within the Agency an Inspectorate-
General to provide an umbrella, for the operation of its health., safety and 
safeguards systems and for the development of nuclear law and order. 

GC(VIII)/QR.88 
page 20 


82. The growing interest of the African peoples in the work of the Agency was 
indicated by the fact that seven of the nine new Members mentioned in the 
report of the Board of Governors were African countries. The African Members 
were eagerly looking forward to the early establishment of links between the 
Agency and the Scientific, Technical and Research Commission of the 
Organisation of African Unity (OAU). 
83. With regard to the vexed question of African representation on the Board 
of Governors, he expressed his delegation's strong disapproval of the 
nomination of South Africa as a Member of the Board and its full support of 
the declaration made on that subject—' . The Government of South Africa was 
not a member of OAU, which comprised more than two thirds of the Continent, 
nor did it have good relations with the other independent African States5 
that being so, it was difficult to see how the Board could expect it to 
represent the interests of the majority of independent African States. The 
policy of apartheid merely highlighted the fact that the South African 
Government was of an origin alien to Africa,„ The need of the atomic age was 
integration, friendship and harmony. He appealed to the South African 
Government to renounce the policy of apartheid once and for all. 
84. He welcomed the efforts made to secure equitable geographical distribution 
of staff by adopting a new policy of rotation by nations. That policy would, 
in the long run, give every Member State experience of the Agency from the 
inside, and although it presented some problems, he felt sure that the 
Director General would be able to deal with them. .He welcomed the Director 
General's appeal to scientists to acquire experience of the technical branches 
of the Agency - an appeal to which the developing countries were certain to 
respond. 
85. With regard to constitutional matters, he hoped it would be possible to 
revise the Statute so that the safeguards system under Article XII would no 
longer extend to equipment and supplies of source material. There was a 
growing feeling that such extension was unnecessary, cumbersome and likely to 
prove .discriminatory to developing countries. The safeguards system should be 
confined to nuclear reactors, to ensure that they would not be used for military 
11/ GC(YIII)/OR.84, para. 3. 



GG(VIII)/QR.88 
page 21 


purposes. Another constitutional issue concerned Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute? which provided that 
"the outgoing Board of Governors . . „ shall designate for membeeship 
on the Board two members from among the following other producers of 


source materials? Belgium, Czechoslovakia., Poland and Portugal . . . ,!f 
It was anomalous that all the countries mentioned as "other producers" were in 
Europe5 though it was known that there were significant quantities of source 
material in other continents, particularly in Africa. The words "other 
producers" should refer to territories in whose geographical areas source 
materi.&Xs e.-i-^tcu not to absentee metropolitan contractors engaged on the 
exploitation of those source materials by reason of their technical knowledge. 
The acceptance of that view would assure dependent territories of their 
sovereignty over their national resources at all times. If that matter were 
fairly examined, the outcome would certainly he that Congo (Leopoldville) would 
replace Belgium and Angola would replace Portugal. 


86. Referring to the peaceful use of atomic energy in Ghana, he said that 
the atomic energy programme would he centred round a research reactor and the 
radiochemical laboratory of the new Nuclear Research Institute, Work on the 
construction of a 2-MW research reactor of the swimming-pool type, which was 
being built with Soviet assistance., had reached the second phase and the reactor 
was expected to go into operation shortly after the end of 1965. As a result 
the Government had found it necessary to ask for an abnormal number of fellowships 
for 1964 and 1965. He hoped that it would be possible to obtain the 
necessary aid. 
87. The Ghana reactor would incorporate all improvements resulting from the 
experience gained in operating the first heterogeneous thermal reactor of that 
type in the Soviet Union. It was designed for research in nuclear and molecular 
physics, radiation chemistry and biology, as well as for the production of 
radioisotopes and the study of the properties of materials irradiated in neutron 
and gamma-ray fluxes. It would- also be used to train scientists. The programme 
of the proposed institute envisaged the closest possible collaboration with 
higher educational and research institutions in Ghana. The presence of the 
reactor would greatly facilitate existing research programmes involving the use 
of radioisotope techniques. Ghana was particularly interested in research in 
radiobiology and activation analysis. 

GC(VIII)/0E.88 
page 22 


88. The programme of work on the use of radioisotopes for tree-killing and 
root-feeding, carried out by the agricultural research institutes, was aimed 
at raising Ghana's agricultural output. The National Institute of Health and 
Medical Research was carrying out various studies on blood, using radiochromium 
and radio-iron. Changes in moisture and soil density under roads 
were also being studied. The Health Physics and Radioisotope Unit of the 
Physics Department of the University of Ghana was responsible for health 
problems connected with the uso of atomic energy. 
89o Ghana greatly appreciated the interest the Agency had shown in its 
programme and the advice and assistance it had rendered. 


90. With regard to the establishment of a Regional Centre for Tropical Africa 
in the Congo (Leopoldville), he reaffirmed that his Government had no 
objection, provided that the matter was first referred to the Scientific, 
Technical and Research Commission of 0AU„ 
91' Mr. BHABHA (India) welcomed the four new Member Statess Cyprus, Kenya, 
Kuwait and Madagascar. 

92. With regard to South Africa's position in the Agency, India's attitude 
was well known and he did not need to re—state it at that juncture. 
93. Those who had attended the Third Geneva Conference had heard of the 
enormous progress made since the Second Conference in making nuclear power 
commercially competitive. Since the First Conference had been held in 1955s 
a vast amount of knowledge acquired in secret by a few countries had been 
shared with others for the universal good. 
94. Nuclear technology had developed from the initial discoveries to largescale 
applications in an astonishingly short time, but there were still fresh 
achievements to look forward to. Although breeder power reactors were a 
possibility, their economics were subject to the kind of uncertainties 
associated with converter power reactors some years previously. In view of 
the progress in work on nuclear fusion reported at the Third Geneva Conference, 
he believed that a break-through might be achieved in that field within the 
next ten years, and there might be sufficient justification for a fourth 
international conference organized by the United Nations in, say, five years' 
time. 

GC(VIII)/ORV88 
page 25 


95. I"t was dangerous to generalize about the competitiveness of nuclear powers 
in some developed countries it was already competitive, while in others it 
would not he so for a long time., and the same applied to under-developed areas. 
A careful study of India's energy and power problems had produced solid data 
on which to base future plans,, It had been accepted that nuclear power was 
competitive with conventional power in two thirds or three quarters of the 
country? and the nuclear power programme for the next ten years was accordingly 
taking more concrete shape. 
96. Following- India's decision to build a nuclear power station of 400 WH(e) 
with the assistance of the United States, agreement had been reached with the 
Government of Canada to build another of the same size using reactors of the 
CANDTJ type with heavy-water moderator and coolant. is technical co-operation 
agreement had also been concluded with Atomic Energy of Canada for the 
exchange of information relating to reactors with heavy-water moderator. By 
the time all the approved current projects had been completed, about the end 
of 1970? India would have approximately 1„2 million kilowatts of-installed nuclear 
power. That would constitute barely 'yf- of the total installed electrical 
capacity in India by 1970;, but it was expected that within 20 years atomic 
energy would be providing at least one quarter of the country's electric power. 
The capacity to be installed was so great that large nuclear power stations 
would clearly be the most suitable, both economically and technically. They 
would increase competitiveness and the nuclear content of India's over—all 
power programme might well exceed the figures* envisaged at present. 
97. With regard to world energy requirements, many of the under-developed 
areas would have to reljr increasingly on nuclear power. Those areas, the 
development of which was a challenge to the world, could obtain the necessary 
large-scale assistance in only three ways; by non-repayable aid., by loans in 
aid, or by trade. Since loans had to be repaid, however, and this could only 
be done through trade, there were in fact only two possibilities. Large 
populations living at mere subsistence level were a danger to the moral and 
physical peace of the world, and atomic energy could play a great part in 
helping to remove that blot on modern civilization* 

GC(7III)/OR.8'8 
page 24 


98. The Agency's role consisted not only in giving assistance, but in doing so 
in such a way as to catalyze greater effort and co-operation on the part of 
Member States. An example of what could be done along those lines was the 
project being conducted at the Philippines Atomic Energy Research Centre, in 
which India was participating. Many such projects could be suggested, and he 
hoped the Agency would increase its activity in that direction,, India was 
discussing such co-operation with a number of countries, and joint projects 
with the United Arab Republic and Poland, and with Afghanistan, were under 
consideration. ' 
99. India now possessed complete facilities for producing radioisotopes and 
labelled compounds, and would be happy to assist other developing countries, 
either directly or through the Agency^ it had in fact offered the Agency a 
number of fellowships in those subjects. 
100. A special feature of the co-operation agreement with Canada for the 
construction of a nuclear power station was th^t the Canadian Government had 
ap-eed that, in return for the right to ensure that the installation was not 
used for non-peaceful purposes, a Canadian nuclear power station would be 
made subject to reciprocal safeguard procedures to be carried out by India. 
I'hat met objections regarding the discriminatory incidence of safeguards, 
which, in the absence of a universal safeguards system, fell most heavily on 
the developing countries. India was glad that the present Agency safeguards . 
system was being reviewed, and he hoped that safeguards vrould no longer be 
applied to equipment. 
101. India had welcomed and acceded to the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty as 
a step towards disarmament. There was, however, no reason why the benefits of 
using atomic explosions in civil engineering works should be denied to 
mankind, so long as such explosions were subject to international supervision. 
India vtrelcomed that new peaceful use of atomic energy, which might contribute. 
to the realization of an open world. 
102. India's decision, announced at the seventh regular session, to contribute 
$25 000 a year to the Agency's 'Operational Budget for three years had been 
intended to enable the Agency to plan its activities on a longer-term basis 
instead of facing uncertainty from year to year. It had been hoped that other 

GC(VIII)/OR.88 
page 25 


Member States would follow that example. Although it understood the reasons 
for combining the Regular and Operational Budgets, India was opposed to that 
measure. In his Government's view Member States should continue to contribute 
voluntarily, and not on an assessed basis, to the Agency's Operational 
Budgetc To show its sincerity, India would increase its voluntary contribution 
in the present year to $35 000 in Indian currency,, 


lOJ. In conclusion he said his delegation was pleased to note that the Agency's 
activities were growing constructively, that more attention was being paid to 


those areas which needed help most, and that the Agency was continuing its 
policy of holding conferences, symposia and seminars in more widely dispersed 
areas. The codes and procedures which the Agency had drawn up would be of 
great importance in the healthy and safe development of atomic energy and 
should acquire the force of international law. He wished to congratulate the 
Agency on the progress it had made and assure it of his country's full support 
and co-operation,, 


The meeting rose at 1 p.m., 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VIII)/OR.89 
28 January 1965 

GENERAL 
Distr.

General onference 

ENGLISH 

Eighth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE EIGHTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 


P.m.
on Thursday, 17 September 1964,at 3.15


President: Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 1-61 
Governors for 1963-1964 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Brazil 1-8 
Viet-Nam '9-19 
Iraq 20 - 24 
Turkey 25 - 29 
Albania 50 - 56 
Denmark 57 - 58 
Iran 59 - 52 
Peru 55 - 61 
19 Annual reports on the Agency's activities 62 - 65 
20 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 66 
14 Scale of Members' contributions for 1965 67 - 69 


15 
Proposal for a change in the Regular Budget 70 - 75 
appropriations for 1964: item proposed jointly 
by the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and Hungary 


16 The Agency's accounts for 1963 < 76 - 77 
18 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 78 - 93 
for 1965 


*/ GC(VII I)/285. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(VIII)/INF/75/Rev.2. 


64-6702 



GC(VIII)/OR.89 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1963-1964 (GC(VIII)/270, 
270/Corr.l, 27o/Add.l5 2 and 3, 280) (continued) 


1. Mr. FRADO (Brazil) welcomed the new Member States„ He also paid 
tribute to the Director General of the Agency and his staff for the' part they 
had played in preparing for the Third International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy-^ . 
2. A number of projects had been developed in Brazil with the assistance of 
the Agency, which had provided experts who had collaborated with Brazilian 
scientists and engineers in specialized fields of research and development. 
The Agency's publications were to be found in all Brazilian scientific libraries. 
3. The.results of the Study Group Meeting on the Utilization of Research 
Reactors, which had been held in Sao Faulo in November 1963 under the auspices 
of the Brazilian Nuclear Energy Commission and the Agency, had been considered 
so rewarding that the Agency had decided to send an expert to Latin America to 
explore more thoroughly the potentialities for regional co-operation in 
programmes of common interest. 
4. The Agenoy would participate in the regional training course on the 
application of radioisotopes in soil-plant relations which was shortly to beheld 
in Piracicaba, Brazil, and candidates for the course had been accepted 
from fourteen Latin American countries. 
5. Turning to the question of safeguards, he said that his delegation had been 
glad to note that various delegations, in particular those of the Soviet Union 
and of the United States of America, had mentioned the subject when addressing 
the Conference. He felt that the revised system, which would be submitted for 
consideration at the ninth regular session of the General Conference, v/ould 
allay the concern of the countries which had found that the former system had 
restricted their industrial development. 
60 Brazil had played an active part in the preparation of the Vienna Convention 
on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and expected to be a signatory, 


7. Nuclear programmes for tee use of radioisotopes in medicine, biology, 
agriculture, industry and basic science were steadily expanding in Brazil, and 
l/ Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 



GC(VIII)/0E.89 
page 3 


the Brazilian Fuclear "Energy Commission was re-examining plans for the construction 
of a large nuclear power station, of about 250-300 MW(e) capacity, 
to be integrated into one of the country's power networks. 


8. T,Tith the Agency's assistance Brazil was looking forward to the progressive 
development of a vast nuclear programme consistent with the scale of its 
national economy, 
9. Mr. LE-VAIT-THOI (Viet-Nam) welcomed the new Member States, whose 
participation in the work of the Agency would certainly help to strengthen its 
action as regards the developing areas. His delegation was appreciative of the 
dynamic manner in which the Director General had guided the Agency's activities,, 
10. Viet-Wam had early subscribed to the "Atoms for Peace" movement, but its 
nuclear programme was still only beginning. It was precisely because Viet-Nam 
recognized its own limitations that it hoped for much from international 
co-operation under the Agency's auspices, 
11. The Board of Governors had recently approved the application of the Agency's 
safeguards to an agreement for co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy i,vhich Viet—Fam had concluded with the United States of America in 1959. 
Thanks to the assistance rendered under that agreement, a research reactor had 
been installed at Dalat. Viet-Eam had signed a similar agreement with France 
in 1961 on the exchange of scientific information, the training of technicians 
and the supply of materials for industrial use. So far it had been in the 
field of training that Viet—Nam had derived the most benefit from that agreement. 
12. Viet-Kam had initiated a research programme aimed mainly at the use of 
radioisotopes in agriculture and medicine. Agriculture was of prime importance 
for Viet-Uam's economy. Research on rice and maize cultivation was proceeding 
with the aid of radioisotope and irradiation techniques. In that connection 
Viet-TJam.welcomed the establishment at Agency headquarters of a joint IAEA—FAO 
Division, which would play the chief part in co-ordinating assistance in that 
field. 
13. Thanks to the services of experts and to the equipment supplied by the 
Agency, a laboratory for the use of radioisotopes in medicine had just been set 
up. A four weeks' course had been organized in June 1964 in order to initiate 
practitioners into the new techniques. There were plans to establish a second 
radioisotope laboratory at the Cancer Institute. 

GC(VIII)/0B,89 
page 4 


14. The Nuclear Research Institute at Dalat was already beginning to produce 
radioisotopes to meet local needs. Activation analysis would be carried out 
in an intensive manner., in particular at the request of the blood bank and 
agricultural services* It had also been proposed that marine sediments along 
the coasts of South Viet-Fam should be studied by the neutron activation method. 
That study would be undertaken in co-operation with the Oceanographic Institute 
at Fna-Trang. Alongside those lines of research having practical implications, 
physicists were studying neutron spectra and neutron diffraction.• 
15. As regards radiological protection, measurements of atmospheric and rainwater 
radioactivity had been regularly undertaken since 1961 in the Dalat area. 
They were to be extended as soon as possible to the Hue and Saigon areas„ The 
establishment by the Agency of a calibration service for long-lived gamma 
detectors would certainly meet an obvious need, and Viet—Nam expected to profit 
from that service. 
I60 ..Viet-Warn welcomed the idea of pairing the nuclear research centres of the 
advanced countries with those newly established in the developing countries. 
Viet-lam was itself contemplating such a project in the near future, between the 


Institute at Dalat and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in the United States 


of America. It was also endeavouring to expand the exchange of scientific and 


technical information and publications. Such exchange's had already taken place 
with Korea, Spain, the United States of America, France, Mexico, Poland, the 
United Kingdom and Sweden. 


17. Viet-Uam intended, within the framework of regional co-operation, to send 
an engineer who had specialized in physics to the Philippines during the 
current year to take part in the joint crystal spectrometer programme. Viet-"Pam 
also intended sending a large technical delegation to the next regional meeting 
on the utilization of research reactors, to be held at Trombay. Viet-Nam had 
always warmly supported, especially in the Board of Governors, any plans and 
projects aimed at promoting more active co-operation on a regional basis between 
various Member States. It was therefore glad to note the special attention paid 
by the Director General to the role of the Agency's r'egional officer for Asia 
and the Far Bast, The regional officer should be able to concentrate most of 
his efforts in spheres where the Agency's assistance could benefit several 
countries simultaneously, since that would serve the common interest-

GC(VIII)/03.89 
page 5 


18• In his opinion? there was still one unexplored sector of technical 
assistance where the Agency's action would be of the greatest importance assistance 
to the developing countries in the drafting of national legislation 


on nuclear energy. That problem should receive all the more attention in that 
regulations on the transport of radioactive materials had already been in 


existence for four years. Those regulations were called upon to play an ever 
more decisive part in the unification of transport rules as existing international 
regulations were brought into line, and national legislation was 
drafted conforming to the Agency's standards. It therefore seemed desirable, 
for the purpose of expediting that stage, for the Agency to study without 


delay the possibilities of assistance in that field. 


19. The countless difficulties which Viet-I^am had to face in its guest for a 
better future were too well known to require mention. In all sincerity and 
humility - because it was aware of the gigantic task to be accomplished - the 
delegation of Viet-^am wished to affirm its Government's determination to 
pursue its efforts untiringly so as to enable the Vietnamese people to enjoy 
the benefits of the atom. In a world where all was in a state of flux, the 
continuity of those efforts at the scientific and technical levels were cause 
for hope for a brighter future. It was because it was animated by that faith 
that Viet-Ham intended, despite its limited resources, to make a voluntary 
contribution of 180 000 Vietnamese piastres to the Agency's General Fund for 
1965. In so do ng, Viet-Fam was conscious of serving the cause of international 
solidarity and co-operation. 
20. Mr. MAJID (Iraq.), after welcoming the new Member States, said that 
the Third Geneva Conference had shown the vital role played by atomic energy 
in science and technology both in the developed and the developing- countries. 
21. Consideration should be given to using the unexpended balance of the 
Agency's funds to finance the short- and long-term programmes of the developing 
countries. Scientists and experts with wide experience in nuclear research 
and technology should be sent to those countries in order to provide the 
following services? (l) evaluation and review of existing programmes in 
nuclear science5 (2) assistance to government agencies in the selection and 
preparation of research programmes in the various branches of nuclear science 

GC(VIII)/OR.89 
page 6 


and technology; (3) formulation of recommendations for improving existing 
programmes in such fields5 and (4) assistance in connection with lectures, 


seminars and panel discussions. 


22. Referring to the Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre in Cairo, he 
felt that its activities should be expanded and that, in particular, it should 
hold special training courses on the use and maintenance of the electronic 
instruments and equipment so widely employed in the nuclear sciences and in 
radioisotope techniques. 
23. He also emphasized the importance of holding exhibitions and of arranging 
lecture tours in the developing countries in order to demonstrate the scope, 
practicability and versatility of the uses of radioisotopes in science and 
technology. 
24. 
The delegation of Iraq associated itself fully with the declaration made 
2/ 
by the African States as regards South Africa-^ , and condemned the policy of 
apartheid followed by that country. 


25. Mr. UMYDIN (Turkey) said that the Turkish Government duly appreciated 
the Agency's activities in co-ordinating the efforts made by its Members in 
the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and was grateful to the Agency 
for the aid it had received. 
3/ 


26. The Turkish delegation approved the Agency's biennial programme-^ as a whole. 
27. As the Turkish economy was agricultural, his country was particularly 
interested in the use of radioisotopes and radiation sources in agriculture. 
A research laboratory on the use of radioisotopes in agriculture had been in 
operation in Ankara for almost three years. Two regional training courses had 
been organized there and Turkey hoped that, with the Agency's help, the 
laboratory would in the near future have an important part to play. Turkey 
followed with interest and satisfaction the work done by the Agency on priority 
projects for increasing world agricultural production, and had asked the Agency 
to collaborate in setting up in Turkey a pilot centre for using radioisotopes 
and radiation sources in the fight against grain-store pests, which at present 
2/ GC(VIII)/OR.84, para. 33/ 
G0(VIII)/275. 



GC(VIII)/02.89 
page 7 


caused Turkey a loss of food products estimated at $15 million a year* Studies 
had been made on the spot in March 1964 by a team of Agency experts, and he 
hoped that the Agency would he able to arrange for the team's report to be 
published in the near future. 


28. The Agency's work on priority projects had already had excellent results:; 
nevertheless, the Turkish delegation felt that it was too restricted in scope, 
and suggested that the Agency should associate with its work experts from 
countries other than those where the projects were carried out, for example 
by granting special fellowships. 
29. In .conclusion, he hoped that the Agency would modify the conditions 
governing the grant of technical assistance, introducing more flexibility into 
the regulation stating that any country wishing to receive equipment should at 
the same time accept the services of experts. 
30. Mr. ATTGOTTI (Albania) recalled that the delegates of the African 
States had raised the question of the representation of the Government of 
South Africa on the Board of Governors. The Albanian delegation was in 
complete agreement with the opinion expressed by the African States on that 
question and would wholeheartedly support them. 
31. The persecution to which the native population of the Republic of South 
Africa was subjected by the racialist Government of the country, in pursuance 
of the abhorrent policy of apartheid, was known to all. It had aroused the 
profound indignation of decent people all over the world, and was condemned 
by the United Nations, other international bodies and all progressive humanity. 
32. The South African Government, with the direct or indirect support of certain 
imperialist Powers, particularly the United States of America, had ignored and 
continued to ignore world public opinion, as well as the resolutions adopted by 
the General Assembly and the Security Council in accordance with the Charter 
of the United Nations, calling on it to put a stop to raoial discrimination, 
to ban repressive measures and to grant full independence to the South African 
population, with equal rights for the native and white population. 
33• The repressive measures taken by the South African Government with the 
purpose of crushing the African movement for freedom and independence endangered 



GC(VIII)/0H.89 
page 8 


the lives of many "thousands of people and constituted an act of genocide, 
condemned by the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of 
Genocide, an instrument which had been drawn up by the United Nations and of 
which the South African Government itself was a signatory* 


34. The PRESIDENT, intervening, said that the subject to which the 
Albanian delegate was referring was not germane to the item under discussion. 
He therefore appealed to him to keep to the point and make his statement as 
short as possible.. 
35. Continuing^ Mr. ANGOFI said the delegation of the People's Republic 
of Albania considered that the action of the South African Government in 
carrying out the criminal policy of racial discrimination could not and should 
not fail to attract the attention of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
The General Conference should express its agreement with world public opinion 
and the opinion of the United Uations, which had condemned the South African 
Government for its treatment of the local population. 
36. The delegation of the People's Republic of Albania requested that, instead 
of South Africa, a seat on the Board of Governors should be assigned to a 
country which would genuinely represent the interests of the African States. 
37• Mr. JUUL (Denmark) said that the Danish delegation had studied with 
much satisfaction the annual report of the Board of Governors to the General 
Conference (GC(vTIl)/2?0 and Corr.l and Add.l, 2 and 3, 280). The Agency 
had worked in a practical and efficient way and had achieved substantial 
results. However, his delegation felt that priority should be given to conducting 
a detailed and thorough investigation of power resources and power 
requirements bearing in mind the rising standards of living in the developing 
countries. Also, ways and means should be found whereby the Agency, within 
its budgetary framework, and individual Member States could aid the development 
of nuclear power in those countries in order to further raise their standards 
of living. 


38o Denmark had recently organized an extended refresher course which had 
been attended by 20 qualified scientists from the developing countries. The 
experience had been stimulating and had clearly shown the need for additional 
courses on those lines. Danish scientists would be happy to welcome more of 



GC(VIII)/0H.89 
page 9 


their colleagues from abroad who wished to attend such courses, and his delegation 
would get in touch -with the Secretariat in the near future regarding an 
extension of Denmark's contribution in that field. The existence of the 
research es bablishment at Sis^ should enable "Denmark to participate more 
widely in training and research programmes planned or conducted by the Agency 
for scientists from abroad.. 


39-. Mr. AZAS (Iran) said that his delegation fully supported the Agency's 


efforts to assist Member States to develop nuclear medicine in their hospitals 


and universities. It -voloo-jk'-.i the increase in A^noy c^ntrLbuttons r,o work in 


that field from 5?23 000 in 1959 to $142 000 in 1963 and the close collaboration 


of the Agency with the ~'rorld Health Organization ("WHO). The contracts for 
research into the use of radioisotopes in connection with anaemia? goitre, 
parasitology and malnutrition i.?ere of particular importance to developing 


countriesf but more attention might be given to similar research contracts for 


the study of malaria. 


40, The Agency's project for the international calibration of thyroid 
radioiodlne-uptake measurements had received the full support of the Iranian 


Council for Medical Research, 


41- However, the number of fellowships awarded during 1963 for physicians and 
physicists from developing countries to study the medical applications of radioisotopes 
was not in proportion to those countries' increasing needs. 


/|2- The Agency's training course in London on the physics of radiotherapy and 


the assignment of an interregional adviser to Beirut were useful steps in the 
Agency's campaign to assist Member States to improve their knowledge of the 
physical aspects of radiotherapy. 


43. The utilization of radioisotopes in agriculture, particularly in the 
developing countries, tended to be less advanced than in medicine, possibly 
because the planning authorities concerned were less aware of the possibilities 
for the agricultural uses of radioisotopes3 in that respect, the Agency could 
play a very valuable advisory role. The Iranian delegation fully supported the 
continuation of studies under the rice and maize programmes and suggested that 
they might be extended to wheat and barley. 

GC(VIII)/OE.89 
page 10 


44. Iran welcomed the regional training course on the application of radioisotopes 
in soil-plant relations held in-Ankara and the Agency's activities in 
connection with insect population control by the sterile-male technique, 
though the estimated cost of the eradication of the olive fly and the 
Mediterranean fruit fly seemed too. optimistic. It also welcomed the Agency's 
efforts to co-ordinate international activities in the field of plant breeding. 
The Iranian delegation would support any effort to increase the number of 
qualified plant pathologists familiar with the utilization of radioisotopes 
who could work on the control of plant diseases in the developing countries. 
45• The establishment by the Agency of an advisory and experimental service 
on the use of isotope techniques in the solution of water problems had the 
full support of the Iranian Government, which would also welcome any effort by 
the Agency to develop new techniques for the enrichment and analysis of tritium. 
It was. to be hoped that the experience gained by the Agency from the United 
Nations Special Fund project in Turkey would be made available to all Member 
States. 


46. The Agency should not use its limited budget in attempting to solve basic 
problems of advanced nuclear technology, such as the thermodynamics of nuclear 
materials or the physicochemical properties of uranium dioxide. . 
47 . The experimental manual on isotope production which the Agency was preparing 
would be of great value to developing countries where new reactor centres 
had been established. There was, however, a real need for an internationally 
accepted standard of purity for radioisotopes, particularly for those used in 
medical work. More attention should be paid to promoting international 
co-operation on the use of radioisotopes in industry? their use in the 
petroleum industry was of particular importance to Iran* 
48. "Research into solid-state physics with low-power reactors seemed +0 hold 
considerable promise, and the Iranian delegation particularly welcomed the 
progress that had been made in the establishment of an International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. 
49. The production of fresh water from sea water by means of nuclear power 
represented a possible solution for those large areas of the world which were 
faced with a shortage of fresh water, but in the present state of the technology 
involved it was unwise to be too optimistic. 

GC(VIII)/0H.89 
page 11 


50. His delegation was glad that the Yankee reactor had been placed under 
Agency safeguards and hoped that other Member States would take' similar, action-
The basic principles of the Agency's present safeguards system were 'sound,, 
though some improvements in detail might be desirable, 
51o In the matter of regulatory activity, the Agency had prepared valuable 


documents on health and safety codes and practices. 


52. In general} the past year had been one of success and fulfilment and the 
Director General was to be congratulated on the. assistance which the Agency had 
given Member States in developing their nuclear programmes. 
53. Mr. MOUGE GGRDILLO (Peru) congratulated the Director General on the 
excellent work done ~by the Agency in providing technical assistance and in 
developing the uses of atomic; energy in all parts of the world. : 
54* Peru was engaged in active work on the peaceful uses of atomic energy; As 

a Member State, it was greatly interested in supporting any moves towards setting 


up regional study and research centres to deal with questions bearing on the 


utilization of radioisotopes, radiations and other forms of nuclear energy in 


biology, medicine, agriculture and industry. Like other Latin American countries, 


it was convinced of the necessity - to the extent that economic capacity, tech


nological capability, natural resources and national aspirations permitted - of 


examining the possibility of building- nuclear power stations in conjunction with 
'industrial installations in selected areas of the continent. 


55. His Government had drawn up. for the first time on a continental scale, 
plans for building a highway at the edge of the forests which, passing along 
the eastern slopes of the Andes, would link the Amazonian uplands of five 
Latin American countries. The project would enable civilization to be brought 
to those areas, which were rich in deposits of all kinds. 
56. "Tithin the limits of its resources, Peru could also contribute to 'the 
setting up of a number of laboratories in the southern Pacific region to do 
research and study ways of using nuclear energy to raise the health and 
nutrition standards of the people. 
57. The climate on the south Pacific coast between Peru and Chile was such as 
to make that desert area one of the most arid in the world. As the United States 
r.nd Soviet Union delegates had pointed out, the technology of reactors and of 

GC(VIII)/0E.89 
page 12 


nuclear fuel fabrication had advanced to the point of making it possible to 


determine an electric power level which would permit the economic production 


of electricity for industrial use and, at the same time, the desalting of sea 
water for agricultural and industrial purposes. The studies which the Agency 
and United States Government agencies had carried out in regard to Mexico, 


Israel and Tunisia, in collaboration with institutions of those countries, 


could serve as a basis for initial planning and the preparation of programmes 
for electric power generation and desalination. Peru was ready, in principle, 


to offer the broadest collaboration in that v/ork. 


580 Population growth and the prospects opened up by scientific and technological 
progress required that efforts should be made to co-ordinate industrial 
and agricultural development in the countries of Latin America, which were very 
rich in natural resources and had a great common cultural tradition. The work 
being done in that connection by the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission 
of the Organization of American States was worthy of special mention. 


59. Peru wished to ask the General Conference to take the necessary urgent 
measures to ensure that, within the decade to come, the experience gained in 
utilizing nuclear energy for generating electric power and desalting sea water 
for industrial and agricultural purposes should be put to practical use in 
the large irrigable areas of Peru's southern coast, where hydroelectric and 
conventional fuel resources were either non-existent or uneconomic. 
60. His country was very grateful to the Agency for the attention given to its 
requests relating to health physics and radiological protection. It hoped that 
similar attention would be given to the three further requests it had made under 
the Agency's technical assistance programme for 1965-66, relating to the establishment 
in Lima of a centre for the storage, distribution and control of radioisotopes, 
to the development of radioisotope applications in agriculture, with 
particular reference to fertilizer use and the study of hydrological problems, 
and to a programme for gamma irradiation of harmful insects. He had been given 
to understand that the Agency would favourably consider projects of that kind. 
61o Peru was well aware of the importance of international co-operation in the 
development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It likewise recognized the 
serious problems facing the Agency in matters of priorities, project selection 



GC(VIII)/0H.89 
page 13 


and financial resources. That situation was worsened by the growing demands 
for assistance from developing countries and called for co-ordinated regional 
programmes in respect of nuclear laboratories, research reactors and combined 
power and desalination plants. In that way, it would be possible to achieve 
rapidly a development of nuclear energy which would permit an improvement in 

living standards for all the peoples of the world. 


ANNUAL REPORTS OH THE AGENCY'S ACTIVITIES (GC(VIII)/272, 273) 


62. The PRESIDE?? drew attention to the :-;. commendation by die Board of 
Governors (GC(viIl)/272) relating to the Agency's report to the General 
Assembly of the United Nations for 1963-64. As the draft resolution recommended 
by the Board was on exactly the same lines as similar resolutions on the subject 
adopted by the Conference in the past, he suggested that it be adopted. 
63. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VIII)/272 was adopted. 
64' The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider the draft resolution 
submitted by the Board in its recommendation (GC(VIII)/273) concerning the 
Agency's report to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations for 
1964-65. 

65. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VIII)/273 was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


66. The PRESISENT explained that the item had been included in the agenda 
in order to provide for the eventuality that one or more members of the Agency1s 
Staff Pension Committee would have had to be replaced. However, no elections 
to that Committee were in fact needed during the present session. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1965 (GC(VIII)/286) 


67. The PRESIDENT called upon the delegate of Pakistan to present the 
report of the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee. 
68. Mr. INNAS ALT (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's report on the scale of Members' 
contributions for 1965 (GC(VIII)/286). 
69. The draft resolution contained in document GC(vTIl)/286; paragraph 2, 
Tfas adopted. 

GC(VIII)/OR.89 
page 14 


PROPOSAL FOR A CHANGE IN THE REGULAR BUDGET APPROPRIATION FOR 1964s ITEM PRO-
POSED JOINTLY BY THE CZECHOSLOVAK SOCIALIST REPUBLIC AND HUNGARY (GC(VIII)/287) 


70. Mr. INNAS ALI (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's report (GC(YIIl)/287) and drew 
attention to the draft resolution reproduced in the annex to the report. 
71. The PRESIDENT put the draft resolution to the vote. 
72. There were 59 votes in favour and nono against, with 18 abstentions. The 
draft resolution was adopted. 
73• Mr. MoADAM CLARK (United Kingdom), explaining his vote, said that 
although, when the matter had come up for discussion, his delegation had agreed 


to accept the verdict of the Committee, it nevertheless considered the decision 
which had now been taken an incorrect one. His delegation regarded the matter 
as one of principle, with no political hias, and wished to record its abstention 
for future reference., . -• 


74. Mr. ERANCO-NETTO (Brazil), explaining his abstention, recalled that 
during the debate in the Committee his delegation had suggested a compromise on 
similar lines to the solution adopted by the "rorld Health Organization, which 
would have met the legitimate desires of Czechoslovakia and Hungary without 
violating sound fiscal and budgetary principles, namely.to refund the difference 
in contributions for the year 1964 only, leaving 1963 unaltered. 
75. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) explained that his delegation 
had voted against the resolution in the Committee because it believed, as a 
matter of principle, that the Agency should not complicate the situation 
regarding the assessed budget by applying unduly the principle of retroactivity. 
However, in view of the decision taken by the Committee, he had abstained from 
voting in plenary. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1963 (GC(V-IIl)/288) 


76. Mr- RAHMOUNI (Algeria), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, presented the Committee's report on the Agency's accounts for 
1963 (GC(VIII)/288). 
77. The draft resolution contained in document GC(VIII)/288, paragraph 2, 
was adopted. 

GC(VIII)/0E.89 
page 15 


VOLUNTARY OOFTRIBUTIOLTS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1965. (GC(VIII)/28l/Rev.3 ) 


78. The PRESIDENT, opening the discussion on item 18, said that Annex IV 
to the Agency1s Budget for 1965-" contained a draft resolution on the Operational 
Budget allocations for 196"5 recommending that the General Conference decide 
that the target for voluntary contributions to the General Fund he $2 million. 
The Programme, Technical and Budget Committee had not yet submitted its report 
on that draft resolution, but he understood that it would be recommending that 
figure, 
79. Document GC(VIII)/28l/Rev.3 contained a list of the pledges received by 
16 September, Since then four more had been communicated by the following 
countries; Austria, 18200; Burma, $1000? India, $35 000| and Israel, $2800. 
80. In addition, he had been asked to announce that the Chilean Government, 
appreciative of the Agency's 7/ork, wished to help finance its activities by an 
appropriate voluntary contribution for 1965. However, as the appropriationslaw 
was still before the National Congress, the Chilean delegation could not, 
for the moment, indicate the exact amount, which would be communicated to the 
Secretariat as soon as the law' had been approved, 
81. He had been informed by the Italian delegation that its Government intended 
to make a contribution as it had done in the past. However, pending approval 
of the nuclear energy bill for 1965 and subsequent years, the Government was 
not yet in a position to indicate the amount. 
82. He had also been asked by the delegate of Mexico to state that his Government 
intended to make a voluntary contribution in 1965 as it had done in the 
past years, but the exact amount had yet to be determined. 
83. Thus the total so far pledged was $464 893? which was far short of the 
proposed target, and he hoped that further pledges would increase the amount very 
considerably. 
84. "Tith regard to voluntary contributions in kind the delegations of Bulgaria, 
the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, 
Poland, Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet 
4/ GC(VIII)/276. 



GC(VIII)/OR,89 
page 16 


Socialist Republics had stated that their voluntary contributions would consist 
of the programme they had proposed for establishing radiological centres in 
developing countries, including the provision of experts and fellowships. That 
part of the programme which devolved on those countries would be carried out 
during the coming two or three years whether the "Western countries took part 
in it or not. 


85. As had been the practice in the Committee for Pledges of Voluntary Contributions 
to the General Fund, the amounts pledged would be recorded on a 
special form but on the clear understanding that that would not constitute a 
legal or binding commitments a point of particular importance for pledges 
requiring subsequent legislative approval. 
86. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) said that, as in previous years 
and subject to the appropriation and availability of funds, the United States 
would contribute to the Agency's operational programmef the amount towards the 
1965 target would be equivalent to 45!^ .f "the total unrestricted cash contributions 
paid into the General Fund by Member States until the total of such 
contributions together with the United States' matching portion reached 
$1 500 000. It was anticipated that $500 000 of the United States pledge 
would be paid as an outright grant. 
87. In addition to its cash contribution, and again subject to the appropriation 
and availability of funds, the United States planned to provide fellowships 
to the value of $280 000 for study in United States institutions and $125 000 
in the form of services of experts, costs associated with participation in 
technical meetings and small equipment grants for technical assistance projects 
for the Agency's Laboratory. 
88. As the pledge for 1965 had been modified compared to those of previous 
years, some explanation was needed of the considerations which had prompted 
his Government's decision. During the past seven years, it had contributed 
to the General Fund an amount equal to 50$ of the voluntary contributions 
'received and that contribution had been over and above cost-free fellowhips, 
the services of experts for Agency panels, meetings, technical assistance 
assignments, equipment grants and other items. The pledges during that period 
had been accompanied by a matching formula designed to provide an incentive to 


i• 


Gr(VIII)/OR.89 
page 17 


other Member States to contribute generously to the important work of the Agency 
for which the only source of funds was voluntary contributions and contributions 
in kind. However, the total amount of money available from the United States 
for matching purposes under that formula had never been fully taken up and 
about $1 million had been lost to the Agency, To that extent, the Operating 
Fund had been penalized and had been insufficient to meet technical assistance 
requests. 


89. In view of that situation, his Government had hoped that the proposal to 
find a solution by an amendment to the Statute bringing all the Agency's 
activities under the assessed budget would meet with general approval. It 
continued to regard that objective as the desirable one in the long run and, 
in the meantime, believed that the proportion of the United States total 
contribution should be brought closer into line with the pattern of United 
States contributions to other international organizations. 
90. Although the United States pledge had been revised, it still contained 
the essential element that would enable the Agency to come near to reaching 
its voluntary target if other contributions were made to bring the matching 
formula fully into play. He accordingly urged all Member States to contibute 
to the voluntary fund in an amount at least equivalent to their percentage 
assessment for the Regular Budget. 
91. Mr. McADAM CLARK (United Kingdom) said that his Government had 
consistently held the view that the form of technical assistance must depend 
on requests and not on what others might think certain countries ought to 
receive and had therefore believed that the Agency should dispose of resources 
that would enable it to obtain technical assistance on the best terms possible. 
For that reason, in the past the United Kingdom had made its contribution in 
convertible currency rather than in fellowships, services or material. 
92. The United Kingdom had decided to contribute the equivalent of $140 000 
in convertible currency to the General Fund for 1965? representing the same 
percentage as its assessed contribution to the Regular Budget. To the extent 
possible, it would also provide the services of experts free of charge and as 
in 1964 make places available at laboratories and certain power stations. 
95. The PRESIDENT announced that France had just made a pledge of $30 000. 
The meeting rose at 5.15 P.ifl. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(VIII)/OR.90 
28 January 1965 


GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

Eighth regular session 

OFFICIALRECEORD OF THE NINETIETH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 18 September 1964, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


18 Voluntary contributions to the General 1 2 
Fund for 1965 (continued) 
11 Arrangements for the ninth regular session 3 5 
1317 
The Agency's programme for 1965-66 andbudget for 1965 
The Agency's relations with intergovernmentalorganizations 
6-13 
14 - 16 
12 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 17 - 31 
3 Credentials of delegates to the eighthregular sessions 
(b) Report to the Credentials Committee 
32 52 
10 General debate and report of the Board ofGovernors for 1963-64 (continued) 
53 - 69 
21 Closing of the session 70-76 

* GC(VIII)/285. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(VIII)/INF/75/Rev.2. 


65-82 



GC(VIII)/OR.90 
page 2 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO TILL G33NERAL FUND FOR 1965 (GC( VTII)/28l/Rev. 3) '. 
(continued) . V.-. 


1. The PRESIDENT said lie was now in a position to inform the Conference 
that 36 States had made pledges to the General Fund totalling the equivalent 
of $634 693- Application of the matching formula announced by the delegate 
of the United States at the previous meeting—' would add a further $519 294? 
with the result that at present contributions totalling $1 153 9$7 could be 
expected for the General Fund for 196~5. 
2. While expressing gratitude to thdse Members •vho had made pledges, he 
regarded it as incumbent upon him to point out that total pledges were still 
a long way short of the $2 million target and stressed that only 37 out of a 
total of 88 Members of the Agency had made pledges. As the Agency's operational 
activities could not be carried on without funds? he hoped that further contributions 
would be forthcoming. 
ARRANGU1SNTS'FOR THE NINTH REGULAR SESSION (GC( VHl)/269) 


3. The PRESIDENT said that hitherto the General Conference had always 
met in Vienna. For its ninth session however it had received an. invitation 
from the Japanese Government to meet in Tokyo (GC(VIII)/269). The General 
Committee, after considering the invitation, had asked him to report to the 
Conference that it was very appreciative of the Japanese Government's offer 
to act as host to the Conference and considered that the invitation should be 
accepted. 
4. As regards the opening date of the ninth session^ the Committee had 
recommended that the session should begin in ..the last days of September or 
the first days of October on a date to be determined by the Director General 
after the necessary consultations. The Committee also recommended that the 
Conference request the Director General to inform the Japanese authorities 
accordingly? to conclude with them the necessary agreement on behalf .of the 
Agency and to convey to them the Conference's appreciation of the offer of 
the Japanese Government to act as host to the ninth regular session of the 
Conference. 
5. The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted. 
l/ GC(VIII)/OR.89, para. 87. 



GC(vni)/OR.90 
page 3 


THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME FOR 1965-66 AMD BUDGET FOR 1965 (GC(VIII)/289? 290) 


6. Mr. IMAS ALI (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget'Committee, introduced the Committee"'s first and second reports on item 13 
of the agenda The Agency's Programme for 1965-be and Budget for 1965 
(GC(VIII)/289,290). Annexed to the first report were three draft resolutions 
which the Committee recommended for adoption, and annexed to the second report 
were four draft resolutions also recommended for adoption, 
7. 'The draft resolution in Annex I to document GC(¥IIl)/289 (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1965) was adopted. 
8. The draft resolution in Annex II to document GC(VIII)/289 (Operational 
Budget allocations for 196~5) was adopted. 
9. The draft resolution in Annex III to document GC(VIII)/289 (Use of the 
Working Capital Fund in 196*3) was adopted. 
10. The draft resolution in Annex I to document GC(VIII)/290 (Transport of 
Radioactive Materials) was adopted. 
11. The draft resolution in Annex__II_to_ document GC(VIII)/290 (international 
Co-operation Year) was adopted. 
12. The draft resolution in Annex III to document G0(VIII)/29O (Encyclopedic 
Publication on Nuclear Science and Technology) was adopted. 
3-3- The draft resolution in Annex IV to document GC(VIII)/290 (Agreements 
91}-. International Mutual Bmergency Assistance) was adopted. 

THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS VfITH INTSRGOTS'RIffiENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (GC(VIII)/292) 


14• Mr. RAHi-F'UNI (Algeria), Rapporteur of the Administrative and Legal 
Committee, introduced the Committee's report on item 17 of the agendas The 
Agency's relations with intergovernmental organizations (GC(VIII)/292). Annexed 
to the report were two draft resolutions which the Committee recommended for 
adoption. 


^5- The draft resolution in Annex A to document GC(VIII)/292 (Representation 
of Intergovernmental Organizations at the Ninth Regular Session) was adopted. 



GC(rai)/OR.90 
page 4 


16. The draft resolution in Annex E to document GC(VIII)/292 (Co-operation 
between the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Scientific., 'Technical 
and Research Commission of the Organization of African Unity) was adopted. 
ELECTION OF MEMB3ES TO TH2 BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(VIII)/284/Rev.1) 


17" The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to take up agenda item 12s 
Election of Members to the Board of Governors. The General Committee had 
notified the Conference in its report (GC(VIII)/284/Rev.1) that five Members 
must be elected to the Board during the present session. The Committee had 
specified the geographical areas in respect of which elections were required 
and drew the Conference's attention to the fact that elections must he conducted 
with due regard to equitable representation on the Board as a whole of the Members 
in the geographical areas specified under Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. 
Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure provided that the elections should be by secret 
ballot and that there should be no nominations. 


18. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Brazilian delegation 
and a member of the Nigerian delegation acted as tellers. 
19. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect two Members from the 
area of Latin America. 
20. A .vote was taken by secret ballot., the result of which was as- followss 
Members to be elected; 2 


• Ballot papers returnedi 143 
Invalid votesi • 4 
Abstentions? 12 
Valid votess 127 
Required majoritys 32 
Votes obtained? 
Argentina 63 
Chile 60 
Colombia 1 
Cuba . . 1 
Peru 1 
Venezuela 1 



GC(VIII)/0H.90 
page 5 


21. Having obtained the required majority, Argentina and Chile were elected 
Members of the Board. 
22. The PRESIDENT invited the'Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of Africa and the Middle Bast. 
23. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as followsa 
Ballot papers returned? 73 
Invalid vote's'? 1 
Abstentions-4 
Valid votes% 68 
Required majority; 35 
Votes obtained; 


United Arab Republic 60 
Ghana 2 
Tunisia 2 
Iraq 1, 
Israel 1 
Lebanon 1 
Nigeria ' 1 -. • 


24- Having obtained the required majority, the United Arab Republic was 
elected a Member of the Board. 

25. The PRESIDMT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the area 
of South East Asia and the Pacific. 
26. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows? 
Ballot papers returned•' 72 
Invalid votes; 7 
Abstentions; 3 
Valid votess 62 
Required majority; 32 
Votes obtained; 


Thailand 62 


27. Having obtained the required majority, Tahiland was elected a Member of 
the Board. 

OC(VIII)/OR„90 
page 6 


28. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to fill the remaining vacant 
seat on the Board of Governors. 
29• A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows 


Ballot papers returned; 73 
Invalid votess 1 
Abstentionss 6 
Valid votes" 66 
Required majority^ 34 
Votes obtained"-


Netherlands 62 
Czechoslovak Socialist 


Republic 1 
Denmark 1 
Ghana 1 


Portugal 1 


30. Having obtained the required majority, the Netherlands was elected a 
Member of the Board. 
31. The PRESIDENT declared the elections completed and pointed out that, 
under Article VI.D of the Statute3 the Members just elected to the Board would 
hold office from the end of the eighth regular session of the General Conference 
until the end of the tenth regular session. He congratulated Argentina? Chile? 
Thailand and the United Arab Republic on their election and on behalf of the 
Netherlands Government assured the Conference that the Netherlands would do its 
best to serve the interests of the Agency as a whole in fulfilling the high 
responsibility with which it had been entrusted. He thanked the tellers for 
their work. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE EIGHTH REGULAR SESSION 


(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(VIII)/293) 
32. The PRESIDENT announced that the Credentials Committee had examined 
the credentials of delegates in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of 
Procedure5 its report? containing two draft resolutions? was to be found in 
document GC(viIl)/293. 

GC(VIII)/OE.90 
Page 7 


33. Mr. ANGOHT (Albania) said that his delegation had noted with regret 
the Credentials Committee's recommendation that the Conference agree to the 
participation in its work of some persons claiming.to represent China? hut in 
fact representing nobody. The Albanian delegation was therefore obliged to 
state that it could not approve the credentials of the representatives of the 
Chiang Kai-shek clique and consequently could not accept that part of the 
Committee's report relating to the credentials submitted in the name of China. 
34. He considered that closing the Agency's doors to a nation such as China, 
representing a quarter of the world's population, amounted to denying the 
Agency's principle of universality and grossly transgressed the most elementary 
principles of international law. Due to the obstructionist attitude of the 
United States representatives, the place of the People's Republic of China 
was still unjustly occupied by the Chiang Kai-shek usurpers. 
35. In bis opinion, the absence of the People's Republic of China from the 
discussions on subjects such as dynamics, high energy physics, the symmetry of 
elementary particles, cosmic radiation, and so on, which had also been discussed 
at the symposium recently held in Peking and attended by scientists from Africa, 
Asia, Latin America and Oceania, could only be prejudicial to the Agency's 
interests. Problems in nuclear physics were at issue, and the Agency could not 
disregard them any more than it could deprive the international forum constituted 
by the Conference of the contributions which could be provided by scientists 
from China, a nation which had a population of 650 million. 
36. He also wished to emphasize that Formosa was an integral part of the 
People's Republic of China. That fact had been recognized even by the United 
States of America in the Cairo Declaration of 1943. The ridiculous and 
tendentious theory of two Chinas propagated by the enemies of the Chinese people 
was doomed to failure. The Chinese people had only one representative and that 
was the Government of the People's Republic of China, which for fifteen years 
had been exercising its authority over the entire life of the country and enjoying 
the full support of the whole Chinese people. Under the guidance of the 
people's government, China had won magnificent victories in the economic and 
cultural development of the country. The People1s Republic of China had become 
a great Power without whose participation no major world problem could be solved. 

GC(VIII)/CE.90 
page 8 


That was due mainly to the peace-loving, sound and far-sighted policy which it 
had followed during the fifteen years of its existence. The People's Sep\ihlic 
of China was playing a very important role in the maintenance of peace in Asia 
and throughout the world. 


37- Mr. SAV.CLIBV (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) stated that the 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, like the other socialist countries, had 
not recognized and did not recognize the validity of the Ohiang Kai-shek group's 
signature to the Agency's Statute and consequently could not concede the legality 


•of that group's credentials to represent China at the Agency's General Conference* 
His delegation therefore could not approve the draft resolution contained in the 
Credentials Committee's report recognizing the validity of the Chiang Kai-shek 
group's credentials. 


38. Mr. REFNSR (United States of America) said that the United States 
delegation approved of the report of the Credentials Committee and would vote 
in favour of the two draft resolutions.39. 
He repudiated the statements made by speakers who had objected to the 
Credentials Committee's action concerning the representation of China, but 
he would not engage in a debate on that controversial political issue, his 
Government's views were already well known, as they had been frequently 
explained in the political organs of the United Nations and other appropriate 
forums. Moreover, his Government would have an opportunity of restating its 
position at the forthcoming session of the United Nations General Assembly. 
40. The Credentials Committee recommended that the General Conference should 
decide to take no action on any proposal to change the representation of China. 
That draft resolution was consistent with the resolutions on the same subject 
adopted at previous sessions and with the decisions consistently taken by other 
United Nations organizations. 
41• The representation of China had been debated extensively at the .last three 
sessions of the United Nations General Assembly, which, on each occasion, had 
rejected proposals for a change and had approved the credentials of the 
representatives of the Republic of China as being in conformity with its rules 
of procedure. 



GC(VIII)/0B.90 
Page 9 


42. The Agency and the specialized agencies had consistently recognized that 
political issues, including those hearing on the representation of Member States 
within the United Nations system, were primarily the concern of the United 
Nations., In conformity with the General Assembly's recommendation, mentioned 
in the preamble to the Credentials Committee's draft resolution I, they had 
repeatedly followed the policy adopted by the General Assembly in such matters. 
His Government took the view that organizations within the United Nations system 
should, as in the past, act in accordance with the relevant General Assembly 
decisions. He therefore.appealed to delegates not to raise irrelevant political 
issues and to concentrate their efforts on promoting the important technical 
work for which, the Agency was primarily responsible. 
43. Mr. LIU (China) protested against the statements made by the delegates 
of Albania and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic questioning the right 
of his delegation to represent China in the Agency. The Government of the 
Republic of China, which he had the honour to represent, was the only legally 
and democratically constituted Government of China and had always been recognized 
as such by the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the Agency. The 
Credentials Committee had found that the credentials submitted by his delegation, 
which had been duly issued by his Government, satisfied Rule 27 of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference^ hence his delegation's right to represent 
China in the Agency could not be questioned. The Chinese Communist regime, on 
the other hand;, had been imposed by force on the Chinese mainland and had never 
been accepted by the Chinese people or recognized by any United Nations organization. 
The United Nations General Assembly, which was the body competent to 
deal with political issues, had invariably rejected the claim of the Communist 
regime to represent China, and it was no more qualified to do so in the Agency 
than in the United Nations. 


44. Mr. LESZOZYWSKI (Poland) said that his Government dii not recognize 
the validity of the credentials issued by the Government of the so-called 
Republic of Chi^ta. The Chinese people could only be legitimately represented 
by a delegation from the People's Republic of China. 
45. U Bwa (Burma,) said that his delegation was prepared to approve the 
Credentials Committee's report. He wished to point out, however, that the 
credentials of Japan and New Zealand, which were members of the Committee, did 

GC(VIII)/OR.90 


page 10 


not satisfy the provisions of Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure.' Paragraph 8. 


of the report stated that there had been six votes in favour of the United 


States proposal on the representation of China, hut since two of those votes 


had been cast by Japan and New Zealand? he maintained that there had been only 


four valid votes in favour of the proposal. If that procedure were to'serve 


as a precedent' for future meetings of the Credentials Committee,, it would be 


prejudicial to the smooth working of the Agency. 


4^. Since the delegation of the Republic of.China was the only one recognized 


as representing that country in the Agency, his delegation would not support 


draft resolution I in the report. It was prepared to support draft resolution II} 
but that did not imply that it recognized the Governments of the Republic 


of China, the Republic of Korea or the Republic of Viet-Nam. 


47 • Mr. ICNESCU (Romania) said that the number of delegates who had 
urged that the question of the representation of China should be settled 
immediately, and the arguments they had advanced, showed that it was vital 


for the Agency's future activities that the right of the People's Republic of 
China to take part in its work should be recognized. The denial of that 
right was not only an injustice to a country whose existence could not be 


ignored, but was also contrary to the Agency's Statute and the principle of 
universality. It was useless to pretend that the Agency could promote the 
uses of atomic energy throughout the world in the interests of peace or to 


speak of genuine international co-operation when the country with the largest 
population in the world was denied its rightful representation. Such an 
unrealistic approach was prejudicial to the Agency's work, effectiveness and 
prestige. His delegation accordingly urged, in a spirit of realism' and having 
regard to the international political climate, that the representatives of the 
Chiang Kai-shek puppet regime should no longer be allowed to usurp the rights 
of the People's Republic of Hhina. 


48. His delegation supported the statements made by those who had denounced 
the inhuman policy of apartheid, which was an affront to human dignity. 
49- Mr. INNAS ALI (Pakistan) said his delegation was prepared to approve 
the Credentials Committee's report. His Government considered, however, that 
China should be represented in all United Nations bodies by the Government of 



GC(VIII)/OR.90 
page 11 


the People's Republic of China and not by the Chinese Nationalist Government. 
That view was based on the legal position, i.e. that the Government of the 
People's Republic of China, being the effective Government, had the right to 
represent China. Pakistan maintained very friendly relations with the People's 
Republic of China and his delegation was therefore in favour of its being 
represented in all United Nations bodies. 


50. Mr. CARRAUD (France) said that, while he did not wish to engage in 
polemics, he must point out that the Government of the People's Republic of 
China was the only one qualified to represent that country in the Agency. 
51. The PRESIDENT, noting that there vrere no further speakers, said he 
assumed that the majority were prepared to accept the report of the Credentials 
Committee and adopt the two draft resolutions it contained. 
52. Draft resolutions I and II in document GC(VIII)/293 were adopted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS F)R 1963-64 
( GC( VIII )/291) (continued)-^ 


53. The PRESIDENT said that two matters remained outstanding under jtem 10 
of the agenda, namely the joint draft resolution submitted hy Afghanistan, 
Algeria- Cameroun, Ceylon, Congo (Leopoldville), Gabon, Ghana, Indonesia, 
Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Tunisia, the United Arab Republic and Viet—Nam 
on the scientific training of nationals of the developing countries (GC(VIII)/29l), 
and the Director General's comments on the statements made in the general debate. 
In the absence of any objection, he suggested that the joint draft resolution 
be dealt with first. 
54. Mr. DAGUBRRE (Senegal), speaking on behalf of all the co-sponsors, 
said that the draft resolution had been submitted direct to a plenary meeting 
of the General Conference with the agreement of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee. 
55. The scientific training of nationals of the developing countries was an 
urgent matter, not only because the Agency's technical assistance programmes 
could not be carried out effectively unless trained local staff was available, 
but because scientific progress, and particularly progress in nuclear science 
and technology, was needed to increase the rate of economic and social 
2/ GC(VIII)/OR.89, paras. 1 to 61. 



GC(VIII)/0K.90 


page 12 


development. The co-sponsors of the draft resolution were therefore asking 
the General Conference to take a decision which would ensure that every 
effort would he made to solve that most important problem. 


56. The .joint draft resolution contained in document G0(¥IIl)/291 was adopted. 
57. The PRESIDENT invited the Director General to comment on the statements 
made during the general debate. 
58. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said he had listened with great interest to the 
general debate and was grateful for the co-operative attitude shown and the 
many constructive proposals made. Although he would be unable at that stage 
to comment on all the points raised*, he could assure the Conference that the 
records of the debate would be studied in detail by' the Secretariat and that 
all the proposals made would be given careful consideration and implemented 
to the maximum possible extent. 
59. He thanked delegations for their complimentary references to the part 
played by the Agency in the Third International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic .Energy^ and to its possible future role in such conferences. 
The Agency had been approached by the United Nations concerning publication 
of the proceedings of the Third Geneva Conferences if it undertook that work 
he hoped that the first volume would be completed by the end of the year and 
that all twenty volumes'would be completed by the end of 1965. That? of course, 
would only be possible if the United Nations took a prompt decision on the 
matter, 
60. He was glad that the Agency's first attempt at a two-year programme had 
been so readily accepted and that the ability to undertake those activities 
with so little increase in expenditure had been appreciated. The utmost 
vigilance would continue to be exercised to ensure that the Agency's manpower 
and financial resources were used as efficiently as possible. 
61. He intended to give the question of the utilization of savings careful 
consideration in consultation with the Board of Governors. It might be 
possible to utilize them to establish a special account for. financing any 
projects? particularly those of interest to the developing countries? which 
might be approved by the Board. That would give the Secretariat an added, 
incentive for careful management of the Agency's funds. 
j}/ Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 19 64. 



GC(VIII)/OR.90 
page 13 


62. Eeferences had been made to possible Agency assistance in drafting national 
atomic energy legislation, and one speaker had referred to the possibility of a 
world nuclear law. The Agency had already helped Member States to draft 
national legislation and it would be prepared to assist Governments further as 
part of its work in the regulatory field. 
63. He had taken special note of the comments on technical assistance and 
training and would do everything he could to ensure that such assistance met 
the needs of Member States, to the maximum extent consistent with the Agency's 
statutory responsibilities.. Special attention would be devoted to the needs 
of newly independent countries, and to what had been said about the establishment 
of regional centres. The suggestion that laboratories in developing 
countries should be adopted by established research centres and universities 
in the economically advanced countries was commendable. The Agency would 
give any assistance it could in tha0 connection. 
64. It had been clear from the debate that the various applications of radioisotopes 
in agriculture9 medicine and industry were of the greatest interest 
to the developing countries. The Agency's programmes would be expanded as far 
as possible to meet their needs in that respect, and the desire for regional 
projects would not be overlooked. 
65. There seemed to be a general wish to improve the distribution of research 
contracts, particularly for the benefit of centres in developing countries, 
and to undertake projects of interest to different countries in one area? 
however, in so doing, the highest standards of scientific research should be 
maintained. 
66. He proposed to expand the Agency's work on the production of fresh water 
from salt and brackish water along the lines of some of the proposals made. 
The series of panel meetings which had been started would be continued. It 
would, however, be increasingly difficult to maintain the general structure of 
Panel meetings, which called for a limited number of consultants, and he hoped 
that Governments would show understanding in that respect. He believed it was 
generally understood that much development work remained to be done before 
desalted water could be economically utilized for production of crops. The 
appropriate division of the Secretariat would study the interesting suggestion 
that the Agency should undertake surveys of world power and water requirements 
and would prepare proposals. 

GC(VIII)/0H.90 


Page 14 


67. He had been interested in what had been said about safeguards? and 
particularly in the reservations expressed by some delegates regarding the 
possible 'effects of safeguards on national atomic energy programmes. The 
revision of the safeguards system, which was at present under study by a 
committee of the' Board, was intended to simplify the procedure and to develop 
a system which, it was hoped, ?rould be generally acceptable to Member States. 
68. Time did not permit him to deal with some of the more novel suggestions 
which had been made during the debate, but one, in particular, deserved further 
consideration, namely the possibility of using nuclear explosives in mining and 
civil engineering. 
69. He thanked delegates for the kindness and generosity they had shown the 
Secretariat in their statements. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


70. Mr. FBAffGKLLA (Uruguay), speaking on behalf of all the American 
countries represented at the Conference, Mr. SALV-uTTI (Italy), speaking on 
behalf of all the vest European delegations, and Mr. 3HABHA (India) thanked 
the President for the competent manner in which he had conducted the meetings, 
and the Vice-Presidents and the Chairmen of the Committees for their contribution 
to the success of the Conference. They also paid a tribute to the 
Director General and the members of his staff. 
?1• Mr. HBDAYAT (United Arab Republic) associated himself with the 
previous speakers and thanked the Conference.for having elected the United 
Arab Republic to represent .the area of ifrica and the Middle iilast on the 
Board of Governors. 


72. Mr. C'GISO (Japan) associated himself with the thanks extended to 
the President and other officers of the Conference and with the congratulations 
to the Director General and his staff. He thanked the Conference for having 
accepted his Government's invitation to hold its ninth regular session in Tokyo. 
73. The PBESIDSMT expressed his appreciation of the kind words that had 
been said about him. His task had been greatly facilitated by the co-operation 
of delegates and by the help he had received from the Director General and his 
staff. Thanks to the spirit of goodwill and moderation shown by all, the 
discussions had been fruitful and had not been marred by any unpleasantness. 
That augured well"for the future. 

GC(VIII)/0E.90 
page 15 


74- He expressed his appreciation to the Austrian Government and the municipal 
authorities of Vienna for their hospitality. 


75. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Eules of Procedure, he invited delegates 
to ohserve one minute's silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


76. The rit~-SIDli>"? then declared the eighth regular session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



V. 

v. 


