International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(IX)/OR.10G 
20 December 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDREDTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Tuesday, 28 September 1965, at 11.30 a.m. 

President: Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
24 Voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund for 1966 (continued) 
1 3 
15 Scale of Members' contributions for 1966 4-5 
14 The Agency's budget for 1966 (continued) 6-8 
10 General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1964-65 (oontinued) 
9 - 21 . 
Credentials of delegates to the ninth regular 
session 
(b) Report of the-Credentials Committee 22-45 
25 Closing of the session 46 59 


* GC(IX)/313. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/Rev.2. 
65-7345 



GC(IX)/OR.100 
page 2 


\, • " 

VQLUNT.ARY. .CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1966 (continued) 


1. " 'tfh'e PRESIDENT invited the' Director .General to'1 give fav'brief summary of 'the-
position, -with -regard to pledges of voluntary contributions to the General" 
Fund for 1966. 
2. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that 42 Member States had so far pledged 
$1 075 000 in .voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 1966. That was 
about $80 000 less than the amount pledged for 1965 ty 40 Members at the same 
time the year before. He was sorry'to state that resources available to the 
General Fund had steadily declined since 1963? when 4-0 Members had pledged a 
total of a little more than1. $1,4 million. In 1964? 42 pledges totalled a little 
less than $1.4 million^ in 1965, 48 pledges totalled about $1.2 million. 
3. He urged all Members that had not already done so to consider making at 
leasir":a" token pledge for 1966, in order to avoid undue curtailment of planned, 
programmes. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1966 (GC(IX)/524) 


4. Mr. TORKI (Tunisia),' Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
'Budget Committee, presented -the Committee's report under item 15 of the agenda -
Scale of Members' contributions for,1966 (GC(IX)/324). , At the end of the .report 
there was a draft resolution 'Which, the Committee was recommending the Conference 
to adopt, 


5. The draft resolution in document GC(IX)/324 was adopted. 
THE-AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1966 (GC(IX)/323) (continued)^ 


6. Mr. TORKI (Tunisia), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's second report under item 14 of the 
agenda - The Agency's budget for 1966 (GC(IX)/323)• Annexed to the report were 
two draft resolutions which the Committee recommended for adoption, 
7. The draft resolution in Annox I to document GC(lx)/323 (Study of 
biennial budgeting) was adopted. 
8. The draft resolution in Annex II (The application of nuclear energy 
to the desalting of water) was adopted. 
1/ GC(IX)/OR.99, paras. 29 to 32. 



GC(IX)/OR.100 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1964-65 
(GC(IX)/515, 316, 317) (continued)2/ 


9. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Conference still had some unfinished 
business under item 10 of the agenda, namely three draft resolutions? the 
first, submitted by the United States of America, related to action pursuant to 
Resolution IO87 (XXXIX) of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations 
(GC(IX)/315)| the second was submitted jointly by 11 Powers (GC(IX)/3l6)3 the 
third was a 12-Power resolution relating to a decision on competence pursuant to 
Rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure (GC(IX)/317). 


10. Mr. TYABJI (India), speaking on behalf of certain Afro-Asian 
countries, namely, Tunisia, Algeria, the United Arab Republic, Iraq, Ghana, 
Lebanon, Ceylon and India, said that all those present were obviously in favour 
of disarmament and would like to do everything possible to bring it about.- The 
sponsors of the 11-Power draft resolution appealed to all Member States to 
render assistance in every possible way to the success of the negotiations for 
general and complete disarmament, and for the prohibition and destruction of 
nuclear weapons, which clearly should take place under effective international 
control. However, there were differences in approach to that problem and, while 
it was difficult to over-estimate the importance of the question, the Indian 
delegation and the other delegations for which he spoke appealed for consideration 
of the 11-Power draft resolution and the other related draft resolutions to 
be postponed. 
11. Mr. PETR0SYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said that many 
speakers in the general debate had referred repeatedly to the desirability of so 
directing the Agency's work as to enable it to contribute to the cause of 
lasting peace, disarmament and the elimination of nuclear weapons. Current 
international developments, including the intensification of the arms race and, 
in the United States, the stepping-up of plans for again using atom bombs, 
urgently called for decisive action to arrest that dangerous trend. Better than 
anyone else, the specialists, scientists, engineers and administrators assembled 
in the General Conference understood the harmful repercussions which the 
increased military use of atomic energy would have on the development of nuclear 
power for peaceful purposes5 the more time, resources and energy went into the 
military uses, the less remained available for the peaceful uses. The peoples 
2/ GC(IX)/OR.97. 



GC(IX)/OR.100 
page 4 


of the world were not likely to approve the Agency's General Conference 
endeavouring to evade questions relating to the continuing nuclear weapons 
race and the threat of renewed recourse to nuclear weapons. 


12. Certain Yifestern delegations - the United'States, the United Kingdom, 
Belgium, Canada and the Netherlands - had put forward a draft resolution to the 
effect that the General Conference was not competent to deal with questions 
relating to the prohibition of nuclear weapons. That attitude could only he 
considered an attempt to avoid discussing the outlawing of nuclear weapons, a 
question of vital concern to all mankind. How could the General Conference he 
considered incompetent? On the contrary, the Agency had a special interest in 
a swift solution to the problem of disarmament, because that would mean that 
unlimited new prospects would be opened up for the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy.. In his view,, the essence of the problem was not the Agency's supposed 
lack of competence| it was the fact that the sponsors of the draft resolution 
in question did not wish to state flatly that they were opposed to the outlawing 
of atomic weapons and the conclusion of a treaty regarding the prohibition and 
destruction of such weapons. It must be. said that the sponsors were inconsistent 
and illogicals -on the one hand, they denied the Agency's right to consider 
political questions, on the other they proposed passing judgement on the United 
Nations disarmament negotiations at Geneva - which amounted to taking a political 
decision. Moreover, as the Eighteen-Hation Committee on Disarmament itself 
recognized, those negotiations appeared to be deadlocked, so that there was 
hardly any cause for expressing satisfaction over them, 
13. The Soviet delegation continued to believe that the General Conference should, 
at its current session, take specific decisions with regard to those matters, hut 
in view of the appeal of the Afro-Asian delegations and of the situation that had 
developed, it was prepared, to agree that consideration of the questions raised in 
the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union and ten other delegations 
should be deferred. It was convinced that the Agency could not and should not 
stand aside from .-iuestions of deep concern to all mankind. 
14. Mr. MICIIASLS (United Kingdom) said he had hoped that the -eloquent appeal 
of the delegate of India would be accepted without further discussion. However, 
the remarks of the Soviet delegate could not be left unanswered. The Conference 
Virould surely agree that each of the nations concerned with nuclear disarmament 
was doing its best to achieve a successful outcome at Geneva. The question was a 

GC(IX)/OR,100 
page 5 


very intricate one and had many repercussions. Viewed realistically, the 


opinions of the General Conference on the subject were no more valuable than 
those of any individual, fiThile the Agency might in the future become an 
instrument of disarmament policy,, that was something far different from trying 
to decide what that policy should be. Involvement of the Agency in the disarmament 
negotiations would only complicate them. For all those reasons the 
United Kingdom had joined in sponsoring the draft resolution on the competence 


of the Agency. It was clear from the Statute that such problems were outside 
its purview. If the Agency became involved in political discussions it would 
be unable to devote itself to its scientific and technical tasks. He therefore 
welcomed the Afro-Asian proposal not to deal with, the subject. 


15. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) said he had deliberately 
refrained in the general debate from commenting on the statements made by the 
Soviet Union and certain other delegations,, because he deplored the introduction 
of controversial political issues into the Agency's work. The United States 
delegation had consistently taken the position that political issues outside the 
purview of the Agency should not be discussed there. However? he felt obliged 
to make some reply to the statement just made by the Soviet delegate. The 
issues concerned should be discussed in the United Nations and other appropriate 
political forums5 discussion of them in the Agency was clearly out of order. In 
conformity with that approach,, he would refrain even now from replying in 
substance to the allegations made but must categorically reject the unfounded 
charges and suggested implications put forward, 
16. It had been his good fortune to be the United States representative to the 
Agency during the past four yearss at meetings held during which time political 
matters had been held to an absolute minimum. About the start of that period 
there had seemed to be a general feeling growing among Member States that 
political discussion and decisions about disarmament and other similar matters 
should be left to the appropriate political organs of the United Nations and 
that the Agency should address itself to its important substantive technical 
functions. That attitude had helped all the Agency's programmes to make 
substantial progress during the period and it was his own and his Government's 
hope that the pattern would continue. 

GC(IX)/0E.100 
page 6 


17. He would reaffirm once again his conviction that every Member State 
represented in the Conference favoured general and complete disarmament under 
effective international control. Certainly his own Government favoured such 
action, as had been demonstrated over the past 20 years, starting with its 
proposal in 1946 on international control of atomic weapons (the Baruch Plan), 
right up to the proposals made by the United States representative in the 
United Nations only one week previously. 
18. 
The United States had made a very concrete and specific offer under those 
255 
latest proposals? to provide 60 000 kg of weapons-grade U from its stockpile 
to be used for peaceful purposes, provided the Soviet Union would transfer the 
lesser amount of 40 000 kg. That specific offer was more than ample support for 
the idea of general disarmament, 


19. Lastly, he could not better illustrate the United States attitude than to 
quote a statement made by the United States Secretary of State to the effect that 
his Government hoped that, as the process of disarmament progressed, the threat 
of the use of all weapons, including nuclear weapons, would disappear as the 
weapons themselves were destroyed. To that end the United States was earnestly 
seeking to attain its goal of a world in which the use of force was subjected to 
the rule of lawf a world in which general and complete disarmament under 
effective international control had been achieved5 a world in which adjustments 
to change would .occur peacefully in accordance with the principles guiding the 
United Nations. 
20. In conclusion, he would thank the delegations that had proposed postponing 
discussion of the draft resolutions before the Conference. That was a 
satisfactory way of avoiding further political speeches and discussions in a 
forum where they were totally inappropriate. 
21. The PRESIDEFT thought he would be correctly interpreting'the general 
feeling if, in the light of the statements just made, he suggested that the 
Conference now pass to the remaining item of business. 

GC(IX)/OR.l'00 
page 7 


CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE NINTH REGULAR SESSION 


(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE (GC(IX)/325) 
22. The PRESIDENT said that the Credentials Committee had met the previous 
afternoon and examined the credentials of delegates in accordance with Rule 28 
of the Rules of Procedure, Its repor t (GC(IX)/325) was, he understood, selfexplanatory 
and therefore required no introduction. 
23. Mr. SMELYANOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said his delegation 
felt hound to point out that the Soviet Union,, like the other socialist countries,' 
had not recognized and did not recognize the validity of the Chiang Kai-shek 
group's signature to the Agency's Statute, .and consequently could not concede 
that group's right to .represent China at the General Conference. His delegation 
therefore objected to draft resolution I submitted by the Credentials Committee 
recognizing the validity of the Chiang Kai-shek group's credentials and vrou^d ask 
for a roll-call vote on it. • 
24. Mr. NUGROHO (Indonesia) said his delegation wished to associate itself 
with the statement made by the Soviet delegate and to support his request for a 
roll-call vote. 
25. Mr. TIBULSAC (Romania) said his delegation endorsed the Credentials 
Committee's report, except in so far as validation of the credentials of the 
so-called delegation of China was concerned. The Government of the People's 
Republic of China was the only legal representative of the Chinese people and 
it was essential in the interest of the Agency that its legitimate rights be 
restored. 
26. It was becoming more and more evident that no important problem of the world 
to-day could be settled without the participation of the People's Republic of 
China, a country containing almost one quarter of the world's population. The 
Agency, being concerned with a most important scientific field, could not ignore 
that reality. 
27. His delegation was opposed to validation of the credentials of the Chiang 
ICai-shek representatives. 
28. Mr. LESZCZYNSKI (Poland) said that Poland.had consistently maintained 
that it was not only illegal but unwise to ostracize and preclude the People's 
Republic of China from participation in the Agency. The current international 

GC(IX)/OR.100 
page 8 


situation, particularly in Asia, proved the Tightness of that attitude. To keep 
up the pretence that Taiwan represented China was fraught with increasing danger 
for the international community. The Polish stand in rejecting persons from 
Taiwan as representative of the Chinese people was, he was sure, in accordance 
with international law. 


29. Mr. LEWIS (United States of America) said his delegation endorsed the 
report of the Credentials Committee and would vote in favour of the two draft 
resolutions recommended therein for adoption by the Conference. 
30. Earlier speakers had expressed opposition to the action of the Credentials 
Committee in regard to the question of the representation of China. His delegation 
would not reply to the statements made nor would it engage in discussion on 
the substance of the controversial political issue involved. His Government's 
views on that issue had been made clear many times in the political organs of 
the United Nations and in other appropriate forums,, and were known to the 
Conference1 it would have a further opportunity at the current session of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations to re~state its policy on the matter, 
31. In draft resolution I, the Credentials Committee was recommending that the 
General Conference should decide to take no action on any proposal designed to 
change the representation of China, The draft resolution conformed with the 
attitude adopted by the Conference at previous sessions,, as well as with the 
decisions consistently taken on the same matter by the other organizations 
within the United Nations system. 
32. As the Conference was aware, the issue of the representation of China had 
been debated extensively at the 1961, 196?. and 1963 sessions of the General 
Assembly, at the conclusion of which debates the Assembly had rejected the 
proposals calling for a change in the representation of China, In addition, the 
Assembly had approved the credentials of the representatives of the Government 
of the Republic of China as being in conformity with the technical requirements 
of its rules of procedure. In his Government's view? subordinate organizations 
within the United Nations system should, as in the past, act in harmony with the 
General Assembly's decisions on the matter. 
33. The Agency and the specialized agencies had consistently recognized that 
political issues, including those involving the representation of Member States 
within the United Nations system, were the primary concern of the United Nations, 

GC(IX)/OR.lOO 
page 9 


and had repeatedly followed the policy adopted by the General Assembly in such 


matters., as recommended by the General Assembly resolution referred to in the 
3/ 


preamble to the draft resolution under consideration.—' Indeed, chaos would 


result if each and every organization took separate and conflicting decisions 


on the same question, 


34. . Mr. BENCEBIKH (Algeria) said that,-in line with its stand in the 
general debate in plenary that certain African countries still languishing under 
the colonial yoke were regrettably not yet represented in the Agency and that 
the People's Republic of China was being excluded for ideological reasons, his 
delegation also had reservations on the draft resolution, 
35. Mr. LBE ( China) thought it regrettable that the question of the 
representation of China had been brought up once again. The. Republic of China 
was one of the founding Members of the Agency, had supported its activities 
consistently and had served on the Board of Governors. Unquestionably;, it had 
the right to be represented at the Conference, 
36. Reference had been made to the seven hundred million of his countrymen on 
the mainland of China. It should not be forgotten that as a whole the people 
there were in sympathy with his Government. His Government had learnt the 
lesson of appeasement and those now tending to appease the Mao Tse-tung regime 
were indulging in a pipe-dream in imagining that one day the mainland Communists 
would be their friends5 sooner or later the countries concerned would be their 
victims. 
37- Mr. GOLJSCHMIPT (France) said the French delegation believed that the 
Government of the People's Republic of China was alone qualified to represent 
China. 


38. Mr. PBTRZ5LKA (Czechoslovakia) said that the General Conference was 
obliged to discuss each year a question which In reality was perfectly clear. 
That the People's Republic of China should so long have been denied its rights 
was one of the greatest absurdities in the history of the Agency^ it was a state 
of affairs which was bound to work to the detriment of the Agency and which could 
only have an adverse effect on international co-operation in .the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. The usurpers ensconced in Taiwan had no title to represent China;; 
_3_/ General Assembly Resolution 396(v). 



GC(IX)/OR.100 
page 10 


the fact that they were able to continue the pretence of doing so was merely a 
consequence of the short-sighted power politics practised by some States. It 
was high time those States faced the facts and. stopped putting obstacles in the 
way of co-operation with 'the People's Republic of China, 


59* The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic could not accept the existing situation% 
so far as China was concerned it would recognise no signature on the Statute 
except that of the People's Republic of China? and no credentials to the General 
Conference not issued by the People's Republic of China. It was also regrettable 
that a number of other States were being kept out of the Agency for similar 
reasons. The German Democratic Republic was a notable example of a country 
making good progress'in atomic enexgy work which was nevertheless denied its 
rightful place in the Agency, 

40. The PRESIDENT said that, in accordance with the request of the 
delegate of the Soviet Union, the vote on draft resolution I in document 
GC(IX)/J25 would be taken by roll-call. 
41. Viet-JTam, having been drawn by lot ~by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
42. The result of the vote was as followss 
In favour s Viet-itfam, Argentina? Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, 
Chile, China, Colombia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Federal .Republic of 
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Holy See, Iran, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Korea, Lebanon, Mexico, Netherlands, Hew Zealand, 
Peru, Philippines, South Africa, Spain, Thailand, Turkey,-
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela 


Against % Yugoslavia, Algeria, Bulgaria, Buiwa, Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, 
Finland, France, Ghana, Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq_, Morocco, 
Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United 
Arab Republic 


GC(IX)/OR.100 
page 11' 


Abstaining§ Afghanistan, Austria, Ceylon, Denmark, India, Kuwait, 
Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Sweden,. 
Switzerland^ Tunisia 


43. There we^e 56 votes in favour and 19 against, with 15 abstentions. 
Draft resolution I was adopted. 
44. The PRESIDENT assumed that the Conference also wished to adopt draft 
resolution II in document GC(IX)/325. 
45• It was so agreed. 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


46. Mr. HIRSCH (Prance) wished to say, on behalf of the countries of 
Y/estern Europe, a few words of gratitude for .the splendid manner in which the 
President had conducted the business of the Conference, The courteous 
authority with which he had guided its debates had been a guarantee of 
efficiency while at the same time making the work of the delegates easy and 
pleasant. His expeditious handling of the Conference's affairs was all the 
more appreciated because it had given delegates an opportunity to become 
acquainted with Japan and its splendid capital, and even to try, tentatively 
to be sure, a few words of Japanese. It had been an unforgettable experience, 
and one which prompted him to say "Nihon wa subarashii desu"p and to the 
Japanese Government, "Domo arigato gozaimashita". 
47. Mr. BAFFQUR (Ghana), speaking on behalf of the States of Africa, 
expressed the keenest appreciation at the manner in which the President had 
conducted the affairs of the Conference. The ninth session, the first held 
outside Vienna, had been for many delegates the first opportunity to visit the 
splendid city of Tokyo, and their experience had been heart-warming in the 
extreme. He hoped that J'lr. Asakai would convey to the Japanese Government the 
gratitude of the African countries for the invitation and for the excellent 
arrangements that had been made. 
48. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said that he took great pleasure in 
speaking on behalf of the States of North and South America. Before coming to 
Tokyo many delegations had had some knowledge of Mr. Asakai's distinguished 
career, but they now had to concede that in reality his qualities far surpassed 
his reputation. His diplomatic tact and his unremitting vigour had smoothed 

GC(IX)/OR.100'' 
page 12 


the way through all stages of the session, and for that the delegations of the 
American nations offered him their profoundest thanks. 


49. Warm thanks were also due to the Japanese Government, and in particular to 
the Japanese Atomic Energy Commission., for their kind invitation to the 
Conference to meet in Tokyo and for the care they had taken to ensure its 
success. He was confident that all delegations were deeply impressed and would 
leave Tokyo with feelings of profound friendship for the Japanese nation. 
50. Finally, thanks were due to the Director General and to all the staff whoso 
guiet work, in the background of the debates, had brought the session to a 
successful issue, 
51. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) said that he took particular pleasure 
in speaking for what were generally known as the countries "down under", and in 
particular for Australia and How Zealand. Their delegations wished to thank the 
President for his excellent handling of the Conference's debates, and the 
Japanese Government for the many comforts and courtesies it had offered. The 
fact that it was the typhoon season in Japan suggested an apt metaphors it 
could well be said that the typhoons which had threatened the Conference had 
been most skilfully circumvented, and that the experiment of holding the General 
Conference away from Vienna had been a great success, 
52. Mr. TYABJI (India) said that he was pleased to express the gratitude 
of the countries of Asia to the Japanese Government and to Mr. Asakai in person. 
It was especially gratifying that an Asian country had succeeded so well in so 
unusual a task. 
53. He felt a particular bond of friendship with Mr. Asakai because they had 
both served as delegates to the first Bandung Conference. After having spent 
six months as Ambassador of India to Japan, he-could experience no surprise at 
the fact that the organization of the Conference had ^00^. so perfect. Profound 
thanks wore due to the Japanese Government for its excellent arrangements and 
for the courtesy it had shown, and to Mr. Asakai personally for his skilful 
handling of the Conference's businass. 
54. Mr. PETROSYAIWS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) thanked 
Mr., Asakai, on behalf of the socialist countries, for the brilliant manner in 
which he had conducted the Conference's debates. The ability and tact he had 

GC(IX)/OR.100 
page 13 


demonstrated testified to his vast experience in international affairs5 the 
many problems of the General Conference had never been handled more 
expeditiously or in a more pleasant atmosphere. In a light-hearted vein, one 
could almost regret that the Conference had marched so efficiently to its close, 
for had it not done so the delegates might have had a few more days to savour 
the delights of Japanese hospitality. The Conference could truly be pleased 
with the warm welcome it had received, 


55- The PRESIDENT said that he was extremely grateful for the many kind 
things that had been said about his work as President of the Conference, It 
was the first occasion on which he had been called upon to preside over the 
deliberations of an international scientific organization, and it was an experience 
he would always remember. Not being a scientist he had been enormously 
impressed, even if at times a little mystified, by the great range of scientific 
and technical subjects that had come up for. discussion, 

56. Delegates must have observed how eager Japan was to make rapid progress in 
all the scientific and technical disciplines associated with the development of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. And with that in mind they would readily 
understand how pleased the Japanese Government had been to act as host to the 
Agency's General Conference. 
57. I"fc was gratifying that the session had been brought to a successful 
conclusion on the appointed day. He wished to emphasize, however, that that 
would not have been possible without the unfailing co-operation of all who had 
taken part, as delegates of their respective Governments and as colleagues 
working towards a common goal. Lastly, he felt sure that everyone would wish 
to join in thanking the Director General, since the timely and successful 
conclusion of the Conference's work had been duo in very large measure to the 
unremitting efforts of him and his staff. 
58. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


59. The PRESIDENT then declared the ninth regular session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The mooting rose at 12.50 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(IX)/OR.91 
8 December 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Tuesday, 21 September 1965, at 12 noon 
Temporary Presidents Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) 
President: Mr. ASAKAI (japan) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisionalagenda* 
Paragraphs 
1 Opening of the session 1 - 18 
2 Election of the President 19 - 29 

* GC(IX)/295. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/Rev.2. 


65-7309 



GC(IX)/ORo91 
page 2 


OPENING CF THE SESSION 


1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared open the ninth regular session 
of the General Conference., 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited 
the Conference to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute, 


J. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT wished first to express to the Japanese 
Government the Conference's appreciation of the offer which had made it 
possible for the ninth regular session to be held in Tokyo, The excellent 
arrangements made for the opening meeting were a happy augury for a smooth 
and successful session, 
4. It was a great privilege for him to welcome, in the name of the 
Conference, Mr. Eisaku Sato, Prime Minister of Japan, and Mr. Shokichi Uehara, 
Minister of State and Chairman of the Japan Atomic Energy Commission, as well 
as the many other distinguished Japanese officials who were present. He . 
would warmly thank them all, together with other Government officials concerned, 
for the steps taken to facilitate the work of the Conference. 
5. He recalled that the previous day had been the ninth anniversary of the 
opening of the Conference on the Statute of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, the largest international conference that up to that time had ever 
met. The year before that the first United Nations International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of .itomic Energy had shown the vrorld how great were 
the opportunities and benefits that the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
could bestow. The Statute Conference had offered me^ns of bringing those 
benefits within the reach of nearly all countries. 
6. In the intervening decade, the useful as well as the destructive 
potential of applied nuclear science had vastly increased. Nuclear power 
had emerged from a long period of trial and experiment and was competing 
vigorously in the world energy market. The Agency too had overcome its 
initial difficulties, and. its responsibilities were broadening. Its-first 
task had been to adapt its role to political and technical realities that 
had not been foreseen when the Statute was drafted - for instance, the 
unexpectedly high cost of the first nuclear power plants, the consequent 

GG(IX)/OR.91 
page 3 


slowing dovm of nuclear energy programmes and the wide spectrum of political 
opinion in the Board of Governors. Despite those handicaps the Agency 
had, in its early years.* laid solid foundations for much of its work. 
Apart from arranging a useful series of scientific meetings, it had devised 
a dynamic progr'amme to foster the use of radioisotopes and had pioneered 
a programme of international support for research, The classical methods 
of technical assistance of the United Nations family had been adapted to the 
needs of atomic energy and a unique project in the United Nations family had 
been completed when the Agency Laboratory came into operation in 19*50, 


7. Despite that useful work the Agency had, in its first years, still been 
a long way from fulfilling the hopes embodied in its Statute, Then,t around 
196I or 1962? the picture had begun to change. The vast investments that 
had been made to develop nuclear power had begun to bear fruit, A growing 
optimism had come fully to light at the third International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in 1964 when, moreover, prospects had 
emerged for using nuclear energy to produce fresh water from the sea, 
The technical progress achieved had been accompanied by, and perhaps linked 
to, an emerging consensus between the major Powers about the work the Agency 
-should do and the way it should do it„ 
That consensus was perhaps one of 
the most heartening recent events in international co-operation,, It was 
particularly apparent in the Board of Governors, which was gradually becoming 
an effective executive body, completing its business quickly and smoothly, 


8, It could not be repeated too often that given such broad agreement among 
its Members, the Agency became an exceedingly effective instrument of 
international co-operation. It could be hoped that the agency would be 
called upon increasingly to give technical support to programmes that were 


•agreed upon in other forums, and he believed the extent to which that would 
happen would largely depend on the degree to which it concerntrated on 
building up its own highly specialized and technical competence. All 
delegations were aware that the world lived in the shaddw of an overwhelming 
nuclear threat and that it was more than ever indispensable to help maintain 
the bridges of understanding between nations. It was not the least important 
aspect of atomic energy that it had provided a strong impetus to joint 
international action. Indeed the authors of the Statute had envisaged the 
Agency as a means of co-operation between nations in the very field that 
caused the most profound concern - atomic energy. The Agency's history 

GC(IX)/OR. 91 
page 4 


showed that such co-operation was best achieved when it went quietly about 
its proper technical tasks. It was in that way that it could best help 
to meet the hopes expressed by the United Nations in designating 196"5 as 
International Co-operation Year. 


9. The fact that 19^5 was also already halfway through the United Nations 
Development Decade lent added urgency to the increasingly important role 
which the Agency was clearly destined to play in the industrial advance of 
Asia and other developing regions as a result of the imminent spread of 
nuclear power to developing countries and the related prospect of nuclear 
desalting. 
10. It was 'in the nature of progress that each step forward opened fresh 
opportunities and presented new problems. The need to increase the Agency's 
help to developing countries made it even more important to obtain adequate 
financial resources for the Agency's various assistance programmes. The 
advance of nuclear technology posed the vast international problem of 
how to speed up the exchange and handling of scientific information. 
And the spread of nuclear power and radioisotope techniques would involve 
the need for more trained technologists and would raise grave problems of 
waste management and health and safety control. Apart from its important 
work in developing a widely accepted system of safeguards to ensure that 
its assistance was used only for peaceful purposes., the Agency had already 
done creditable, if not spectacular, preparatory work in all those areas 
and he was confident that the present session, held at a time when the 
opportunities before the Agency were widening and in a country which had 
made spectacular progress resulting in a high degree of industrial and 
scientific development, would make the Agency an even more effective 
instrument for promoting the contribution of atomic energy tc peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world. 
11. He then called upon the Prime Minister of Japan who had graciously 
consented to address the Conference. 
12. Mr•> SATO (Prime Minister of Japan) said that it was a great honour to 
say a few words of greeting at the opening meeting of the ninth regular 
session of the General Conference. On behalf of the Government and the 
people of Japan, he wished to extend a warm and hearty welcome to the 
delegates of all Member States, and to representatives of the United Nations 
and other international organizations. 

GC(IX)/OR.91 
page 5 


15o Two years previously he had had occasion to attend the seventh session 
of the General Conference in Vienna and had been deeply impressed by the 
dedicated efforts of delegates and of the Agency's Secretariat, all clearly 
motivated by the common ideal of promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 


energy. 


14. The Prime Minister, the Government and the people of Japan had, 
accordingly, been extremely pleased when the General Conference unanimously 
accepted the Japanese Government's invitation to hold its ninth session in 
Tokyo. He wished to express his gratitude for the goodwill and the spirit 
of co-operation shown by Member States, as well as by the Director General 
and his staff, in making the Tokyo Conference a reality. 
15= That the Agency should have decided to hold its General Conference in 
an Asian country was ample proof of the fact that the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy were no longer the exclusive preserve of certain advanced 
countries, hut had become a matter of common interest to the world at large. 
In recent years, .the world had witnessed a remarkable spate of progress in 
science and technology in general, but research and development had been 
particularly rapid in atomic energy. The uses of atomic energy, for power 
generation and desalting of sea water, in isotope applications, and so on, 
v/ere becoming ever more numerous in areas as widely varied as industry, 
agriculture and medical science. The Agency's determination to use the 
tremendous potentialities of atomic energy for peaceful purposes only, as 
a contribution to welfare and prosperity throughout the world rather than 
for the destuction of mankind, was a source of great hope. 


16. In that connection he thought it fitting to pay tribute to the wisdom 
and foresight of Dwight Eisenhower, former President of the United States, 
who as long ago as 1955 had made the famous "atoms for peace" proposal out 
of which the Agency had evolved, 
17. Ever since 1957 Japan had been unstinting in its efforts to help the 
Agency perform its proper functions of promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy and of preventing the diversion of nuclear materials for military 
purposes. He now took'the"opportunity to reassure the Conference of the 
Japanese Government's firm intention to do its best, in co-operation with 
the Agency,- to contribute to research and development work on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in the developing States of the world, particularly 
those of Asia. 

GC(IX)/OR.91 
page 6 


18. In closing he expressed the hope that the Conference would have 
useful discussions on the topics before it and that its meetings would he 
brought to a successful conclusion- At the same time ho hoped that 
participants from abroad would be able to see for themselves what Japan 
was accomplishing in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and that they 
would take home with them a host of pleasant memories of their stay in 
Japano 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 


19. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President* 
20. Mr. VEJYANT-RANGSRISHT (Thailand) said he had great pleasure in 
proposing Mr. Asakai (japan), whose long and distinguished career as a 
diplomat made him especially fitted to direct and guide the work of the 
session* 
21. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) seconded, and Mr. BILLIG (Poland) 
supported, the nomination. 
22. Mr. Asakai (japan) was elected President of the General Conference for 
its ninth regular session by acclamation. 
Mr. Asakai (japan) took the Chair. 


23. The PRESIDENT thanked the Conference for the great honour it 
had paid to the Government and people of Japan in electing him President 
for the Mnth session. 
24. He had been given a great responsibility to discharge and wished to assure 
delegates that he would do everything in his power to merit their confidence 
and trust. It would not be an easy task to preside over the deliberations of 
a Conference responsible for promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
particularly since the discipline was still so young and growing so fast. 
25. He had for many years taken a keen interest in the prospects which the 
advent of nuclear power had opened up to mankind. Many had feared earlier 
that the world would run short of conventional sources of energy. Those 
fears had now been left behind and there was no reason why the problem of 
adequate power supplies should be a cause for concern in the future. 

GC(IX)/OR.91 
page 7 


26o The delegate from the Netherlands had referred to that development 


earlier in the meeting and had given a very useful account of the genesis 


of the Agency and the stead.y growth of its activities during the preceding 


eight year's. He personally wished to say how grateful he was for that 


account and, at the same time., to express to the Netherlands delegate 


the gratitude of the whole Conference for his able conduct of the opening 


proceedings, 


27= In a perfect world, nuclear power and the enormous -Advantages resultin 
frora man's discovery of how to utilize the energy at the heart of matter 
ought to represent only a positive contribution to man's age-old struggle 
for a better life, Unfortunately, as the people of Japan knew only too 
well, mankind's use of nuclear power could he a scourge as well as a 
blessings 


28* No one would deny that it was the duty of men of good will everywhere 


to do all they could to prevent atomic energy from being used for 


destructive purposes ever again. Although that was the clear duty of 


delegates to the Conference as individuals, he wished to suggest that it 
was hardly the task of the present Conference0 The aim in the days 


immediately ahead should be to take decisions that would enable the Agency 


to pursue its statutory task of contributing to the increased use of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes - steadily and with growing intensity, 
but within the means that were at present available for the purpose„ In 


so doing it might also be able to take some stepo to prepare for the day, 
which would surely come, when greatly increased means would be available 
for the work the Agency had been sot up to perform. 


29o The fact that the present session of the General Conference was being 
held in an Asian country, where the entire people and Government were unite 
in the belief that atomic energy should be used only for peaceful purposes, 
might well be a good omen for its success as a further milestone in' the 
Agency's endeavour "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". He was sure 
that he could count on the full co-operation of all delegates in making the 
session a success. 


The meeting rose at 12.3C p<.m„ 



International Atomic Energy Agency GC(IX)/OR,92 

17 December 1965 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo., 
on Tuesday, 21 September 1965, at 3.30 p.m. 


Presidents Mr. ASAKAI (japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional 


Paragraphs 

agenda* 


3(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 1 -2 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 

3 -7 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 8 - 11 
6 Applications for membership of the Agency 12 - 16 
7 Statement by the Director General 17 - 48 
Statement by the Representative of the 49 

- 59 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 


* GC(IX)/295. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/Rev.20. 


6.5-7313 



GC(IX)/OR„92 
page 2 


APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 


1. The PRESIDENT proposed that, in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules 
of Procedure, a Credentials Committee should he appointed consisting of the 
following nine Memberss Australia, Colombia, Iraq, Italy, Poland, Thailand, 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of America and Uruguay, 
2. The proposal was adopted unanimously. 
ELECTION OF VICE-PRESIDENTS 


3. The PRESIDENT pointed out that under Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure 
the Conference was required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the election of 
the Chairmen of the two Main Committees. He therefore intended to suspend the 
plenary meeting for a short time to enable the two committees to elect their 
chairmen. 
• The meeting was suspended at 3.35 p.m. and resumed at 3.45 p.m. 
4. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the eight posts of Vice-President 
of the Conference. 
5. Mro QUIHILLALT (Argentina) proposed the delegates of the following 
Statess Brazil, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Prance, India, Iran, 
Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and United States of America, 
6. Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) seconded the nominations. 
7. The delegates nominated were declared elected to the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


8. The PRESIDENT observed that under Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure 
the General Conference was required to elect four additional members to the 
General Committee, He invited nominations. 
9. Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana) nominated the delegates of the following Statess 
Canada, United Arab Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland and Yugoslavia. 
10. Mr. MARTINO (Italy) seconded the nominations. 

GC(IX)/GR„92 
page 3 


11• The delegates of the States nominated were declared elected to the General 
Committee; which was thus duly appointed in compliance with the provisions of 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, 


APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(IX)/308) 


12, The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to consider the 
recommendations of the Board of Governors concerning the applications for 
membership of the Agency made by Jamaica and Jordan, The Board had submitted 
a draft resolution in re&peoi of each of those applications, bi'.t he thought the 
Conference might take the two draft resolutions together.. 


13, Sir William PENNEY (United Kingdom) supported the two applications 
for membershipo 


14. Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) welcomed the applications for 
membership made by Jamaica and Jordan, The confidence of the developing 
countries in the Agency was reflected by the increasing number of such countries 
applying for membership. He welcomed in particular the application by Jordan, 
whose admission to the Agency would bring up the number of Arab countries 
within the area of Africa and the Middle East which were Member States to a 
total of 12, 
15. The two draft resolutions were adopted unp '.imously. 
16c The PRESIDENT stated that, in accordance with Article XXI.C of the 
Statute, Jamaica and Jordan would become Members of the Agency as soon as their 
respective instruments of acceptance of the Statute had been deposited with the 
United States Government, 


STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


17„ The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that he would like, as in former years, to 
welcome those States which had joined the Agency since the preceding session of 
the Conference. The new Members were Costa Rica, Cyprus, Kenya, Kuwait and 
Madagascar, and the membership of the Agency now stood at 93• 


18. Recalling that the Agency was approaching the second year of its long-term 
programme-^, he said he was pleased to report that implementation of that .programme 
was proceeding satisfactorily. 
1/ INFCIRC/500', 



GC(IX)/ORo92 
page 4 


19^ - One of. -the..proposals included in it had been the .reorganization of. the 
Agency's technical assistance .activities by concentrating them in.one department. 
That department? which had come into full operation at the beginning of 
1965? contained two divisions concerned with programming and with implementation, 
while overall planning? financing and statistical reporting were concentrated 
in the office of the Deputy Director General for Technical Assistance. 
Economies in staff and a consequent increase in operational efficiency had thus 
been achieved, A further improvement had been secured through another feature 
of the long-term programme, namely, unified programmes of assistance for Member 
States in which the provision of experts and equipment was fully integrated 
with the basic training of personnel who would work with the experts and 
continue the work after their departure. The 1966 programme of technical 
assistance would reflect that arrangement. 


20. He had also tried to initiate a new form of assistance whereby research 
institutions in developing countries entered into reciprocal arrangements with 
similar institutions in the more advanced countries. Such arrangements, he 
felt, should be developed to an increasing extent, since they offered prospects 
of important lasting benefits and would probably permit more efficient use of 
the limited funds available for technical assistance. He hoped that Member 
States would find it possible to support the scheme by providing the necessary 
fellowships and equipment,, 
21. The Agency was playing an increasingly active part in United Nations 
Special Fund projects. Delegates would be aware of the projects which had 
already been in operation the previous year in Yugoslavia and the Philippines. 
The Yugoslav project, relating to research and training in the applications of 
atomic energy to agriculture, would be completed in 1966. As for the 
Philippines project, which was concerned with pre-investment studies on power, 
including nuclear power, the first phase had been concluded and the Agency had 
been authorised to proceed with studies envisaging the use of nuclear power 
plants in the context of planning an optimum expansion of power capacity. A 
detailed cost analysis was now being made of alternative methods of expansion 
based on conventional and nuclear plantsp the results of that analysis, and 
the methods of analysis employed, should be of interest to other countries 
finding themselves in a similar situation. 

GC(IX)/0E.92 
page 5 


22, The implementation of the Special Fund project.for eradication of the 
Mediterranean fruit fly in Central America by employing the sterile male 


technique had begun under the technical direction of the Joint FAO/lAEA 
Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture. The Joint Division would also 


implement the latest Special Fund project to be entrusted to the Agency, which 


concerned the establishment in Turkey of a pilot plant for grain disinfestation 
by irradiation. It was expected that the pilot plant would successfully 
demonstrate the feasibility and economic practicability of using radiation on 
a commercial scale to prevent considerable losses of stored grain resulting 
from the action of insect pests. 


2Jo The value of the Special Fund projects for which the AgenGy was the executing 
agency now exceeded $6 million. Another project involving the use of 
similar techniques in which the Agency was participating was the 
Austrian/ENEA/lAEA international programme of irradiation of fruit and fruit 


2/ 


juices in progress at the Seibersdorf laboratories near Vienna.—' 


24. He now wished to refer again to the Joint FAO/lAEA Division, which had 
come into being on 1 October 1964. After some very minor initial difficulties 
the Division was now operating harmoniously and effectively and was demonstrating 
the advantages of that particular form of close co-operation between two 
organizations in the United Nations family on subjects of mutual interest. 
Such co-operation represented the best way of avoiding duplication of effort 
and eliminating inter-organizational rivalries. 
250 The Agency's technical operations had continued and greater efficiency had 
been achieved by organizing the divisions concerned into sections. For 
example, the Division of Huclear Power and Reactors was sub-divided into units 
dealing with nuclear power and desalting, economics, and reactor physics and 
research reactor utilization. 


26. During the past year several important new nuclear power projects had been 
initiated, and the competitive position of nuclear power had improved significantly. 
In the United Kingdom it was estimated that an AGE (Advanced Gascooled 
Reactor) station would generate electricity at a lower cost than in the 
2/ See document INFCIRC/64O. 


GC(IX)/OR„92 


page 6 


case of a coal-fired station? while in the United States of America various 
public utility undertakings had ordered light-water nuclear power plants in 
preference to conventional equipment. Developments in several other countries 
had shown a similar encouraging trend in favour of nuclear power. 


27o More and more countries were giving serious consideration to the possibility 
of using nuclear plants to supplement their available energy resources, and that 
had led to increasing calls on the Agency's services for analysing nuclear 
power prospects in particular areas and for undertaking power reactor feasibility 
studies, site evaluation and assessment of tenders. During 1965 the Agency had 
dispatched nuclear power missions to Argentina and Turkey, and another was 


•expected to visit Brazil, Chile and Peru. 
28c The rapid development of nuclear power would be accompanied by an increasing 
production of plutonium by power reactors. The Secretariat had organized 
a panel to discuss the utilization of plutonium in power reactors. The 
conclusion reached by the panel had been that the technical basis for using 
plutonium in thermal reactors had already been established and would be 
strengthened in coming years. In view of the large thorium reserves available 
in several developing countries, the Agency was also interested in the utiliza


tion of thorium in converter and breeder reactors. 


29" The Agency's experience in connection with international co-operative 
projects of training and research had been very encouraging^ in particular, 

the projects relating to basic reactor physics and neutron diffraction had 
progressed satisfactorily. The former - the STPT (Borway/Poland/Yugoslavia) 
Project-^ - was receiving enthusiastic reports from the scientists concerned in 


the three countries. The latter - IPA (India/Phil ippines/Agency) Project 
involving the use of a neutron crystal spectrometer at the atomic research 
centre at Manila^/ - had made a premising start. The results already achieved 
would be published and a second spectrometer was now under construction. The 
success of those two projects confirmed his belief in the importance of regional 
undertakings of that nature. 


5/ See document lNFCIRC/550< 
4/ See document INFCIRC/56O, 



GC(IX)/OR„92 
page 7 


30, With regard to health and safety, much had been done to establish inter


national services and improve co-operation. The Agency's revised Basic Safety 


Standards? revised transport regulations-^ and codes of uractice on personnel 


6/ 7/ 
monitoring-^, waste management—' and radiological safety in mining and milling 
had been approved by the Board$ the transport regulations had already been 
adopted extensively by Member States and transport organizations. A number of 
codes on other subjects were also being published. That type of publication 
continued to be well received by Member States. 


31= A regional study group on health physics was to meet in November 19&5 in 
# 
Bangkok, The establishment of an advisory service at Agency Headquarters 
jointly with FAO and ILO would mean that information and advice on radiation 
protection and the management of radioactive wastes would be available to 
Member States. Several Member States had furnished the Agency with reports on 
the research into radioactive waste management which they were conducting^ the 
publication of summaries of those reports would permit the benefits of the 
research to be more widely shared by the Members of the Agency, A similar 
scheme dealing with selected topics in health and safety was to be instituted 
in 1966. A regional advanced training seminar on radioactive waste management 
was scheduled for October 1965 at the Tokai-mura establishment in Japan, 


32, As far as health and safety in general were concerned, he could not too 
strongly urge the need fcr early agreement on a scheme to provide for emergency 
assistance in the event of radiation accidents, Emergencies had to be dealt 
with immediately, and one should not be lulled into a feeling of false security 
by the excellent safety record which the nuclear industry had hitherto enjoyed. 
One should rather express one's gratitude for that state of affairs by ensuring 
that if an emergency situation ever did arise, one would be ready to meet it, 
bearing in mind that the public confidence so carefully built up over the years 
could be destroyed overnight by a single emergency, to meet which the proper 
measures were not taken. For that reason it was his fervent hope that the 
discussions of the subject in the Board of Governors during recent years would 
soon result in some acceptable universal or regional arrangement, 


2/ STI/PUB/97. 
6/ STI/PUB/95. 

ll STI/PUB/87 . 


GC(IX)/OR,92 


page 8 


33• While on the subject of technical operations; he wished to mention the 
important role being played by the Division of Scientific and Technical 
Information in the organization of scientific meetings and the production of 
scientific publications, -which was likely to reach a record level in 1965., 
In that connection he would mention that the United Nations was publishing the 
proceedings of the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy and it was expected that all 16 volumes would have appeared by October of 
the current year. 


34. Throughout the period covered by his statement preparations had been under 
way for using a computer in connection with many of the Agency's operations. 
In-service training of staff and the programming of work had ensured that the 
computer, an IBM I4OI5 would be effectively used when it was installed in 
October 1965- It might be possible later to provide some computer services 
for Member States. 
35• As regards the work of the Department of Research and Isotopes, he wished 


to supplement what he had already said about agriculture by reporting continued 
progress in co-ordinated programmes relating to rice and maize cultivation and 
studies of soil moisture and efficient use of water. In medicine? progress 
was also being made in co-ordinated programmes relating to protein deficiency, 


endemic diseases and other subjects,, The Agency also hoped to introduce 
co-ordinated programmes involving the application of radioisotope's in industry. 


36. He had been greatly encouraged during the past year by the readiness of 
certain Member States to execute programmes of research of interest to the 
Agency at no cost to the latter. Members which had lent assistance in that way 
Included Australia, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Sweden, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, the United States of America and Yugoslavia. It was 
particularly gratifying to observe that developing countries receiving assistance 
were so ready to provide something in return. He also wished at that 
point to acknowledge the value of research reports made available by Hungary, 
Poland and the Soviet Union* 

GC(IX)/OR.92 
page 9 


37- The time at his disposal would permit only a passing reference to the work 
of the Agency's Laboratory, whose activities in the preparation of standards had 
been so well received. The distribution from Seibersdorf of standardized 
radioisotope sources had continued fD expand, and in 19^4 some 2600 sources and 
samples had been sent to 11A institutes in 43 countries. The Laboratory had 
also provided assistance in the implementation of the ag3ricultural programme, 
which now covered 11 countries involved in the co-ordinated rice research programme, 
3 in the maiae ;vros/::^7.6 and 12 in the c.i rinf es'-ation programme using 
the sterile male technique„ 

38„ The Monaco Laboratory had continued useful work on the dispersal and 
biological uptake of radioactive waste released into the sea, 


39. The Agency had recently begun an international exchange of nuclear data, 
the technical area covered being that of generally measured quantities, such as 
the cross-sections of various reactor materials (including fuel isotopes) for 
reactions induced by neutrons of different energies„ Quantities such as the 
yield of neutrons in fission were also covered, but not the constants derived 
for any one reactor or type of reactor. The data were now available in such 
detail that they could best be handled oy computer techniques, and it was felt 
that exchanges of such data would be of assistance in the development of nuclear 
power0 
40, The International Centre for Theoretical Physics had commenced operations 
in October 1964? with the support of UNESCO, and in that connection he wished 
to quote Professor Weisskcpf, who in a letter to Professor Slater had said that 
"the most decisive achievements of theoretical physics during 1964/65 took 
place at Trieste", In its short life the Centre had already held two important 
seminars, one on plasma physics and the other on high-energy and elementary 
particles, which had been attended by no less than 125 scientists from about 
30 countries, with lecturers of 14 different nationalities. The Centre had 
already issued more than 70 scientific publications and a major contribution to 
that work had been made by scientists from the developing countries. 



GC(IX)/OR.92 
page 10 


41o The financial problems of the'Centre were a source of some concern, and 
he had sought many ways and means of overcoming them. In 1966 the Board and 


the General Conference might he asked to give serious consideration to the 
future of that excellent institution; when its formative years could be 
regarded as completed,, 


42, One of the most significant achievements of the past year had been the 
unanimous acceptance by the "Board of the revised safeguards system, a document 
which the Conference would be asked to consider at its present session. The 
Agency's revised system marked an important step towards ensuring that the atom 
would be used only for peaceful purposes5 moreover, under it the first international 
inspection programme in the nuclear energy field would be put into 


effect with the support of both East and West, As Dr. Seaborg, Chairman of 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission, had once said, "Except for the 
limited Test Ban Treaty, there are few more important steps than this beingtaken 
to preserve international peace and security11 . 


43• The Agency's executive responsibility for the application of safeguards 
had developed remarkably in the past year,. Only two years had gone by since 
he had informed the Conference of the first transfer to the Agency of responsibility 
for applying safeguards in relation to a bilateral arrangement.—' 
In the meantime 21 Member States had submitted identifiable parts of their 
atomic energy programmes to Agency safeguards, either because they desired 
assistance under an Agency project, or were requesting the Agency to apply safeguards 
in relation to a bilateral arrangement, or wished to submit facilities 
unilaterally to Agency safeguards. The total power represented by the 
facilities thus subject to Agency safeguards exceeded 1400 MV/(th) out of some 


25 000 Ml"/(th) at present generated by power reactors, 


44" The Board had approved the request of Denmark and the United Kingdom to 


transfer to the Agency the administration of the safeguards required by their 
bilateral arrangement. At the Board's meetings in June, the Governor from the 
United Kingdom had announced the decision of his Government unilaterally to 
place the Bradwell Power Station, with a capacity of over 1000 IvIW(th), under 


8/ GC(VII)/OR.73> Para. 57* 



GC(IX)/OR.92 
page 11 


Agency safeguards. More recently, Sweden had requested negotiations with a 
view to placing its bilateral arrangements with both the United States and the 
United Kingdom under Agency safeguards. At the Board's meeting a few days 
earlier approval had been given for the application of Agency safeguards in 
relation to the bilateral arrangement between Canada and Japan - a transfer of 
particular interest? since it was fully reciprocal and provided for each 
country to act as a supplier to the other. 


45• Finally? he wished to say a word about the desalting of sea water? a 
technical development in which the Agency was actively engaged and which might 
contribute to the solution of water shortage problems. The Agency had continued 
to organize panel meetings on the use of" nuclear power for desalting? the most 
recent of which had reviewed its work to date and recommended a programme for 
the futureo The extent of international collaboration in which the Agency had 
been invited to participate was most encouraging. It included the joint 
Israeli/United States project and a project of considerable importance to Mexico 
and the'United States in the Gulf of California. It was expected that the 
latter project would be the subject of a study carried out jointly by the two 
Governments and the Agency? the Agency to provide the•chairman and secretary of 
the study group. Tunisia was also being given Agency assistance in its work 
on desalting? and the Agency was receiving an increasing number of requests for 
surveys to determine the possibilities of nuclear desalting in regions of the 
world where water was scarce. 


46. 
The agreement for co-operation in desalting work concluded in November 1964 
' 9/ 
by the Soviet Urion and the United States^-7 was an event of great significance. 
In order that the Agency and its individual Member States might receive the full 
benefit from that co-operation, the two Governments had undertaken to provide 
the Agency with copies of their reports and to invite observers from the Agency 
to their scientific meetings on the subject. Assurances had also been 
received from the United Kingdom that the Agency would be able to share the 
benefits of its extensive desalting programme. 


9/ INFCIRC/60. 



GC(IX)/OR.92 
page 12 


47• The spirit of co-operation manifest in the agreements he had mentioned 
seemed to be a measure of the goodwill which existed between the Agency and its 
individual Members9 and between those Members themselves? it G J1COUXS- ged him to 
think that the Agency had before it many opportunities for constructive work. 


480 In conclusion? he expressed gratitude to the Government of Japan for its 
invitation to the Conference to meet in Tokyo, and for the excellent 
facilities placed at the Agency's disposal for that purpose., It was fitting 
that a country which had made such outstanding progress in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy should be host to the first session of the General Conference held 
away from Headquarters. Perhaps there was also significance in the fact that 
Japan was unique in having provided, by legislation? that atomic energy must 
be used only for peaceful purposes. 


STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF TEE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 


49. Mr. HOP (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations) 
conveyed to the Conference the best wishes of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, They reflected the interest with which the United Nations had 
followed the Agency's activities. He would comment on its work and on the 
relations between'the two organizations in the context'of the United Nations 
Development Decade. Although? as the Secretary-General had stated? the goals 
of the Development Decade had no\ yet been reached? the institutions and programmes 
of the United Nations had been greatly strengthened during the past few 
years. The establishment of the United Nations Trade and Development Board 
had added a- new dimension to its work and the proposed establishment of the 
United Nations Development Programme? by merging the Expanded Programme of 
Technical Assistance with the Special Fund? should strengthen technical 
co-operation. The creation of the United Nations Institute for Training and 
Research should assist in the execution of economic? social and political tasks. 
The reorientation and expansion of the United Nations International Children's 
Fund? the consolidation of the Centre for Industrial Development and the 
proposed expansion of the World Food Programme should all contribute towards 
an expansion of United Nations activities. 

GC(IX)/OR.92 
page 13 


50. The'papers submitted to the Conference indicated the development of the 
Agency's work, some aspects of which were of special importance for achieving 
the purposes of the Development Decade,, 
51. Inter-agency arrangements for co-operation had been reinforced, reflecting 
the general recognition of the inter-relationship between various forms of 
activity, 
52. The Conference on the Application of Science and Technology for the 
Benefit of the Less Developed Areas had stimulated effort in that domain, and 
the United Nations, its specialized agencies and the Agency were co-operating 
- through a new committee reporting to the Economic and Social Council of the 
United Nations (ECOSOC) - in studying the complex problems involved in applying 
science and technology, suitably adapted to local conditions, in developing 
countries. High-priority topics had been selected with a view to concerted 
action, ECOSOC, in its reso ration 1083(XXXIX), had invited the Committee to 
submit recommendations aimed at stimulating, co-ordinating or, if necessary reorientating 
the activities of the United Nations family in that field. 
53* Arrangements had been made to intensify co-operation between the United 
Nations and the Agency in regard to energy and power and the Third International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy was an example of such 
co-operation. Another example was the Special Fund project in the Philippines 
for a pre-investment study on power, 


54- The production of fresh water by desalination was of great interest to 
both organizations, and the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science 
and Technology to Development had recommended that high priority be given to 
the problem* As several international organizations were interested, 
co-ordination was of great importance. At its recent session, ECOSOC had 
asked the Secretary-General to intensify the role of the Secretariat as a 
clearing house for the exchange of information and to explore further possibilities, 
in consultation with the agencies concerned, for accelerating progress. 
To that end the United Nations was organizing an inter-regional seminar on the 
economic application of water desalination^ the seminar would be attended by 
about 40 participants from developing countries, and one of the subjects to be 
discussed would be the application of nuclear power to desalination. 



GC(IX)/OR,92 
page 14 


55. In its resolution 1089(XXXIX) relating to the Development Decade, adopted 
at its July 1965 session, ECOSOC had requested the Secretary-General and the 
executive heads of agencies !ltc review their work programmes and to explore 
the possibility of formulating future programmes of action and, if possible, 
to make projections over the next five years with a view to identifying areas 
in which their organizations can make their maximum contribution both individually 
and by concerted action''1. The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination 
had also recognized the need for synchronization and adjustment of programmes. 
56* While the links of the Agency with other United Nations organizations were 
developing, its role and prospects had also been clarified„ The concentration, 
in the economic field, on major projects such as nuclear power and water 
desalination was an obvious example, while in the technical field the Agency 
had in recent years increasingly contributed to the use of radioisotopes, 
especially in nuclear medicine, radiation biology and agriculture, and had 
established closer relationship with MO and FAO, Research was also firmly 
established, and important work was being carried out, at the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste and at the Seibersdorf Laboratory 
for example, and under research contracts awarded to outside organizations, 


57. The Agency played a vital part in setting standards in the increasingly 
important fields of health, safety and waste disposal, and had also achieved 
significant progress in the field of safeguards, which was of particular 
importance in view of the increasing use of nuclear power, 
58, Interest in the possible use of the Agency's facilities in the field of 
disarmament, and in particular to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
had increased in the past year. In the Disarmament Commission of the United 
Nations and in the Conference of the Sighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament 


in Geneva specific proposals were under consideration for extending Agency 
safeguards to all countries, while the Preparatory Commission for the 
Denuclearization of Latin America was considering a system of verification, 


inspection and control in which the Agency's safeguards system would be the 
basic element. 



GC(IX)/CHo92 
page 15 


59. If successfulj such efforts to use the Agency as a ready and effective 
means of ensuring compliance with disarmament measures could he of great value, 
both in strengthening the Agency and in furthering the primary objectives of 
the United Nations. 
The meeting rose at 4-45 p=m. 



International Atomic. Energy Agency 

GC(IX)/OR.95 


14 December 1965 


GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Wednesday, 22 September 1965, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Items of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


Adoption of the agenda and allocation of 1 -2


8 


items for initial discussion 


General debate and report of the Board of 3 - 106 


10 


Governors for 1964-65 


Statements by the delegates of: 


United States of America 5 -25 
France 26 -42 
Belgium 45 -54 
Ghana 55 -62 
Philippines 63 -72 
Israel 73 -91 
Uruguay 92 -101 
Finland 102 -106 

* GC(IX)/311. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)lNF/.2/Rev.2. 


65-7317 



GC(IX)/OR.93 


page 2 


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AlJD ALLOCATION 0? ITS?0; F <R INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(IX)/295'i31l) 


1. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference accent the recommendations 
made by the General Committee in regard to the agenda and the allocation of 


items for initial discussion (GC(JX)/311). 


2„ The recommendations of the General Committee were accepted, and the agenda 


was thereby approved. 


GENERAL DEBATE AID REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1964-65 (GC(IX)/299,307) 


3. Mr. SBABORG ("United States of America) congratulated the President 
on his election and thanked the Director General for his outstanding leadership 


of the Agency.. His delegation was extremely gratified that Dr. Eklund had 


agreed to serve a further term as Director General, 


4. It was. a great pleasure and honour for him to be in Japan at the present 
time, and he wished to express his particular appreciation of the Japanese 


Government's hospitality as host to the Conference. 


5. He now wished to read a meassage to the Conference from the President of 
the United States of America. 


"I welcome this opportunity to speak, through Chairman Seaborg, to 
the delegates to the ninth General Conference of the IAEA. I believe 
it is significant that you are meeting this year in Tokyo, the capital 
of a nation whose people have made such remarkable progress through the 
peaceful development of science and technology. 


"Today we realize, more than ever before, the power of science. 
We also realize that the mighty force of science is not the domain of 
any one nation. Its great knowledge springs from sources in many lands. 
Its fullest development demands international responsibility and. the 
co-operation of all men. This is the reason for the existence of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency. You are directing the atom, the 
greatest source of power which man has ever wrested from nature, towards 
peace, towards the fulfillment of human need, 


"Since its inception in 1957, the IAEA has made noteworthy progress. 
In organizing and implementing international programmes of scientific 
and technological co-operation, it has shown the world that men gain far 
more by sharing their knowledge and tools than by using them alone in 
secrecy and isolation; The IAEA has offered the advanced countries and 
their less developed neighbours and friends opportunities to work together 
and to share the scientific developments of many nations. 



GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 3 


"But the IAEA also has the solemn duty - and the unique opportunity to 
assure the world that materials and equipment employed for peaceful 
uses of atomic energy are not used for any military purpose. Prevention 
of the spread of atomic weapons is one of the most important tasks of 
our times. It is my deep conviction that the IAEA, through its safeguards 
systemj can make a crucial contribution to achievement of this 
goal. The United States Government is pledged to do all in its power 
to assure the success of the Agency's system. I urge every Member State 
to give its support to the Agency system in principle and in practice. 


"There must be no resting. The work which you have been doing 
must be carried on with increasing effort and support. There is no 
standing still in your twc-fold task of keeping the peaceful atom 
peaceful and directing its enormous energy toward productive uses. 


"1 take this opportunity to renew my country's pledge to assist 
the International Atomic Energy Agency in the full pursuit of these 
benefits which the peaceful atom can bestow. 


"With gratitude for your past accomplishments I send you the best 
wishes of the people of the United States for your future endeavours." 


6. He had come to Tokyo in the spirit of President Johnson's message, in 
order to advance on behalf of his Government the high principles of the Agency, 
which in the words of the Statute were "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world". He would recall that the United States Government's basic policy 
of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy had been 
operating since 1954, a-nd extensive programmes, set on foot with the assistance 
of many different agencies in the United States and abroad, had become a 
symbol of effective international co-operation aimed at the betterment of 
mankind. Those programmes concerned the uses of radioisotopes and radiation 
sources, the promotion of peaceful nuclear research, the provision of 
opportunities for nuclear education and training and, more recently, the uses 
of nuclear power for generation of electricity and for the combined production 
of electricity and fresh water, 
7. The United Nations International Co-operation Year coincided with the 
end of the first decade of the United States Atoms for Peace programme and 
provided a special opportunity for taking stock of the situation. The Third 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy held the 
previous year had likewise provided such an opportunity, and the most salient 
feature emerging from the review which had then been undertaken had been that 

GC(IX)/OR.95' 
page 4 


the extent of international co-operation in the development of nuclear energyresources 
during the last decade had no parallel in all the history of 
international science and technology. 


8. In his view, the establishment of the International Atomic Energy Agency 
in 1957 had been the most important expression of international co-operation 
during that decade. Delegates would all be familiar with the Agency's farreaching 
programme;, which the United States, together with other .fember 
States, had consistently sought to strengthen. 
9. The advent of economically competitive nuclear power and the world-wide 
expansion of nuclear power potential lent special importance to the Agency's 
safeguards system, which was designed to ensure that power reactors and the 
nuclear materials which they employed and produced were not diverted from 
peaceful purposes, A general review of the safeguards system was before the 
Conference, and he urged all delegations to vote for the resolution approving 
the revised system* One of the most important factors contributing to the 
growth and viability of the Agency was its concentration on the technical 
aspects of its responsibilities. In the opinion of the United States delegation, 
the practical progress made by the Agency in carrying out some of its most 
difficult tasks was due to its ability to deal with those tasks on a technical 
basis without the introduction of political issues* 
10„ The United States Government was proud of its programme for transferring 
responsibility for administering safeguards to the Agency. The first such , 
transfer had been accomplished by means of a trilateral agreement signed 
by the United States, Japan and the Agency on 23 September 1963 and to date 
arrangements of that kind had been' made for the Agency to administer the 
safeguards in respect of nuclear materials and equipment supplied by the United 
States to 13 countries. The United Kingdom and Canada had concluded similar 
agreements with the Agency and with countries, including Japan, with which 
they had safeguards agreements. The United. States was seeking to conclude 
further agreements for the transfer of bilateral safeguards responsibilities 
to the Agency and it was hoped that other aembers would follow the same policy. 
The Agency's safeguards were also to be applied to its projects in Finland, 
Norway, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mexico and Yugoslavia. 



GC(IX)/OR„93 
page 5 


11. To demonstrate the effectiveness and acceptability of Agency safeguards, 
to provide Agency staff with experience and to test the system in operation, 
the United States in 1962 had voluntarily agreed to place four of its civilian 
prototype power and research reactors under the safeguards system. That 
agreement had been renewed the year before and extended to include a large , 
privately-owned power reactor in the United States, the 600 M?(th) Yankee 
reactor, which was capable of producing more than 100 kg of plutonium per 
year. Experience of several years had shown that the agency's safeguards 
system in no way interfered with the efficient operation of nuclear installations, 
12. The United States was greatly encouraged by the offer of the United 
Kingdom to place its Bradwell nuclear power station under Agency safeguards, 
a step which would mean the application of the Agency's system to another 
important type of power reactor and thereby contribute to the objective of 
having widely accepted international safeguards with uniform standards and 
methods of inspection. 
13. The prospects for nuclear energy were very bright and the future of 
international co-operation in that field, focused through the Agency, was 
most promising. 
14. Recent events in the United States and elsewhere had indicated that 
nuclear power was now a significant competitive source of energy and there 
was every indication that its use was going to increase rapidly. Projecting 
current trends, one could estimaxe that by 1970 the nuclear electrical 
capacity of the United States would be of the order of 6000-7000 W and that 
of the entire world approximately 25 000 IvPV. A further projection indicated 
that there would be 60 000 to 90 000 W.1 of installed nuclear power in the 
United States by 1930 and that by the year 2000 about 50$ .f total electric 
power generated in that country would be from nuclear energy. The uses of 
nuclear products and energy sources in space, medical diagnosis and treatment, 
food sterilization and preservation, industrial processes and ship propulsion 
were also showing substantial growth. The use of nuclear energy in water 
desalting, large-scale excavation and rocket engines for extended space 
missions was also promising. 

GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 6 


15. Important strides had been made by the Agency in connection with the use 
of nuclear energy in desalination. His delegation considered the Agency to be 
a focal point for international co-operation in that field. Because of the 
growing international interest in the subject, the United States was sponsoring 
and would be the host to the First International Symposium on 'Vater Desalting, 
to be held in Washington on 3-9 October, Over 52 nations had accepted 
invitations to attend. The Agency would chair a session and present a paper 
on the technical and economic aspects of nuclear applications in desalting. 
Co-operative studies between the United States and countries (including Israel 
and the Soviet Union) interested in the potential of nuclear desalting were 
under serious consideration and his delegation looked forward to increased • 
participation by the Agency in that important field. 


16. The Agency's activities had kept commendable pace with recent technological 
developments:; it had assisted a number of Member States in making preliminary 
assessments' of nuclear power and desalting prospects, in evaluating reactor 
systems and in the siting, construction and safe operation of nuclear power 
plants. It had also fostered the development of nuclear technology, of 
research and services in the life sciences and the physical sciences, and of 
health, safety and waste management standards, codes and manuals. The United 
States delegation urged the Agency to continue and intensify those activities. 
17. It also commended the growth of technical assistance activities, through 
which the Agency took a direct part in promoting the application of nuclear 
science and technology to the economic progress of the developing countries. 
The increase in regional and inter-regional projects was also noteworthy. 
The Agency's services were particularly necessary in that type of international 
co-operation where a number of Member States was involved. 
18. The activities conducted in 1964 included 11 training courses on a variety 
of.subjects, the appointment of a regional officer for Asia and the Far Fast, 
assignments of several regional experts,, follow-up survey missions to Asia, 
the Far East, Latin America and Africa, and courses and research projects 
at the Middle Eastern Regional Radiosotope Centre for the Arab Countries. 
Other regional programmes included research and training at the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, reactor fuel-element research under 
a co-operative project in Horway, Poland and Yugoslavia5 sea disposal research 

GC(IX)/03.95 
page 7 


under the Monaco Project and spectrometer research at the Philippine atomic 
Energy Research Centre, while the utilization of research reactors continued 
to he one of the Agency's most beneficial fields of regional activity.. 


19. Another important aspect of the Agency's programme was the growth of 
co-operation with the United Nations and its specialized agencies. The Third 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, held in 
September 1964? had been successfully conducted through close co-operation 
between the Agency and the United Nations, and the two organizations had 
continued to collaborate on the International Co-operation Tear and on general 
questions of power. Other examples of effective and valuable co-operation 
were the Joint EA0/IA2A Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture, which had 
been in existence for almost a year., the exchange of technical liaison officers 
between the Agency and T7H0, UNESCO's aid to the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste and the collaboration between the Agency and 
UNESCO on studies involved in the International Hydrological Decade. The 
Agency and ILO had together reviewed a draft manual on safe practices in 
mining and milling radioactive ores, while the Agency was also executing 
projects for the United Nations Special Fund in Yugoslavia on agricultural 
research and training and in Central America on the elminination of the 
Mediterranean fruit fly and had almost completed a Special Fund pre-investment 
power study in the Philippines. 
20<> The Agency was also working closely with several regional organizations? 
with the European Nuclear Energy Agency (ENSA) and the Oesterreichische 
Studiengesellschaft fur Atomenergie (Austrian Atomic Energy Research 
Organization) on the use of radiation for food preservation, with ENEA on 
providing various standards and codes relating to health, safety and waste 
management, and with the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission (iANEC) in 
its survey of the possibilities of using nuclear power in America, while 
IANEC was helping the Agency with a study of training problems in Latin America. 


21. He had emphasized such regional and inter-agency projects in order to 
call attention to a relatively new trend in international co-operation,but 
the fact that in 1954 about B&f of the Agency's technical assistance had gone 
to individual J'lember States should not be overlooked. 

GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 8 


22. He wished to pay tribute to Japan and to the many other countries vrtiich 
had taken special initiative on various occasions to co-operate through the 
Agency. In 1959, Japan had been the first country to obtain nuclear material 
through the Agency, and in 1963 had signed, with the Agency and the United 
States, the first trilateral agreement for the administration hy the Agency 
of the safeguards provisions under a previous bilateral agreement. Japan 
had donated equipment to the Agency's Laboratory, Agency-sponsored training 
courses had been held in Japan, and only a week previously the Agency's 
working group on nuclear data had met in Tokyo. 
23. The United States Government would continue making every effort to advance 
the Agency's objectives. It supported the budget recommended by the Board of 
Governors, and would renew for 1965, for the seventh consecutive year, its 
offer to donate up to 'I50 000 worth of special nuclear material for use in 
Agency projects in research and medical therapy., It would continue whenever 
possible to make available on a cost-free basis the services of experts, 
training opportunities and certain items of equipment, and to contribute to 
the Agency's library copies of all scientific and technical reports published 
by the United States Atomic Energy Commission on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, and prints of United States films on the subject. 
24. The United States Government pledged its continued support to the Director 
General and the staff of the Secretariat, and would continue to provide the 
most competent Americans to fill posts in the Agency. 
25. The demands upon the Agency were growing and becoming increasingly 
challenging. Th.3 international scientific community and the Governments.of 
Member States should meet that challenge by increasing their efforts towardsinternational 
co-operation on the peaceful uses of atomic energy for the worldwide 
benefit of mankind, an aim which would provide' not only the greatest 
challenge, but, if successful, the greatest reward..'• ' 
26. Mr. HlRSCH (Fyanee) congratulated the President on his election and 
thanked the Japanese Government for its hospitality. 
27. Great changes had taken place in the last 20 years. In the absence of 
any real measure of general and universal disarmament, there was an inevitable 
increase in the number of countries liable to have access to 'nuclear weapons. 

GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 9 


On the other hand the relative importance of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy was also increasing. The production of nuclear power now exceeded 
the amount consumed in plants producing nuclear weapons and in a few years', 
time the uranium market would he governed by civilian requirements• 


28. The' role of the Agency would expand in proportion to the extent of the 
problems and studies which had to be tackled on a genuinely international 
scale. While the considerable development to be expected would benefit the 
industrialized nations in the first instance, it was essential to ascertain 
how the new techniques could best be utilized in various fields by the less 
advanced countries. France had concentrated on the different ways of producing 
power from natural uranium, a solution which would ensure independence from 
outside nuclear fuel supplies for a growing number of countries possessing., 
uranium resources. France had already supplied experts in uranium-ore 
prospecting to a number of such countries and was prepared to provide technical 
assistance to countries interested in the generation of electricity from 
natural uranium<> At the present time France, in conjunction with some of its 
neighbours, was working on the problem of producing electricity on a joint 
basis in international power plants. 
29. On the national level, in December 19645 the French Government had approved 
the conclusions of a report drawn up by a consultative commission for the 
production of nuclear electricity, which recommended that work be started 
between 1966 and 1970 on the construction of nuclear power plants with a 
total capacity of 2500-4000 IW(e). France's fifth National Economic Plan 
provided for a nuclear capacity that was at least twice as great as the capacity 
installed under the preceding plan. 
30. That programme would mainly involve the construction of natural uranium 
reactors with unit powers of 500 iJW(e), which would probably be raised 
subsequently to 750 and perhaps 1000 MW(e). Experience gained during the 
last ten years and the improvements made would make it possible to produce 
electricity at costs competitive with those obtaining in conventional plants. 
It was also planned to make such reactors more economic by increasing their 
specific power and reducing the number of channels for a reactor of any given 
power. 

GC(IX)/OE.93 
page 10 • 


31. The commissioning in 19o6 of an 80~M"lr(e) experimental power reactor 
moderated with, heavy-water and cooled with pressurized C0? would provide 
the experience needed if it were decided to embark on a programme based on 
heavy-water plants. Such a programme would make for a more effective 
utilization of natural uranium and would at the same time continue to- provide 
the plutonium needed for fast-neutron breeder reactors. Such heavy-water 
reactors would also make it possible to build economically acceptable mediumsize 
power plants with caoacities of 200-300 &W(e). 
32. Large-scale development of nuclear electricity production would require 
the use of fast-neutron breeder reactors,.which would enable uranium-233 
to be fully utilized; with such reactors the cost of the ore would have 
little effect .on the total cost involved. In that connection France was 
vrorking in collaboration with SURATOM. At the 'Jadarache Centre the first 
experimental fast-neutron reactor was scheduled to become critical in 1966 
and the construction of a critical experimental facility would provide a 
means of testing the components of that reactor type. The construction of. 
a first experimental fast-neutron power plant was scheduled to begin before 
1970. 
33• The trends noted at the Third International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy had grown clearer, and present assessments of installed 
capacities in 1980 were higher than the estimates made a year ago/ At the 
same time5 however, most nuclear power plants had been, or were due to be, 
constructed in the industrialized countries, and international transactions 
in the nuclear field,, still few in number, were being concluded without -reference 
to the vgency, which had been set uo, among other things, to playa 
part in such transactions. 


34. It bad to be realized that countries that made progress in the civilian 
sphere were at the same time increasing their capacity.for producing weapons. 
35• The Agency's safeguards system- provided a means of keeping a check on 
the way in which assistance was used, but it did not prevent recipient countries 
from engaging in uncontrolled activities at the same time. The position was 
particularly clear in the case of safeguards applied to facilities placed 
voluntarily under the Agency's system by countries which also operated military 



GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 11 


programmeso It was like, a traveller picking out only one case from among 
his many pieces of luggage for inspection by the customs. The control exercised 
by the Agency did, nevertheless, provide a basis for the development of a 
system which would only be properly applied as part of a general scheme for 
nuclear disarmament. It was for.that reason that France was anxious to 
ensure the effectiveness of the system and had approved the new safeguards 
document. 


36. As for the. financial aspects of the system, France had agreed that it 
should be paid for out of the Agency's Regular Budget insofar as research 
reactors and certain power reactors of various types were concerned„ In 
such cases the main objective would be to work out suitable safeguards 
procedures and acquire the experience needed for future operations. If, 
however, a large number of power reactors were placed under Agency safeguards 
within the framework of bilateral agreements, the costs would exceed the 
level of the Agency's total budget at the present time. Such expenditure could 
no longer be charged to the Agency's budget but would have to be borne by the 
parties to the agreement and would thus have to be included in the cost per 
kWh. 
37 • In connection with the Agency's budget for 1966, his delegation had 
expressed reservations at the meetings of the Board* It supported the efforts 
made by the Director General to keep Secretariat staff at a practically constant 
level, but it considered that the slow development of the agency's activities 
justified only slight increases in the budget1, certain inevitable items of 
expenditure would have to be met by savings on other items. 


38. Similarly, the financial assistance provided by the Agency to regional 
training centres should be submitted to close scrutiny. Such assistance was 
primarily designed to ensure that a centre was set up and could start work. 
Subsequently the level of financial assistance should be scaled down and costs 
should be borne by the countries directly concerned. A detailed study should 
be made of the financial implications of setting up an international centre 
for research and training in the medical applications of radioisotopes. 
39- Technical assistance was one of the most positive aspects of the Agency's 
work, and France, which had provided the Agency with 15 experts over the past 
year, would continue to support the technical assistance programme. France was 



GC(IX)/GR.93 
page 12 


also offering the Agency a loop for low-temperature irradiations, valued at-• 
$20 000, The equipment supplied would enable numerous experiments to be 
carried out involving basic research in solid-state physics,, France was also 
prepared to ensure that the centre which received the equipment would work 


in close collaboration with the Grenoble Hue1ear Research Centre in order to 
make sure that the equipment was utilized to maximum advantage.


40. His country also supported the work being done by the Agency in drawing 
up regulations, in particular those relating to safety standards•and transport. 
It would continue to assist the Secretariat in drafting the important documents 
in question. France had approved the international convention on civil 
liability for nuclear damage and hoped to be able to ratify it in the near 
future. 
41• In connection with the,proposal to amend Article VI of the Statute on the 
composition of the Board, he. recalled that the Statute represented a delicate 
compromise which it. had taken a long time and much mutual goodwill to work out, 


42. In approving Mr. Eklund's appointment as Director General for a further 
four years, his delegation was glad to note that continuity would be assured 
and it expressed the hope that the development of the international situation 
would enable the Agency to play the part expected of it. For its part France 
would do everything in its power to ensure that it did. 
45.• Mr. FRR:<:R•' (Belgium) congratulated the President on.his election and 
thanked the Japanese Government for its magnificent hospitality. 
44* I"t was with the greaxest sympathy that Belgium was following the Agency's 
valiant efforts to fulfil its responsibilities under the Statute, particularly 


in the field of regulatory activities and safeguards. The safeguards document 
was indeed the first practical step on the slow road to disarmament. The 
application of the safeguards system would thus prepare the Agency for carrying 
out a role in the future which its founders had net foreseen; there was 
no doubt that, if the nuclear Powers could agree on general disarmament, the 
Agency would, thanks to the experience which it would have gained, be able to 
assume international supervisory functions in nuclear matters. 


45' Belgium had also followed with great interest the work of the various 
symposia and conferences organized by the Agency or with its assistance. 



GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 15 


46. However, the basic task of the Agency remained the provision of technical 
assistance to the countries which were still in the early stages of nuclear 
development. Yet the Agency was perhaps still not making as big an effort in 
that direction as it might. The funds at its' disposal were certainly limited, 
but it could extend its influence by acting more as a catalyzing agent for 
technical assistance provided by the advanced countries, instead of attempting 
to carry out with its own technical resources //ork which could be performed 
at its request by laboratories and institutions in various Member States. 
It should likewise not devote too much attention to basic research, to the 
detriment of the practical applications of atomic energy. 
47. It was above all by the provision of training fellowships, expert services, 
judicious advice and equipment that the Agency could fulfil its task of bringing 
about technical progress. To that end, Belgium each year placed at the Agency's 
disposal six Type II fellowships of a total annual value of $20 000, in addition 
to the country's annual voluntary contribution to the General Fund. 
48. In that connection he wished to mention that the sum of $10 000 would be 
paid as Belgium's voluntary contribution for 19^5• 
49- It had been said that a country could undertake large-scale action in the 


nuclear field only if it possessed a sound academic infrastructure, Belgium 
had therefore been particularly gratified at the conclusions and proposals 


put forward by the group which had met at Vienna in April 1965, in compliance 
with Resolution GC(VIII)/RE3/l82, to study the scientific training of 
nationals of the developing countries,, Indeed, ever since 1962 Belgium had 


proposed that the Agency should expand nuclear training with the assistance of 


other international organizations. 


50, It was also important to make better use of the facilities offered by 
modern publicity media. The organization of. filmed study courses under the 
auspices of the Agency and UNESCO would be particularly valuable to the developing 
countries. The latter would then no longer be forced to send students 
abroad if, by means of sight and sound, it were possible to provide them with 
scientific training of the same quality as that of the Western nations. 


51. Another matter which the Agency should consider forthwith, in collaboration 
with the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the International Bank 

GC(IX)/0H.93 


page 14 


for Reconstruction and Development for example, was the arrangement of special 
financing procedures to help countries with weak currencies to purchase 
large-scale nuclear installations, which were particularly expensive items. 
Adequate safeguards and long-term credits would be necessary for the purpose. 
Now that the use of nuclear power had become a reality, the solution of that 
problem would assume vital importance for the economic development of many 
countries„ 


52. Among the six priority fields of study which the Agency had assigneditself 
there was one which deserved particular attention, namely the use of 
nuc'Jear power for "Che desalination of water,. The problem of water was a 
universal one, and even the most favoured countries were beginning to fear a 
fresh-water shortage in the more or less distant future, The good prospects 
offered by nucle'ar power for water desalination placed the' Agency under an 
obligation closely to follow all the research and experimentation carried out 
throughout the world for the purpose of developing the most economic types of 
desalination plants. Belgium was studying that problem with the greatest 
attention and would like to be associated as closely as possible with the 
work of future symposia and panels on the subject. 
55* Belgium had decided to build a network of nuclear power stations. The 
first station, with a capacity of 56O-6OO HW(e), would be begun early in 1966, 
and would be followed by a second station of similar capacity, work on which 
would start at the end of 1966 or the beginning of 1967. In the meanwhile 


the BR-3 Vulcain experiment was proceeding satisfactorily. Under a bilateral 
co-operation agreement signed during the present year, India had agreed to 


lease to Belgium 13 tons of heavy water required for experimental purposes. 


54. In conclusion., he wished to thank the Director General for the work he 
had accomplished during the four years of his term of office. It was thus 
with the greatest pleasure that Belgium would cast its vote in favour of his 
appointment for a further similar term. 
55 • Mr. BAFFOUR (Ghana') expressed the great pleasure of his delegation 


at Mr. Asakai's election to the office of President of the General Conference 
at its ninth session. The splendid hospitality extended by the Government 
and the people of Japan was keenly appreciated. 



GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 15 


56. Ten years previously few people would, have imagined that the Agency's 
evolution could proceed so far by 1965. Only a few of the nations represented 
at the present session of the Conference had then possessed the secret of 
the atom. Today things were very differents many nations, among them Ghana, 
had advanced considerably in nuclear science and were eager to be closely 
associated with the work of the Agency because of the numerous possibilities 
it offered for their future progress. 
57• He could not pretend to speak for the whole of Africa, a vast continent 
comprising many nations,, Many of those nations were still in the very earliest 
stages of development3 and a large part of the continent's resources remained 
untapped. Indeed, at first sight the problems faced by Africa seemed almost 
insuperable, but precisely because they were beset by so many difficulties 
the nations of Africa were endeavouring to take a highly realistic and practical 
approach to the planning of their future. 


580 One example of the problems which weighed on Africa and transcended the 
boundaries of its individual countries was the tsetse fly, a source of disease 
which, to a considerable extent, was responsible for the serious lack of 
protein in African countries„ The task of eradicating it was faced by most 
of the continent. Before the use of isotopes had come into its own, a great 
deal of money and effort had been expended on efforts to eradicate the tsetse 
fly, efforts based largely on a car.eful assessment of the pest's ecology. 
All had failed. That was but one reason why Ghana was eager to pursue the 
limited programme of atomic research on which it had embarked. There was now 
hope that some progress could be made towards the eradication of the tsetse 
fly, and Ghana, along with the other countries of Africa, would look to the 
more developed nations of the world' for encouragement and assistance in their 
endeavour. 


59- Many other problems interested the African countries. Just as in other 


parts of the world, water, either through scarcity or excess, often presented 


serious problems. The African nations still possessed little knowledge of 


their subterranean water courses, and it was a well-known fact that in that 


connection-isotopes could be of great assistance. In short, it was problems 
of that kind which had prompted Ghana to undertake nuclear research, and he 
was confident that in the end the considerable expenditure required would be 
well justified. 



GC(IX)/OR„95 
page 16 


60. He believed that the Agency and its Member Stakes should make a thorough 
re-appraisal of 'the problems they were called upon to face. They should 
take a fresh look at their objectives, and should.never lose sight of the 
fact that the bridging of the gap between the developing countries and the 
more advanced countries was really their most important task. In the future, 
then, it would be possible to look back on the Agency's achievement as one 
that had truly fostered international co-operation and understanding. That, 
after all, was y/hat the Agency was for. 
61. The Agency's financial resources should be carefully husbanded so that 
the greatest possible benefit could be derived from them. In mentioning 
that point he had the safeguards programme particularly in mind. It was 
unquestionably an important programme, but serious thought should be given 
to the value which could be derived from the Agency's work by all Member 
States, particularly the less-developed countries. It was urgently important 
to concentrate not on refinements but on the fundamental problems that had 
to be tackled. If the developing countries could be encouraged to make full 
use of the resources which the Agency was able to place at their disposal, 
it would be possible to affirm that the Agency had done its job well. 
62. He warmly thanked the Agency, and Dr. IDklund in particular, for all that 
had been done to enable Ghana to pursue its limited programme5 and thanks 
were also due to all others who had offered stimulation and encouragement. 
63. Mr. FABOLAI'T (ihilippines) congratulated the President on his 
election and expressed his delegation's appreciation for the generous hospitality 
extended to the Conference by the Government of Japan. Because of past 
history, it was auspicious that Japan should be the host country for the first 
session to be held outside Tienna, and the peoples of Asia would be watching 
the proceedings with tremendous interest. 
64. He welcomed the newly admitted countries; the continuous growth in the 
Agency's memebership testified to the vital role it was playing in contributing 
to world peace and progress. The fact that the Director General had agreed 
to serve for a further four-year term was gratifying and would ensure 
continuance of the work so well begun. 

GfC(rC)/OR.95 
page 17 • 


65. It was gratifying that the great progress made in recent years towards 
the ultimate development of atomic energy as an instrument for peace, progress 
and greater understanding among friendly naticns had far surpassed and outweighed 
the distressing trend'towards nuclear proliferation. The role played 
by the Agency i.i that development had been of singular importance and it was 
to he hoped that, with %hc greater support of "'ember states, it would continue 
to exert the utmost influence in directing the work along peaceful lines. 
66* A recent development for which the Agency was to be commended was the 


establishment of the -Joint PAC/IJ.EA Division of atomic Energy in .agriculture. 
Hunger was the most frightening spectre haunting millions of the world's 
population, and it was essential that food production should be increased 
to the point at least of matching the explosive growth in world population* 
The joint programme, bearing on such matters as soil fertility, irrigation 
and crop production, insect eradication and pest control, together with 
training work and exchange of scientific information, would constitute the 
best investment of the resources available to the two organizations for tackling 


that problem of fundamental urgency. 


67 • His delegation was grateful for the help being extended by the Agency in 
the promotion of closer co-operation in specific nuclear energy activities 
among the Member States of the Asian region, as typified by the study group 
meeting on reactor utilization held in Bombay in late 1964 and the regional 
training course on the application of radioisotopes in medicine conducted in 
1964 in Manila with the support of hit* Government. Study group meetings of 
the kind were assuming greater importance with the increase in the number of 
research reactors now in operation or under construction, and were an important 

instrument for fostering fruitful working relations among scientists and 
regional centres. It wag therefore unfortunate that, because of unforeseen 
difficulties, the fi^st Agency-sponsored study group meeting on nuclear power 
for developing countries, which had been'scheduled to meet in Manila in mid-
September 1965, had had to be postponed- His delegation hoped that the 
delegations of the i:ember States concerned would be able during the Conference 


to-discuss plans for its convening at the earliest possible time. 


68. Medicine and public health constituted one of the most important areas 
where atomic energy could benefit the greatest number of people. His 
Government had therefore considered it a privilege to act as host for the 1964 

GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 18 


regional training course on the application of radioisotopes in medicine, and 
looked forward to the holding of the inter-regional advanced training school 
on the same subject, to be held in Bangkok in January 1966. 


69. The training and research programme being undertaken jointly by the 
Philippines, India and the Agency, which he had mentioned-at the eighth 
session, had been formally inaugurated in January 19^5 a"fc ^e Philippines 
Atomic Research Centre, with participants from China, Korea, India, Thailand 
and the Philippines. The first six months' work had proved most fruitful5 
several diffraction studies had been completed and at least one paper published. 
The programme was thus already demonstrating its value as a scientific 
endeavour and example of regional co-operation, and his Government hoped 
that the venture' would pave the way for similar joint efforts in the Asian 
region. 
70. He was glad, too, to be able to report that the first phase of the . 
pre-investment study of the power supply situation in Luzon, which was being 
undertaken with the assistance of the Special Fund and the Agency, had been 
completed. The results indicated that only a small proportion of the future 
power requirements could be met by local energy resources, and the place of 
nuclear power was now being studied as a second phase. His delegation hoped 
that the results to be obtained would prove of use also to other countries 
similarly placed, 
71. It wos encouraging that, within the space of barely one year, 21 Member 
States should have concluded agreements with the agency for the transfer of 
safeguards functions. That development indicated growing recognition of the 
Agency's vital role in reducing the possibility of the diversion of nuclear 
materials to military purposes. The .Agency's safeguards system would be 
improved by the proposed revisions before the Conference, whereby the intent 
and purpose of certain of its provisions were more clearly specified and 
technological advances were taken into account. The revisions would not, of 
course, remove the greatest defect of the system, i.e. the non-coverage of the 
nuclear Powers except on a voluntary basis. That shortcoming was not inherent 
in the system itself but derived from the fact that it was unlikely that any 
of those Powers would call upon the Agency for assistance, despite its being 

GC(IT)/OR.93 
page 19 


in the best position to apply safeguards to prevent the misuse, of, nuclear 
facilities and materials. His delegation would support the proposed revisions 
in the firm hope that in time the system would come to have a more universal 
application. 


72. In conclusion, he was glad to say that his Government, despite the 
financial difficulties it had to face, would continue its support 
for the Agency's work. With the growth in membership and activities, increased 
financial support for the Agency was essential if it were not to fall short 
of its e's.jectvtf&'s. He noped tnat all i'lember States 'would hear that important 
consideration in mind.. 
75. Mr. BSRG'Lupl (Israel) said that he was pleased to he among the first 
to congratulate iir. Asakai on his election to the office of President. He 
also vri.sh.ed to thank the Government of Japan for the unstinting hospitality it 
had shown the Conference. 
74. His delegation had always endeavoured, in its statement during the general 
debate, to report on the scientific and technical work carried out in Israel 
during the previous twelve months, to review i-ts co-operation with the Agency, 
and to suggest courses of action which, in the light of Israel's own experience, 
seemed to be of general interest. Such a report was in keeping with the 
technical character of the Agency, and avoided political issues with which 
the Agency should not concern itself. 
75- During the year under review Israel had placed its swimming-pool research 
reactor under Agency safeguards. It had done so with some hesitation, but 
was convinced of the rightness of its course. To quote from a statement of 
the Resident Representative of Israel to the Agency, "The Government of 
Israel has been co-operating faithfully with the Agency in all matters of 
planning, research and development of atomic energy. The transfer of safe- ' 
guards is a further step.along this road,.the more so as Israel is the only 
State in the Liiddle Sast to accept the Agency's safeguards on an atomic reactor". 
The Resident Representative had also expressed the hope that that' step would 
enhance the standing of Israel within the Agency. 


76. Israel had been fortunate in obtaining Agency assistance for some of its 
research projects. In addition to four continuing projects (in nuclear 
desalting, biology, haematology and insect control) the Agency had now approved 

GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 20 


Israeli participation in a new project concerned with the efficient use of 
water in agriculture. His delegation accordingly wished to express its 


gratitude to the Director General and the technical staff of the Agency for 


the interest they were taking in Israel's work and for the assistance they 
had given. 


77" He used the word "assistance" deliberately because in all those projects 
the Agency was contributing only 'part of the budget; his delegation believed, 
moreover, that that was only right and proper. The Agency should serve as 
a catalyst in areas of work which were regarded as worthwhile. It should 
encourage Member States to make an independent effort, by taking an interest 
in their work and contributing to it when possible, The Israel Atomic Energy 
Establishment had therefore contributed a number of cost-free research 
contracts on subjects which it believed to be of interest to the Agency, for 
example liver scanning and insect eradication by irradiation. 

78. To anyone concerned with the'administration of scientific work it was • 
obvious that the Agency's Secretariat faced a difficult task in distributing 
its available resources among the many worthwhile projects submitted to it.' 
The Agency might well consider restricting its research efforts to'a.number 
of important subjects, so that it would be in a position to give appropriate 
grants to those Ilember States which appeared to be most competent in the fields 
in question and to ensure the international character of the projects by 
encouraging scientists from other countries to participate in them. In a 
sense that had already been done at the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics, which promised to be one of the Agency's most successful ventures. 
Some Israeli scientists had already had the good fortune to participate in 
the Centre's work, as teachers and as students. 
79* To assist the Agency in encouraging international co-operation between 
scientists, his Government had decided to continue its policy of awarding 
scholarships to,the extent of 90 man-months for foreign scientists who wished 
to participate in Israel's research and development projects. It hoped that 
the Agency would continue to help by allocating those scholarships as suitably 
as possible. Under that scheme Israel had already.had the pleasure of welcoming 
a number of scientists from other developing countries. 



GC(rO/cR.93 
page 21 


80. Israel had continued its efforts to establish and strengthen relations 
with the atomic energy commissions of other countries, especially the developing 
countries, and that too was in keeping with the spirit of the Agency. 
Joint planning among those countries, and joint projects undertaken by them, 
surely constituted one of the best ways of promoting and accelerating the 
application of atomic energy. 
81. One of the most difficult problems for countries in the early stages of 
nuclear development was to ensure a proper division of manpower and facilities 
between fundamental and applied research, Research reactors were a great 
asset but could easily become a liability if not used fully and rationally. 
Israel had tried to strike a balance between the two extremes and to apportion 
reactor time sensibly between pure science and practical applications. 
82. The verification of the prediction of "omega-minus" had greatly 
encouraged work on elementary particle theory. Israel had continued its 
theoretical studies on the physics of fast reactors and had broadened its 
programme on the 116'ssbauer effect and the resonance scattering of gamma rays 
from highly-excited nuclear levels. A facility had been constructed which 
produced polarized neutrons by reflecting thermal neutrons from a cobalt-iron 
mirror. In general, a great deal of attention had been paid to the use of 
neutrons in Israel:; and in that connection neutron diffraction was regarded 
as one of the most promising techniques. It was a method of particular 
importance to chemists in the determination of molecular structures because it 
permitted the localization of hydrogen atoms in organic and inorganic molecules 
and thus supplemented X-ray and electron diffraction techniques which were 
not capable of that refinement. Indeed, the number of problems which could 
be solved by neutron diffraction was so vast that his delegation urged the 
Director General to plan and co-ordinate an international effort on the 
subject. Even countries with relatively limited nuclear programmes could 
usefully participate in such a scheme and it would enable them to put their 
research reactors to good use. 


83. Solid-state physics offered many possibilities for a reactor establishment, 
for example studies on inelastic scattering of neutrons by ferroelectrics 
of the potassium-dihydrogen-phosphate type. By studying the location of the 
hydrogen atoms it should be possible to explain the properties of such compounds 

GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 22 


and possibly even to evolve a theory which would describe them in terms of 
their characteristic strong hydrogen bonds. The results so far obtained had 
led Israeli scientists to a new theory of the structure of liquid water, a 
problem which had occupied physicists and chemists for a long time. 


84* Other chemical problems which had continued to attract attention included 
the nuclear properties of short-lived nuclides, the mechanism of high-energy 
chemical interactions, the radiolysis of aqueous solutions and - most important 
ex all - the physics and chemistry of molten salts and of highly—concentrated 
aqueous solutions. 


85. Thus Israel had tried to give fundamental research its due, but at the 
same time' it had not neglected the .practical applications of atomic energy. 
Emphasis had been laid on developing methods of activation analysis,, including 
the utilization of photoneutrons and delayed neutron emission. There were, 
in addition to the fissionable nuclides, a few radioactive nuclides which 
emitted neutrons during decayf such secondary neutrons could quite clearly 
be used for "the determination of delayed neutron precursors. Thus, in addition 
_ -235TT ' 2J3xT 238TT'. -?32rrv ' l6-_ ., if. . ,n ," . . , ,, ,n ,


uo U, u% U, ana Th, 0 and 0 could be converted into the delayed 
neutron emitter if, and 0 into F by way of a (d,n) reaction. There was 
thus an elegant method for determining isotopes of oxygen and, indirectly, 
the concentration of deuterium oxide, Similarly v6Li could be determined in 
the presence of J' 0. Some elements, such as 3, Ca and Al, produced 
by neutron capture from the "normal" isotopes, emitted such highly energetic 
gamma rays during' decay that they could produce neutrons from heavy water or 
beryllium. By counting neutrons one could determine the concentration of the 
nuclides and of the elements from which they were formed by neutron capture. 


86. He hardly needed to emphasize the practical importance of activation 
analysis. Even so it seemed worthwhile to mention its use in criminology for 
detecting forgeries and falsifications-, determing the origin of drugs 
such as opium, and performing non-destructive analyses of court evidence. 
In fact, the Israeli delegation believed that the Agency would do well to encourage 
further research in activation analysis, a fairly simple technique 
"which nevertheless provided good training for young nuclear chemists. 
The 
Government of Isreal would be pleased to see the Agency organize> possibly 
in 1967? an international seminar on the subject, to be held in Israel? 
informal contacts had already given considerable encouragement to the ideac 



GC(IX)/OR„93 
page 25 


87. At the eighth session of the General Conference he.had stressed the 
importance which Israel attached to the use of atomic energy in agriculture, 
especially in connection with food preservation and insect eradication. 
Israel had made good progress in such work, and his delegation wished to 
acknowledge the important role which the Agency had played and was continuing 
to play. The Agency would be well advised to expand its activities in 
agriculture, and in particular to encourage the developing countries to 
embark on such activities. Food preservation and insect eradication were 
both problems of vital importance to the success of agriculture and to 
public healthy both, moreover, could be undertaken with relatively simple 
techniques and without elaborate equipment. The Agency might profitably 
collect data on the most damaging insects, especially those prevalent in the 
newly independent countries, and initiate a world-wide project for the 
eradication of such pests. He was pleased to associated himself with what 
the distinguished delegate of Ghana had said on the subject, 
88. He had dwelt at some length on the work of the Israel Atomic Energy 
Establishment in order to show how many problems in the field of atomic energy 
could be usefully tackled before one bothered about nuclear power. They 
constituted, in fact, an immediate answer to the question of how atomic energy 
might serve peaceful purposes. 
89. At the same time his Government was well aware of the long-term problems? 
nuclear power and, more important still, the combination of power generation 
and water desalting. In the latter field Israel had benefited by collaboration 
with the United States Government. A clearer picture of the economics of 
such dual-purpose ventures had already emerged, and it was now possible to 
conjecture when they might come to fruition. 
90. His delegation, like others, had noted the fluctuating attitude towards 
power reactors over the past ten years5 periods of undue optimism had generally 
been followed by unwarranted pessimism. In connection with the desalting 
of sea water, Israel hoped that a balanced view would be attained more quickly 
than had been the case with nuclear power.- It believed that the use of large 
dual-purpose reactors vra.s likely to become,during the next two decades, the most 
important and almost certainly the most spectacular application of atomic 
energy. The programme would require time, but it should be studied and 
planned immediately. There was no room for pessimism. 

GC(IX)/0E.95 
page 24 


91. Israel was convinced that atomic energy, in all its aspects, would play 
a major role in the further development of society. Ifany problems remained 
to he solved hut their solution held great promise. The Agency should 
continue to assist iiember States in making "the fullest possible use of their 
manpower 'and facilities for the many constructive applications of atomic 
energy. Jnly in that way could it fulful its legitimate function and bring 
nearer the time when swords would be converted into ploughshares. 
92. Mr. FP^iBGiZiKLa (Uruguay) congratulated the Tresident on his election 
and reviewed the work carried .out in Uruguay during the past year in connection 
with the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
93• Uruguay was continuing to make routine use of' twelve 250-kV radiotherapy 
units, four of which were of the moving-field variety. Five grams of radium, 
broken down into convenient quantities, were being used to meet requirements. 
Five radioisotope laboratories were in operation; they were receiving every 
help from the Government, in obtaining the radioelements' they required. One 
caesium-137 and four cobalt-60 bombs were available for teletherapy and an 
18-MeV rotating betatron had come into operation a few months ago5 it was the 
first such unit to be used in the Southern Hemisphere. 


94* He listed the advantages of the betatron, particularly when use was made 
of accelerated electrons> and discussed the results obtained in the treatment 
of specific malignant tumours. The higher costs of the installations and 
equipment was justified by the improved teletherapeutical results obtained. 


95, Although Uruguay was well equipped in the'field of teletherapy, the 


position was not so satisfactory in other sectors of atomic energy which 


required greater investments - particularly at a time when the economies of 


most Latin American countries had suffered a decline as a result of currency 


devaluations. Nevertheless, some progress was being made, albeit slowly, 


96. The Faculty of Engineering (Physics Institute) was doing research and 
carrying out measurements -of fluxes with a view to providing a substitute for 
arteriography in cases where the latter technique was liable to be dangerous3 
various radioisotopes were being used. The Technology and Chemistry Institutes, 
whic?a were part of the same Faculty, organized regular advanced' courses on 
nuclear physics and also offered courses in reactor engineering. The Veterinary 

GC(IX)/OR.93 
page 25 


Faculty- was carrying out fish conservation studies using carbon-14 at the 
Fisheries Research Institute and was also performing autoradiography work 
which was extremely important in view of the fishery resources of the Rio 
de la Plata. The Biology Institute at the sane faculty was making a study of 
the effects of radiation on foodstuffs, 'particularly beefs with a view to 
neutralizing the Virus of foot-and-mouth disease. 


97<• The Agronomy faculty was doing work on fertilizers and the Chemistry 
Faculty was engaged on a broad radioactive-ore prospecting programme with 
assistance provided, by an Agency expert. Prospecting work had already been 
carried out in nine of the 19 departments which made up the country. Interesting 
work on the determination of lavas by means of the potassium-argo'n method 
had also been carried out in co-operation with the Atomic Energy Institute 
of Sao Paulo (Brazil), 


98. A State organization had discovered monazite, associated with a titanium 
ore, in the black sands along the Atlantic coast„ Millions of tons of the 
ore had been found and the discovery would help to make up for the scarcity 
of thorium deposits in Uruguay. 
S$. During the past year the Agency had provided Uruguay with a prospecting 

expert, a one-yeaa? contract providing for further gammagraphy work on the 


hydatid cyst of the liver, three fellowships for technical training and 


assistance in obtaining fuel for a reactor of up to 100 kW. 


100. In the name of his Government and the Atomic Dnergy Commission-of Uruguay 
he wished to express his.appreciation to the Director General for the support 
and collaboration that had been provided by the a-gency. His delegation would 
have pleasure in supporting the Director General's reappointment for a further 
four-year term. 
101. Finally he wished to propose that the General Conference should send 
telegrams in the name of the Agency's 95 Members calling on the Governments' 
of Pakistan and India to abandon the use of force in settling their differences. 
Resort to force had.never provided an equitable solution to any problem. 
Although the conflict was of direct concern to the United Nations rather than 
the Agency the latter organization, as a body set up to promote peaceful 
activities, would demonstrate its moral stature by taking such action. 

GC(IX)/OR.$3 
page 26 


102." Mr. LAURILA (Finland) congratulated the President on his'election 
and expressed his delegation's gratitude to the Director General and'the 
Secretariat for their praiseworthy work during the past year, which had been 
hampered by the fact that the Agency's material and financial resources had 
not kept pace with the general" development of nuclear technology. 


103. Huclear power plants had proved competitive even where the cost of 
conventional electric power was not high and a rapid growth in its use was 
to be expected, which meant a great increase in the amount of fissionable 
material produced in various countries. Hence much attention was being given 
to the means of ensuring safety in the use of nuclear energy and to eliminating 
the possibility of fissionable material being used for non-peaceful purposes, 
104• The revised safeguards system now being proposed could be regarded as 
the best that could be devised for the time beings but the rapidly expanding 
use of nuclear energy could create technical and economic problems in its 
application so that the system would need to be revised in the near future. 
The system finally adapted should be flexible, inexpensive and universally 
acceptable, so that every user of nuclear facilities would be prompted to 
place them under ^ency safeguards. The aim should also be to enable the 
Agency to be fully informed of the amount and nature of fissionable material 
in various parts of the world and its movement from country to country. 


105. The installation of nuclear power plants for generating electricity posed 
complex- industrial problems for a small country like Finland. The introduction 
of nuclear power in-a small country's generating system must be preceded by 
a thorough study of the energy economy and its relation to the national 
economy, and such a pilot study'had been" initiated' in Finland in 1953. £* 
had been completed by a joint team of experts from the Agency and Finland. 
The forecast based on the results of the study, published under the title 
"Prospects of ITuclear power in Finland"-^ , had proved sound. 
106. Safety and safeguards in particular would create problems when the first 
full-scale nuclear power plant was completed in Finland in the hear future. 
So far, safeguards arrangements in respect of the majority of large-scale 
reactors had resulted from the transfer' of responsibility for administering 
1/ STl/DOC/lO/2. 



GC(IX)/?H.93 
page 2 7 


safeguards under bilateral arrangements to the Agency. In Finland, however, 
it would be possible, at least in principle, to test the applicability of the 
safeguards system in a practical case, in which no factors of secondary 
importance or of an artificial character were involved. 


The meeting rose at 1 p<,m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(IX)/OR.94 

30 December 1965 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

General Conference 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-FOURTH MEETING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Wednesday, 22 September 1965, at 3.15 P.m. 


President: Mr. ASAKAI (japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 

agenda* 


9 Closing date of the session 
1 -3 

10 
General debate and report of the Board of 4 - 117 
Governors for 1964-65 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Japan 4-14 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 15 - 45 
United Arab Republic 46 . 
Bulgaria 47 - 60 

Cuba 61 - 64 
Spain 65-80' 
China 


81 - 89 
New Zealand 90 - 95 
South Africa 


96 - 106 
Netherlands 


107 - 117 


* GC(IX)/513. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/REV.2. 


65-7321 



GC(IX)/OR,94 
page 2 


CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure 
the General Conference had to fix a closing date for the session, on the 
recommendation of the General Committee, 
2, The General Committee had considered the question the day before and 
had authorized him to recommend on its behalf that Tuesday, 28 September he 
provisionally fixed as the closing date. If for some reason it was impossible 
to conclude the session by that day, it would of course continue until all 
business had been duly disposed of. 


5. The General Committee's recommendation was accepted, 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1964-65 
(GC(IX)/299> 307) (continued^ 


4. Mr. HOGEN (japan) considered it very significant that the Agency, 
whose aim was to promote the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, 
was holding the ninth regular session of the General Conference in Japan, 
which, 20 years earlier, had experienced the tremendous and destructive 
force of nuclear energy, He pointed out that 1965 was the first year of 
2/ 


the Agency's long-term programme—7 and the tenth since the first United 
Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy had 
been held. It was also ten years since the basic law restricting the 
utilization of nuclear energy to peaceful purposes had been promulgated 
in Japan. 


5. The first Japanese commercial power reactor (l66 megawatts) was 
expected to come into operation towards the end of the year. The power 
demonstration reactor which had started operating in 1963 was supplying the 
electricity needs of the Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute at 
Tokai-murao Preparations were under way for constructing a second commercial 
power reactor (500 megawatts) near Kyoto, By 1970 the production of nuclear 
electric power was expected to total one million kilowatts. In 1965 
construction of a materials testing reactor had begun and the second national 
reactor had reached criticality at the beginning of 1965, Interim experiments 
on radiation chemistry had started and the construction of a 
chemical reprocessing plant was planned, to come into operation by 1970, 
1/ GC(IX)/0E.93, paras, 3-106, 
2/ ITFCIHC/50. 



GC(IX)/OR. 9A 
page j 

6„ The tripartite agreement between the Agency and the Japanese and 
United Kingdom Governments for the transfer of the administration of 
safeguards under the bilateral agreement between the latter two_ had been 
approved by the Board, of Governors in June 1965 and would he the first under 
which Agency safeguards would be applied to a power reactor of over 100 
megawatts, namely the first commercial power reactor he had already mentioned. 
Recently a similar agreement between the Agency,, Japan and Canada had been 
approved by the Board. 


7. Japan intended to give a mass spectrometer to the igency's nuclear 
research laboratory, 
8. The fact that the Agency's membership had now grown to 93. countries 
testified to the importance that developing countries attached to its work. 
His Government particularly valued its achievements in drawing up health 
and safety standards and hoped that such work would continue* 
9. As the peaceful uses of nuclear energy expanded, its by-products, as a 
source of potential destructive power, posed serious problems and the authors 
of the Agency's Statute had wisely given it the important function of 
preventing diversion of nuclear energy to military uses. The Revised 
Safeguards Syste was an important step in that direction. His Government 
had agreed to accept the system for the first commercial power reactor and 
had been the first to transfer to the Agency the administration of safeguards 
under a bilateral agreement, namely the agreement between Japan and the 
United States. All Japan's bilateral agreements had now been transferred to 
the Agency for administration, which was proof of his Government's confidence 
in the Agency. It hoped that, given the same spirit of co-operation on 
the part of all Member States, the implementation of the safeguards system 
would bring within the realm of the possible the establishment of 
safeguarded world-wide disarmament referred to in Article III.B.l of the 
Statute. The safeguards provisions, by their nature, could never achieve their 
objectives if they were applied only to a particular country or group of 
countries, and he accordingly appealed to all Member States to co-operate with 
a view to ensuring their universal application. He welcomed the United 
Kingdom's decision to place the Bradwell power reactor under Agency safeguards, 
which would do much to silence the criticism that Agency safeguards, were only 
enforced upon developing countries so as to perpetuate the existing advantage 
of the more advanced. 
2/ GC(IX)/294, Annex, 



GC(IX)/OR.94 
page 4 


10. He regretted the nuclear weapons test conducted in October 1964 by a 
neighbouring country in defiance, so to speak, of public opinion in 
numerous countries including his own. There was, consequently, an urgent 
need to solve the problem of how to prevent the production and proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and he was pleased that the functions of the Agency in 
regard to such matters were to be reviewed. Y/hile those questions were 
primarily within the field of competence of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations and the Disarmament Commission, the Agency might contemplate 
establishing a system for reporting and registering the international 
transfer of all nuclear mateiials so as to obtain an accurate picture of 
their movement. The United States Government had already decided to report 
to the Agency every six months on the transfer of nuclear materials under 
bilateral agreements and he hoped that other Member States would do the 
same and agree to discuss the practical problems involved in the near 
future™ 
11. The efficacy of the Agency's safeguards system would be greatly 
increased if it were applied to the chemical reprocessing facilities which 
separated the fissionable material from fission products produced in the 
reactor. Now that nuclear energy had become firmly established as a source 
of commercial power it was essential to simplify safeguards regulations so 
as not to undermine the commercial competitiveness of power reactors. 
That could be done if chemical reprocessing facilities were subject 
to safeguards, and he considered that safeguards procedures in respect of 
such facilities should be devised in the near future, taking into account 
the relevant procedures regarding power reactors. 
12. Article III of the Statute authorized the Agency to supply nuclear 
materials for peaceful purposes. At the second regular session of the 
General Conference Japan had stated its intention of buying through the 
Agency 3 tons of natural uranium for use in the first national reactor. 
It had expected that the Agency would be able to function as a wholesaler 
of nuclear materials, as originally intended when it had been established, 
but that expectation had not been realized to any'great extent. He looked 
to its being able to do so in the future and to provide the materials at 
lower prices than those demanded under bilateral agreements. He also hoped 
that the Agency would be able to fulfil its statutory tasks in regard to 
supplying services, equipment and facilities under its long-term programme. 

GC(IX)/OH.94 
page 5 


15. His delegation was glad that the policy of strengthening regional 
activities should have been promoted by holding, for the first time, the 
General Conference away from Headquarters, namely in Asia. It was satisfactory 
to note that after the Conference of Countries in Asia and the 
Pacific for the Promotion of Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, held in 
Tokyo in March 1963, a regional officer for Asia had been appointed and 
tha't the Agency had since continued to operate with due regard for the 
region's special needs. In February Japan had given Thailand, the 
Philippines, Pakistan and China, through the Agency, 1600 capsules for 
radiation tests in research reactors. Many symposia, seminars and 
training courses had been held- in his country under the Agency's auspices. 
The fourth meeting of the International Nuclear Data Scientific -.forking 
Group had been held, with successful results, in September 1965? and the 
Inter-regional Advanced Training Seminar on Radioactive Y/aste Management 
would start on 4 October. He hoped that the Agency would continue to 
promote activities that would meet Asian needs, a task in which Japan would 
co-operate as fully as possible. 
14= In conclusion, he congratulated the Director General on his reappointment 
to the high office he had so ably filled during the past four 
years. 


15. Mr. P5TR0SYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) congratulated 
the President on his election and, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, 
thanked the Japanese Government for making it possible to hold the General 
Conference in Tokyo. 
16. Referring to the Agency's important task of ensuring that.every 
inhabitant of the earth, regardless of where he worked, should be able to 
enjoy the benefits resulting from the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he 
said that international conditions had a considerable effect on the 
accomplishment of the Agency's objectives. 
17. The experience of the post-war years had shown clearly that scientific 
contacts and the joint participation of scientists in symposia and conferences, 
such as the International Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy at Geneva, the recent International Chemistry Congress at 
Moscow and other meetings of scientists, were extremely fruitful and useful 
when they were held in periods when international tension was relaxed. 

GC(IX)/0B.94 
page 6 


On the other'hand, any deterioration in the international atmosphere,and 
any actions dictated by military policy had a deleterious effect on such 
co-operation, 


l8o It had to he recognized that the world ',vas at present confronted with 
a deliberate exacerbation of international tension, resulting from the 
aggression against Viet-Nam and the attempts of the imperialists and 
colonialists to turn hack by force of arms the inevitable historical process 
of the liberation of peoples from the colonial yoke. Aggressive forces 
were preparing to make military use cf atomic energy, which the Agency was 


'supposed to direct into peaceful channels. 


19. The growing arms race - which extended to nuclear weapons as well was 
diverting vast amounts of human resources, effort and intellectual 
energy from peaceful and constructive Y/ork and was making the world 
.situation more unstable, 
In the strategic thinking of the aggressive 
States nuclear weapons now occupied a leading role in wars and conflicts, 
from so-called local wars up to world-wide thermonuclear warfare, 


20, Twenty years before, the nuclear weapon had been used against the 
cities of Hiroshima and Hagasaki, The vision of that crime had not yet 
disappeared from the memory of mankind, the scars of its wounded victims 
had not yet healed, pain was still felt in the hearts of those who had lost 
their relatives and dear ones and yet there was again frank- discussion of 
the question of dealing a nuclear blow to the cities of another Asian 


.country, Viet-Mam, 


21, Soviet scientists were disturbed by the deterioration in the 
international situation, not only because it disrupted the work of scientists 
the world over on the peaceful use of the atom but also because a war at 
the present time could develop into a nuclear and thermonuclear war, A 
number of areas v/ere no?/ the scene of wars and conflicts. Now as perhaps 
never before, therefore, it was necessary to show a sense of responsibility 
and goodwill with a view to solving the present disputes by peaceful means, 


22, The peoples of the world would fail to understand if the General 
. Conference ignored the problems connected with the continuing nuclear 
weapons race and the threatened use of nuclear weapons again. 



GC(IX)/0E.94 
page 7 


23. Referring to Article III.3.1 of the Statute, he recalled that six years 
earlier the United Nations had expressed itself in favour of general and 
complete disarmament and? therefore, in favour of the complete elimination 
of nuclear weapons. At its sixteenth session the United Nations had 
adopted a Declaration on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear and 
Thermonuclear Weapons, in which it had proclaimed that "Any State using 
nuclear and thermonuclear weapons is to he considered as violating the 
Charter of the United Nations, as acting contrary to the laws of humanity 
and as committing a crime against mankind and civilization".—' That 
declaration had been adopted on the initiative of a number of Asian and 
African countries. 
24" In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, it would be most appropriate 
and timely for the ninth General Conference of the agency to come out in 
favour of the earliest possible conclusion of an agreement on prohibiting 
the use of nuclear weapons and to call on all States to contribute to the 


success of negotiations on general and complete disarmament. Such a step 
on the part of the General Conference was all the more natural in that the 
Agency had a special interest in the rapid solution of the disarmament 
problem, since such development would open up tremendous opportunities 
for advances by all States in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


25. In their monument to the victims of the first atom bomb attack, at 
Hiroshima, the Japanese people had inscribed the moving wordss "Rest in 
peace, it shall not happen again". But to ensure that the tragedy of 
Hiroshima should not- be repeated elsewhere in the world, steps had" to be 
taken to outlaw the use of nuclear weapons and to destroy existing stocks 
of such weapons. 
26. The Soviet Union and a number of other countries were introducing a 
draft resolution on prohibiting the use of atomic weapons. The text of 
that resolution was as follows$ 
"The General Conference 


(a) 
Seeking, in accordance with .article II of the Statute, to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy 
to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world, 
4y General Assembly Resolution 1653 (XVI). 



\ 


GC(IX)/OR.94 
page 8 


(b) 
Believing that the tragedy of the Japanese cities of 
Hiroshima and'Nagasaki, subjected to atomic bombing 
twe-nty years ago, should never happen again, 
(c) 
Being deeply aware of the danger of the continued 
nuclear armaments race, which gravely affects progress 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy for the good of 
mankind, 
(d) 
Having in mind that the Agency is a member of the United 
Nations family, and recalling the provisions of the 
declaration on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and 
thermonuclear weapons contained in General Assembly 
resolution 16^5 (XVl), particularly its provisions to 
the effect that the use of nuclear weapons is a direct 
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, is contrary 
to the rules of international law and to the laws 
of humanity, is directed against mankind in general and 
must be considered as a crime against mankind and 
civilization, 
(e) 
Whereas Article III.B.l of the Statute lays down that 
the Agency must conduct its activities in accordance 
with the purposes and principles of the United Nationsto 
promote peace, and international co-operation, and in 
conformity with policies of the United Nations furthering 
the establishment of safeguarded world-wide disarmament 
and in conformity with any international agreements 
entered into pursuant to such policies, and 
(f) 
Believing that this Conference, at which an overwhelming 
majority of the nations of the world is represented, 
could greatly contribute to the cause of universal peace5 
Appeals to all Member States; 


(a) 
To refrain unconditionally from the use of nuclear weapons 
in their international relations; 
(b) 
To take stops to accelerate the conclusion of an international 
agreement on the prohibition of the use of 
nuclear weapons| and 
(c) 
To render assistance in every possible way to the 
success of the negotiations for general and complete 
disarmament, and for the prohibition and destruction 
of nuclear weapons.rl 
27. 
The Soviet delegation was convinced that the adoption of such a 
resolution would represent a definite contribution of'the General Conference 


to the cause of outlawing nuclear weapons. 



GC(1X)/OR.94 
page 9 


28. As well as taking active part in the work of the Agency, the Soviet 
Union had- concluded co-operation agreements under which it was sharing 
many of the results of its work on the peaceful uses of atomic energy with 
several other countries, How agreements had bean concluded with Canada, 
Belgium and the Netherlands, and negotiations had been completed on the 
conclusion of a co-operation agreement with Italy. Under agreements with 
the United Kingdom, France and other countries, scientists were' being 
exchanged and were working together with Soviet scientists for extended 
periods (5 to 12 months) on the solution of various problems in nucloar 
physics ana. high-energy physics. Such agreements also served as the basis . 
for an extensive exchange of scientific and technical information,, 
29. Of late, Soviet co-operation with other countries had assumed new 
formss Soviet scientists were participating in scientific research work 
performed in other countries while foreign scientists were assigned to work 
being done in the Soviet Union, For example, British scientists were working 
at the Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology and at the Moscow 
Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Physics, French scientists were 
at Sukhumi, Tbilisi and Kiev, while American scientists were at the 
Institute of Physics in Erevan, and so on. Young Soviet scientistc were working 
for periods of several months in the United States (at Cambridge 
and at the Brookhaven National Laboratory), in France (at Orsay) and in 
England (at Culham), Soviet scientists were carrying on successful work 
with their colleagues from the socialist countries at the Joint Institute 
for Nuclear Research in Dubna. Soviet scientists were also working for 
extended periods at CERF in collaboration with scientists from other 
countries in organizing very interesting experiments on high-energy physics. 
All those activities bore witness to the possibilities and advantages of 
developing scientific ties and contacts between people working in science, 
30. In the matter of technical assistance, the Soviet Union had, during the 
past year, supplied such assistance to fifteen countries of Eastern Europe, 
Asia and Africa, where various atomic installations had been built, 
including nine reactors, six accelerators, seven radiochemistr.y and physics 
laboratories, etc. Construction wbrk was being continued in Ghana and Iraq, 
where atomic reactors and radiochemical, physics and medical laboratories 
were under construction. Construction of those facilities would be completed 

GC(IX)/OR,94 
page 10 


in 1966-67, In August 1965, with the assistance of Soviet specialists, 


a 2-MW(th) reactor had started up in the Democratic People's Republic of 


Korea. 


31. The construction of atomic centres in those countries had laid the 
foundation for extensive scientific research on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, carried out by skilled national personnel who had received 
training in the Soviet Union during recent years, 
32. Particular attention should be paid to one form of assistance 
provided by the countries in the socialist community, namely the establishment 
of medical centres in the developing countries within the framework of 
the technical assistance supplied by the Agency, He recalled that in 1962 
the socialist countries had put forward a proposal concerning the creation 
of six medical radiological centres equipped with modern facilities and 
radiation sources and of six physics laboratories for the training of staff 
from the assisted countries. 
33• The socialist countries had declared at that time that they would 


supply free of charge all the equipment for one third of those centres. 


But that offer had not been supported by the Western Powers and at the 


previous Conference the socialist countries had decided to give that help 


despite the unwillingness of others to take part, 


34. In the light of the obligations it had assumed, the Soviet Union had 
agreed to supply equipment for two centres in 1965. In accordance with the 
Board's decision, that equipment was to be transferred to Morocco and 
Pakistan, The Soviet Union had agreed to supply equipment for another- two 
centres in 1966, He hoped that the Board would prepare in advance the 
necessary proposals with regard to the countries to which the equipment 
was to be sent, 
3"5. Each radiological centre supplied with Soviet equipment under the terms 


of the offer by the socialist countries was provided with Soviet gammatherapy 
apparatus,- short-focus X-ray therapy apparatus and the requisite ancillary 


dosimetric equipment. The gammatherapy apparatus had a 4000-curie cobalt-60 
charge and was used for the static irradiation of deep tumours. The X-ray 


therapy apparatus was intended for the treatment of surface tumours and 
various skin diseases. 



GC(IX)/0K.94 
page 11 


36. The- Sovi,et -Union -would neet the cost of transporting that equipment -to ' 
the recipient,countries, of working out a. plan for its installation, of 
engaging experts, for: assembling and preparing it for operation and of 
training -national workers on the' spot as well as ..training the necessary 
number of experts from recipient countries in the Soviet Union itself. 
37. He hoped that other advanced countries would follow the example set 
by the offer by the socialist countries for the creation of radiological 
centres in the developing countries. That offer, now in course of 
implementation, provided new opportunities for extending technical 
assistance. 
58. During the past year the Agency had on the whole done useful work in 
the interest of Member States. However', his delegation could not fully 
associate itself with the optimistic appraisal of the results and1 efficacy 
of its scientific programme. His delegation was opposed to frittering away ••. 
resources on numerous scientific investigations, often lacking in generalinterest, 
and to duplicating the work of other international' -organizations. 
39. It was also dissatisfied at the lack of due co-operation between the 
agency and certain specialized agencies of the United Nations on a number of 
research topics which fell within the competence of those agencies rather than 
within thai: of the Agency. The latter should establish closer relations with 
WHO for example. It could join' forces with WHO on such problems as the 
elaboration.xof. new diagnos-tic methods and treatment involving the use of 
radioisotope sources and irradiation. It was also" desirable "to .-improve 
relations with. UNESCO in regard to training and to make better "usfe-of- that - • 
organization's experience. ' -. ..-,,.. 
40. The Agency's scientific work could also be made more offecti'vd-Lby 
improved internal organization. Ir. its scientific activity .the Agency should.> 
give special attention to matters not being handled by others. The "/ork on 
the industrial application of radioisotopes also' ought to be ex,pand.ed. 
41. One aspect of the Agency'1 s- activity on which he wished to comment \yas 
the project for setting up within the igenoy an international mechanized 
information "centre which would use. a computer for rapid data retrieval. -.In 
the Soviet Union much was being done to establish such systems-, which would' 
make it possible to obtain, assemble and give out the necessary information. ..,~ 
to scientists and .engineers. However, th'e" creation of national computer "centres 

GC(IX)/OR.94 
page 12 


for processing and retrieving information did not solve the problem of the 
wide and rapid dissemination of information to experts in all countries. The 


Soviet Union supported the Agency's initiative regarding the creation of a 
mechanized information centre, in the belief that it would contibute to the 


development of atomic science and technology for peaceful purposes in 
developing countries and that it would also enable advanced countries to 


exchange scientific and technical information more quickly and fully by 
means of wide international co-operation, 


42. His delegation also approved '.vhat the Agency was doing to disseminate 
and analyse information on the economic aspects of nuclear energy. Useful 
work was also being done in the matter of collecting information about the 
desalination of sea and salt water by atomic reactors. 
43. The Agency's existing programme could be fully carried oat without 
increasing the budget. As made clear by the Director General to the Board, 
the 1965 deficit had been largely covered from internal resources, which 
meant that reserves existed which must be used. However, the draft budget 
for 1966 was to involve an increase of nearly 11$. Such an increase was 
higher than the rate of increase in the national revenue of Member States 
or the rate of growth envisaged in the long-term programme. The increase 
was chiefly to cover increases in staff salaries and would not affect the 
amount of technical assistance given by the Agency. 
44. He was bound to draw attention to the serious shortcomings in the 
Agency's staff policy and particularly to the unjustifiably high number of 
permanent contracts given to senior staff members from Western countries. 
45. In conclusion he wished the Conference success and hoped that a spirit 
of co-operation and understanding would prevail, 
46. Mr. TOBAMY (United ..rat Republic) made the following statement's 
(l) "I congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on your unanimous election. 
We are all sure that under your capable guidance the Conference will be a 
success. We are deeply impressed by the hospitality and kindness of the 
Japanese Government and people, -ns one of those who are visiting Japan for 
the first time, I should like to express sincerely to you and the Japanese 
people our heartfelt wishes for lasting peace and continued prosperity, which 
has enabled Japan to achieve so much, particularly in the use and development 
of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 
3/ This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's request under 
Rule 92(b) of the Conference's Rules of Procedure. 


GC(L£)/OR.94 
page 13 


(2) "7.e want to congratulate you. Dr. Eklund, as Director General of "the 
Agency, on your-achievements during the last four years "in the Agency. The 
Agency has, no douht, progressed towards more efficiency and has' rendered 
considerable services to the developing countries,, but we are all aware of 
the fact that such countries still need'rnu'ph more 'than they get from the 
Agency, and I sincerely hope bhat you, Dr.'Sklund, will be able in the future 
to convert our hopes into deeds and facts. 
(3) "My country, the United .^rab Republic, has been,' and Js, always ready to 
assist you and. the Agency in every possible way. \w*e offered, and are still 
willing to offer you, the services of a number of distinguished scientists and 
experts to serve the international community on the Agency's staff. Our 
scientists and the Atomic Energy Establishment are also willing to extend 
their services in the' international field in co-o^ratlon with the Agency 
whenever needed. Jviy Government is willing to increase its voluntary contribution 
to the agency at any time the Board of Governors considers that 
that offers the.way out of the Agency's financial situation. 
(4). "The increase in the membership of the Agency confirms our belief that 
it is.still a healthy instrument capable of assisting the developing countries. 
We welcome the increase in membership, in particular among the Arab an,.. . 
African'States, which shows that the African peoples look with confidence to 
the .agency for the contribution it can make to the prosperity of mankind and 
that,our continent counts on being rightly and fully represented on its organs. 


(5) "The fact that we are meeting in Japan with the noble aim of using atomic 
energy to promote the peace, prosperity and welfare of mankind evokes memories 
of events which took place a number of years ago.- in the lifetime of our 
generation - and, with those events in mind, it is our'roost earnest desire", 
to devote all our mental efforts and abilities to ensure a better life for 
those already enjoying a high standard of living and to create new 
potentialities for the many nations which need to provide coming generations 
with the essential means to ensure,a decent standard of living. 
(6) "It is our ardent hope that man will never be allowed to use the energy 
released from the atom against him&elf, and all of us must act with wisdom 
and energy to ensure this end. Recent steps such as Resolution l653(^Vl) of 
the United Nations General Assembly, the. Moscow treaty of August 1963> "the 
declaration of the African summit conference in Cairo in July 19^4j declaring 
Africa a denuclearized continent, the declaration of the summit conference 
of non-aligned countries in Cairo in October 1964; and the deliberations of the 
18—Kation Committee on Disarmament in Geneva, in.which my country has played 
an*active role from the beginning, justify the hope.and give grounds for 
optimism that we may one day roach an agreement to release peace-loving nations 
from the fear and. tension causod by the possible use of atomic explosions in 
international disputes or for other reasons. 
(7) "In view of the fact, that we'.have come to this part of the globe to 
discuss all the possible peaceful uses of atomic energy, we cannot overlookthe 
importance of realizing.the necessity to co-oporate with the 700 million 
people of China'and all the potential results of such co-operation. The 
recognition and,admission of the People's Republic of China to the 
international.body of the United "Nations may very well be the natural and 
'logical moans for reaching a proper understanding and securing peaceful cooperation 
with China and thus promoting the Agency's work for peace. 

GC(IX)/OH.94 
page 14 


(8) niAl the atomic energy activities in my country are fully devoted to 
peace. It is for that reason that we have approved the agency's Revised 
Safeguards System as one of the means of controlling the future possibilities 
of producing atomic weapons by countries which are not yet members of the 
co-called atomic club; provided the system is applied without any discrimination 
whatsoever between nations and that it does not adversely affect 
or hinder scientific or technological development or normal industrial 
development in developing countries. But this raises the following questions. 
Can the system achieve this aim in practice? Can it be effectively applied 
in one way or another in all areas of the world in order to eliminate the 
dangerous possibility ox building up resources and potentialities leading to 
the production of atomic bombs in a given country? Can the system be really 
useful in sensitxve areas where these potentialities are close to the stage 
of producing atomic weapons? v/c believe the system could be effective when 
applied to reactors and atomic facilities already in existence which are 
capable of producing such disastrous weapons in the foreseeable future. A 
decision of that kind needs much courage on the part of the Member States of 
the Agency and would require full understanding and co-operation from the 
great Powers which have provided such potential resources to sensitive areas 
in the past. With those considerations in mind, we ha-ve approved the Revised 
Safeguards System and contributed, to the best of our ability, to the discussions 
on this subject in the hope that the system will be applied in the 
near future, without any discrimination whatsoever, to all installations 
constituting a potential danger to peace anywhere in the world. The Agency 
already has reason to be proud of its success in convincing its Member States 
that they should agree to apply the system,, thus contributing in a practical 
manner to the assurance of peace, 
(9) "I shall try to review in brief some of the developments in the United 
Arab Republicrs atomic energy programme. Significant progress and a 
remarkable advance has been achieved in the various fields of nuclear 
physics, rc-ic'j- oec]-u:c.3 ogy,- nuclear chemistry, reactor physics, neutron 
physic^j nuclear engineering; reactor materials and metallurgy, exploration 
and development of local ores, scientific instrumentation for research, 
application of radioisotopes in medical, industrial, biological and 
agricultural research as well as ra.diation protection and dosimetry. 
(3.0) "Our research facilities have provided many scientists from a number of 
Arab and. .Ifrioan countries with opportunities to solve many problems of a 
scion'.if ic and regional nature. 
(11) ''v</e have extended our new programmes to the faculties in our universities 
and organized specialised courses leading to diplomas and higher degrees in 
nuclear science and technology. In doing 'so the universities are able to 
satisfy oar requirements for large numbers of nuclear scientists and engineers. 
(12) "I should like to stress that we warmly welcome international co-operation 
in our country with a view to utilizing science to solve various problems 
confronting us. One of the interesting problems which has recently received 
wide publicity involves the application of modern science to the ancient 
Egyptian wonders, i.e. the application of high-energy cosmic-ray mesons to 
probe the structure of Egyptian pyramids in order to find chambers or cavities 
not known at present. This project is being jointly carried out by the 
Ain Shams University in Cairo and the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, California. 

GC(IX)/OR.94 
page 15 


(lj) "The Middle Eastern Radioisotope Centre established in Cairo two years 
ago, in co-operation with the Agency, has proved to he very valuable to the 
areaj 107 specialists were successfully trained in radioisotope techniques 


covering the fields of medicine, agriculture and industry. It is also 


significant to note that all the trainees are post-graduates from the 


developing countries of Tunisia, Sudan, Iraq, Kuwait, Ghana, Nigeria, Libya, 
Morocco, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Yemen, Saudi .^rabia and the United xirab 
Republic. 


(14) "Research projects of a regional nature have been carried out or 
sponsored by the Cairo Centre in the territory of Member States. This 
reaearch includess (a) Underground water studies in Kuwait, Such studies 
will also be carried out in the Kingdom of Libya^ (b) agricultural research 
on salinity and fertilization and their effects on crop production in the 
Republic of Tunisia. Similar research will also be carried out in the 
Republic of Iraqj (c) .i study of factors affecting the production and quality 
of olive oil in the Republic of Tunisia; (d) A study of the water-retaining 
capacity of different soil strata in the Republic of ^lgeria§ (e) Research 
on fruit-fly irradiation in the United Arab Republic This research will 
also bo carried out in the Republic of the Sudan; (f) Research on olive-fly 
irradiation in the Republic of Tunisia and mosquito irradiation in the 
United Arab Republic5 (g) Bilharziasis studies in the United Arab Republic. 
Such studies will also be carried out in the Republic of Iraq:; (h) Thyroid 
studies in the Republic of Sudan. These studies will also be carried out in 
the Republic of Iraqp (j) Research on drainage in the Republic of Iraqi and 


(k) Research on genetic effects of radiaxion in Jordan. This research will 
also be carried out in the Republic of Sudan. Experience has shown that the 
provision of equipment for trained specialists through the Agency or under 
other assistance programmes is necessary to enable them to make the best use 
of their experience in serving their people. It can thus bo foreseen that 
the Cairo Gentre will be able to render extensive and valuable services in 
the field of research throughout the area, in addition to what it has already 
achieved. It should be noted that any such centres it is decided to establish 
should be set up in areas that, in fact, need their services. 
(15) "With regard to our, nuclear power and water dosalihation programme, 
our engineers, in co-operation with our consulting engineering firms, are 
completing their analysis of the tenders for the construction of the first 
nuclear power plant in the United -irab Republicf this will be a dual-purpose 
150-MW(e) plant at Sidi Krier, west of ..Alexandria, to which a desalination 
plant with a capacity of 20 000 cubic metres a day will be attached. The 
plant will be connected to the electricity grid to supply the Alexandria 
industrial area and to provide desalinated water for our agricultural 
demonstration experiment. ^ team sent by the United States atomic Energy 
Commission last December to study the project has presented a valuable report 
which bears out our expectations and studies regarding the economic 
production of special crops, using desalinated water. We believe that the 
succes-sful completion of this experiment will benefit many nations in the 
arid regions and will contribute to the international effort aiming at solving 
the long-term problem of fresh-water requirements which was clearly defined 
at the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of atomic Energy. 



GC(IX)/OR.94 


page 16 


(16) "The di scovery of uranium ores and the enormous amounts of thorium 
extracted from monazite occurring in the deposits of Mack sand in the 
northern part of the Kile Delta offer remarkable prospects for the future 
production of fuel elements. 
(17) "I wholeheartedly believe that the Agency can be, and will be, one of 
the most important organs in the United Nations family in serving humanity, 
in serving all of us, through the co-operation of all of us. I wish you, 
Dr. Eklund, success in your coming term of office and I thank, once again, 
the Japanese people for their kindness, charm, hospitality and efficiency, 
as manifested in the President of our Conference." 
.47. Mr. POPOV (Bulgaria) congratulated the President on his election 


and thanked the Japanese Government and the municipal authorities of Tokyo 


for the hospitality extended to the General Conference. Twenty years 


previously the Japanese people had experienced the destructive force of one 


of the greatest discoveries of the human intellect. Now it was in the van 


of the struggle to prohibit miolear weapons. 


48. The adoption of a resolution on the prohibition of such weapons at 
the present session would be extremely valuable for the Agency's future 
activity and the welfare of mankind and would be particularly appropriate 
if it took place in Tokyo. 
49• He noted with satisfaction the efforts made by the Agency during its 


eight years of existence to ensure that a growing number of countries 


benefited from scientific and technical advances in the utilization of 


atomic energy for peaceful purposes. He stressed the Agency's role in 


organizing the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 


Atomic Energy, which had made it possible to estimate progress in the . 


construction and operation of nuclear pov/er stations and to assess the 


economic prospects of nuclear energy. 


50. New and major problems of nuclear science' such as that of nuclear 
electric power, thermonuclear synthesis or the direct transformation of 
atomic powBr into electric power were of prime importance to modern physics 
and of interest to most Member States. It was therefore entirely logical 
and justified firmly to expand the Agency's study of such problems, as that 
would"truly "contribute to progress and economic advance throughout the world. 
51. Bulgaria was also interested in solving those problems and was ready to 
co-operate by means of bilateral or multilateral agreements with a view to 
using the technical and economic possibilities offered by modern science in 

GC(IX)/ORo94 
page 17 


the most rational way. It was also willing to co-operate in solving other 
problems of utilizing atomic energy for peaceful purposes. He was grateful 
to the Director General for visiting.Bulgaria the previous autumn where he 
had met scientists and public men and had exchanged views on utilizing 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes as well as on the question of closer 
collaboration between the Agency and national atomic energy commissions. 


52. The Bulgarian delegation fully appreciated the value of the Agency's 
activity in regard to the application of radioisotopes in medicine, 
agriculture, radiobiology, hydrology, chemistry and physics.. It would 
nevertheless like the structure of the annual report to conform to that 
of the programme,, which would make it possible to analyse more precisely both 
the activity of the Agency and its results. The report also seemed on 
examination not to reflect sufficiently certain sections of that activity,, 
For example, some additional details on scientific documentation would be 
usefulo It would also be desirable for the report to contain not merely 
a simple list but an evaluation of what had been done.. 
53o Sub-paragraph 7(a) .f "the introduction to the report stated that. 
"the technical assistance programme has continued to be hampered by 
financial stringency", which meant that the Agency's financial resources 
were inadequate to meet the demands made by certain States. It would 
therefore be advisable to modify the regulations on .the acceptance of 
gifts in kind. The regulations in force for voluntary contributions did 
not help to increase the resources intended for the provision of assistance 
to developing countries,, Indeed, the need for making those contributions 
in convertible currency was insisted upon, although many countries were 
unable to do so in spite of their desire to lend aid„ 


54. For that reason, a group of socialist countries, including Bulgaria, 
had in 1962 proposed to the Agency a technical assistance programme for 
developing countries drawn up on the basis of gifts in kind. The General 
-Conference had approved that programme at its seventh session. 
Unfortunately, 
the Secretariat had been unable to -find the means for the complete realization 
of the programme, and the advanced Western countries had done nothing to 
co-operate with the socialist countries. As a result, the socialist countries 
had decided to carry out their part of the programme independently of the 
participation of other Governments. Under the programme, Czechoslovakia 
had already provided radiotherapy equipment for Algeria, while action was 
now under consideration in the light of the Board's decision regarding the 



GC(IX)/OEo94 
page 18 


provision of radiotherapy equipment to Pakistan and Morocco by the Union 
of Soviet Socialist 'Republics and to Afghanistan by Hungary." Bulgaria was 
also prepared to honour its commitments under the programme5 it would 
participate in the specified proportion in providing, together.with Poland, 
radiodiagnosis equipment to any Member State which requested it through the 
Agency, 


55. He hoped that the Secretariat would he able to give a greater number 
of young scientists the possibility of acquiring experience in the large 
study centres of the most advanced countries. The financial resources set 
aside for that purpose should not be reduced in favour of other activities 
which were not at the present time of interest to the majority of Member 
States, such as the activity of the Laboratory, which had been set up to 
give certain services to Member States rather than as a nuclear research 
centre. 
560 The Bulgarian delegation felt that the work of the Laboratory bore no 


direct relationship to the functions of the Agency. The constant increase 


in its activities was disturbing, and if it was not restricted no funds 
would be sufficient to cover it. A new increase was proposed for 1966. 
Furthermore, the Laboratory's activities were not financed in accordance" 
with the requirements of the Statute, i.e. under the Operational Budget. 


The Bulgarian delegation felt that it was high time to draw up a 


programme for the' Laboratory in accordance with the Statute and' with the 


immediate tasks of- the Agency. 

57• The Bulgarian delegation was opposed to the proposed llfo increase in the 
budget for 1966. The biennial programme did not provide for any substantial 
extension of the Agency's activities in 1966 and there was consequently no 
justification for such a large increase. The annual rate of increase of 
the budgets of United Nations organizations did not normally exceed 5'fo 
and there was no reason why the Agency should be an exception. It was 
necessary to take steps to stabilize the budget and, in particular, salaries 
of staff members. There were various internal ways in which savings could be 
effected under various sections of the Agency's budget. . • ' •. 

58. As for the Revised Safeguards System, Bulgaria had always been opposed 
to the use of nuclear materials for military "purposes. With the exception of 
certain provisions, the new system"seemed more flexible and to represent less 
of a hindrance to the economic development of the countries concerned. 

GC(IX)/OR.94 
page 19 


59. The Bulgarian Government was convinced that a radical solution to the 
problem of world peace could only he achieved through a solution of the main 
problem at issue, viz, general and complete disarmament under international 
control. He recalled that a request had been addressed by the Secretary-
General of the United Nations to the Agency calling upon the latter to make 
a study of the economic and social consequences of disarmament in the field 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. In 1964 the Agency had drawn up a 
document on the subject and it was to be hoped not only that it would continue 
the study but also that it would take concrete steps to contribute to 
disarmament, Unfortunately, it, was scarcely possible to create- a favourable 
climate at a time when, not far from where the General Conference vras meeting he 
was thinking particularly of Yiet~Nam -, there were areas at war which 
represented a threat to world peace* 
6O0 In conclusion he hoped that the General Conference would take such 
decisions as would enhance the prestige of the Agency and would contribute 
to the development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy,, 

61. Mr. LEON ANTICH (Cuba) said that his delegation wished first to 
express its gratitude to the Government of Japan for having made it possible 
to hold the ninth regular session of the General Conference in Tokyo. ' Japan, 
the country which had suffered the terrible and destructive nuclear 
bombardment of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, was opening its doors twenty years 
later to offer yet another opportunity of discussing, analysing and 
accelerating the peaceful use of atomic energy in the fields of welfare and 
economic development. 
62. The aims set out in the Agency's own Statute were also those' of the 
United Nations and should be the common objectives of all countries represented 
at the General Conference. Whoever subscribed to those aims must be firmly 
committed to the campaign for world peace, the inalienable right of all 
countries, including those not represented at the session. 
63. The human face was at present passing through moments of tension and 
danger^' some regions were under the shadow of aggression, whilst in others 
aggression,had already broken out, and in all the danger of the use of 
nuclear and thermonuclear.weapons threatened the destruction which Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki had undergone. Cuba had not renounced and would never renounce 
its right to sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity5 it had 
not ceased and would not cease to give unfailing support to the just struggle 

GC(IX)/OR,94 
page 20 


of peoples for national liberation and the effective establishment of their 


international rights as sovereign States. Nor did it intend to waive its 
right, or fail in its duty, now or at any time, to co-operate in the cause 


of peace and international understanding. 


64. His delegation would support the resolution introduced by the delegate of 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, believing it to be a fruitful and 
effective approach to the problem at issue. He appealed to the delegations of 
all Member States to support the resolution, -and urged the General Conference 
to use all the means at its disposal with a view to taking rapid and effective 
steps to ensure that the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes became an 
accomplished fact in the very near future. 
65. Mr. OTERO MVASCUBS (Spain) congratulated the President on his 
election,, which was a tribute not only to his personal qualities but also to 
his country, which had made such admirable progress in all fields of science 
and technology. 
66. Spain had continued to collaborate with the Agency during the past year, 
providing experts and fellowships for students from other countries. It had 
also contributed $10 000 to the General Fund and proposed to make a similar 
contribution in the present year. Particular importance attached to the 
Agency's work in the field of technical assistance, from which Spain had also 
benefited on a number of occasions. 
67o Considerable success had been achieved in connection with the drafting of 
safety standards, the siting of power plants and other nuclear installations, 
the safe transport of nuclear materials, and the provision and calibration,of 
secondary standards for isotopes and other sources of ionising radiation5 it 
was to be hoped that work in those fields would be stepped up in the near future. 


68„ The same comment applied to the Agency's scientific and technical meetings 
on topics of general interest, which had had a similar record of success and in 
which Spanish scientists and engineer's had collaborated. The positive results 
achieved would be attributed to the endeavours of the Director General, who was 
to be congratulated on all he had done in the last four years. He wished the 
Director General every success in his new term of officef Spain would certainly 


support his re-appointment. 



GC(IX)/OR„94 
page 21 


69o He would follow up his introductory remarks by giving a brief outline of 
the work being done by Spain in the nuclear field. New uranium deposits had been 
found and it was hoped it would be possible to increase the present reserves of 
10 500 tons of U_0o "three or four times in the near future. It was planned to 
set up a new plant for concentrating uranium in the Salamanca region with a 
capacity of 1000 or 1200 tons a day. An increasing amount of work was being 
done in connection with uranium purification, the fabrication of fuel-element 
prototypes and the processing of irradiated fuel., although the main effort in 
the latter field v/as being made at the joint plant at ISol within the framework 
of the European Nuclear Energy Agency. 

70. The Moncloa National Research Centre already had a staff of 1100 research 
workers, including 280 university graduates. The work done at the Centre covered 
nuclear physics,.radiochemistry, the production, distribution and controlled use 
of radioisotopes, metallurgy, and reactor physics and engineering. 
71. In connection with the problem of water desalination, it was worth noting 
that a conventional plant had been brought into operation which had solved the 
water-shortage problem in one of the Canary Islands. 
72. The enormous drop that had taken place in the cost of nuclear electricity 
had had an immediate-effect'in Spain and nuclear plants could now compete with 
thermal plants in that country. Near Madrid a 15O-MW PTO power plant was being 
built§ work on another plant - a 46O-KW BfR station, selected in an international 
competition - was beginning in the Ebro Valley. Advanced studies were being made 
-in connection with a third plant - a Sranco-rSpanish 500-MW project based on a 
natural-uranium, graphite-moderated gas-cooled reactor. Gpvernment authorization 
had been requested for another 350-MW plant. Spain would thus have an installed 
capacity of I460 MW within the next five years. 


75. A special agreement had been concluded with the Government of the United 
States which would enable Spain to send uranium concentrates to that country with 
a view to obtaining the enriched uranium needed to fuel the first of the abovementioned 
plants. 
74• So far Spain had selected plants of known and proven design but it was now 
anxious to build one that would guarantee better fuel utilization and operate on 
natural uranium. 



GC(IX)/0Ho94' 
page 22 


75. Work had been going on over the past five years on the prototype of a 
heavy-water-moderated, organic-cooled reactor which had very promising 
characteristics. 
76. It was to he hoped that a similar development in the use of nuclear 
electricity would take place not only in the highly industrialized nations 
hut also in countries''whose economic levels corresponded to that of Spain, 
and that hundreds of nuclear power plants and fu3l plants would begin to operate 
in the next few years <, 
77. Spain was very interested in the safeguards system that had been approved 
provisionally by the Board and submitted to the General Conference for final 
approval, since the proposed scheme covered the whole range of installations 
from chemical plants for the purification of uranium to nuclear power plants 
with their ancillary equipment, as well as research and materials testing 
reactors and the various facilities connected with the fuel cycle. 
"Jdc Within the next ten years it could be expected that hundreds of groups of 
inspectors would be engaged in carrying out constant checks on nuclear facili


ties. Quite apart from the strain that those activities would impose on the 
Agency's budget, which had hitherto been kept within very reasonable limits, 
it was clear that they would tend to hamper the peaceful development of nuclear 
energyo 


79. While there could be no doubt that assistance received in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy must not be diverted to military uses, he nevertheless 
wished to repeat what he had said at the eighth session of the General Conference, 
namely that safeguards should be limited to enriched uranium or plutonium 
facilities, where they should be applied as stringently as was necessary. On 
the other hand, the idea of exercising control over the nuclear industry as a 
whole-while still feasible at the present time - would very soon cease to be 
feasible. 
80„ Spain, which had concentrated all its efforts on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, considered that the value of the safeguards system was chiefly 
psychological. It was designed to create a favourable atmosphere for controlled 
nuclear disarmament and emphasized the desire of the majority of nations to 



GC(IX)/OR,94 
page' 23 


confine .their efforts to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. There was a 
danger?-however,- that if attempts were made to provide for all eventualities rather 
than to -concentrate on underscoring the desire of countries to work 
along peaceful lines - there would he a tendency to delay and hold up the 
peaceful development of nuclear energy, which? as the French delegate had 
pointed.out, was a guarantee of international peace and understanding. 


81. " Mr. HUANG (China) said the Chinese delegation associated itself with 
the speakers who had expressed deep appreciation to the Japanese Government 
and people for their very warm reception and generous hospitality. It also 
wished to- congratulate the Secretariat on its excellent preparatory work for 
the Conference. 
82. The revelation of the destructive power of the atom twenty years ago had 
been followed by two historical developments: the establishment of the Agency 
in 1957 and the partial nuclear test-ban treaty in 1963. Those two accomplishments 
had provided the basis for hopes that atoms could be harnessed to serve 
man instead of destroying him. Unless atomic energy could be successfully 
developed solely in the interest of man's welfare and happiness, the future of 
humanity was in great danger, The Chinese policy of developing atomic energy 
exclusively for peaceful purposes had been clearly stated by President Chiang 
Kai-shek at the commissioning of the National Tsinghua University's nuclear 
reactor in December 1961, That policy coincided with the efforts of the 
Agency to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world. At a Conference concerned with 
the peaceful uses of atomic power, the new threat to peace in Asia could not 
fail to be a cause for concern, 
83. The leading stumbling block in the way of world peace was poverty, What 
the developing nations needed today was to be able to utilize advanced scientific 
and technical knowledge to overcome poverty and gradually raise themselves 
to the level of well-being in the scientifically advanced nations. The 
gap might take some time to close, but efforts must be made to narrow it. He 
himself had expressed the same idea when he had spoken at the seventh session 
of the General Conference in favour of the "democratization of science". His 
delegation's thinking was still based on that concept, which it would like to 
see embodied in the guiding principles of the Agency, 

GC(IX)/OR,94 
page 24 


84. In connection-with the development of the safeguards system, a trilateral 
treaty had been signed at Vienna in September between the Republic of China., 
the United States of America and the Agency, On 25 May l$6^?-he had represented 
his Government at the signing of an inventory listing all facilities 
supplied by the United States and the uses to which they were being put. The 
inventory had been communicated to the Agency. The Chinese Government had 
also given notice of its readiness to receive visits by Agency inspectors. 
85.. The Argonne National Laboratory in the United States and the Institute of 
Nuclear Science of the National Tsinghua University in Taiwan had been linked 
as "sister laboratories" in February 1965 with a view to improved co-operation 
in the future, Three Argonne scientists had visited Taiwan and lent valuable 
assistance to Chinese research in nuclear physics and isotope chemistry, 
Tsinghua graduates had gone to the United States and Western Germany for 
advanced studies and some of them had been awarded Agency fellowships. Those 
v/ho were now back in Taiwan were actively engaged in the study of nuclear 
physics. The Chinese Government had already allocated.funds for setting, up 
a national physics research centre at Tsinghua for use by Chinese physicists, 


86, High praise was due to the Agency for its technical assistance, which had 
enabled the Republic of China to carry out extensive studies on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. In 1957 "the Medical College of the National Taiwan 
University had started to use radioisotopes for medical diagnosis and treatment. 
Development had been fairly rapid because the country was now able to 
produce short-lived radioisotopes itself. Extensive results had been reported 
in the fields of internal medicine, ophthalmology, dermatology and oncology. 


87. The Agency had also given continuous support to his country's efforts to 
improve rice varieties through the use of atomic energy. The Institute of 
Botany of the Academia Sinica under Br, Li Hsien-wen had for nine years been 
engaged in joint research work with the College of Agriculture of the Taiwan 
Provincial Chung Hsing University. AS a result of their findings, it had 
been possible to raise rice production per unit area and thus to help feed the 
fast-growing population, China was prepared to share the results of its 
experience with, other rice-growing countries. 

GC(IX)/ORV94 
page 25 ' 


88, ..Power generation -was one of China's most important problems at present 
and it hoped to. have its first atomic power plant around 197Q. An important 
part in the country's plans for nuclear power generation was played by the 
Agency's regulations governing civil liability for nuclear damage, transportation 
of nuclear fuels and radiation safety standards. The Chinese Government 
hoped that the Agency would also support its subsequent nuclear activities. 


8.9. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Agency for its valuable technical 
assistance to the Republic of China, That assistance had been utilized to 
the maximum. Sincere appreciation was also due to the various industrially 
developed nations for letting China share the fruits of their experience and 
scientific knowledge, 
90, Mr. 'SCOTT ( IVew Zealand)? after congratulating the President on his 
election and expressing his delegation's thanks to the Japanese Government for 
the excellent arrangements which had been made for the present session, said 
that Japan's encoura'ging record of progress in the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and her consistent stand internationally against the 
development of the wax-like uses of atomic energy could well be emulated by 
other-countries. 


91, Hew Zealand welcomed the increase in the Agency's membership. .Xt. .believed 
that there were many benefits which membership of the Agency-could bring.to 
developing countries. • • --''••'•

92, New Zealand, too. as a major world producer of wool, dairy and forest 
products, meat and other food, could not afford to delay the evaluation of 
recent developments in the relevant practical applications of nuclear science 
and there were now in the country several groups concerned with various aspects 
of nuclear science and technology, at governmental level, in the universities 
and in industry. Most of the universities now provided sound training in 
nuclear physics, radiochemistry and radiation chemistry, and some university 
departments were carrying out important research in the biological sciences. 
The Institute of luclear Sciences, set up by the Government in'1958 as a 
national research centre, had established an international" reputation "in 
certain specialist sectors of work, principally in the geochemlcal field. 
Some fifty laboratories throughout the country were using radioisotopes in 



GC(IX)/OR.94 
page 26 


varying degrees as a tool for research., mostly in agriculture and biology, A 
limited number of commercial firms were using small radioactive sources as 
production aids. One firm had we11-advanced plans for the erection of a 
pharmaceutical sterilization plant of 150 000 curies of cobalt, 


93. In medical diagnosis and therapy New Zealand was well advanced. For 
several years past,, thanks to the adequate provision of equipment and a planned 
programme of staffing,. New Zealand had had the highest density, in relation to 
population, of therapeutic nuclear medical facilities in the world. In fields 
other- than medical, immediate planned expansion, involving both equipment and 
staff, was necessary if New Zealand was to reap the full benefits of nuclear 
science. The installation of a nuclear power station planned for about- 1977 
could be expected to stimulate interest in nuclear research. It should moreover 
be borne in mind that many qualified New Zealanders had gone to work in 
other countries where they had greatly contributed to the successful development 
of nuclear science and its practical application, 
94. To turn to the work of the Agency, his delegation endorsed the opinion of 
the Director General that one of the most significant achievements of the past 
year had been the unanimous acceptance of the Bevised Safeguards System by the 
Board. New Zealand had fully and consistently supported the imposition of 
safeguards against diversion of nuclear materials and equipment provided by 
the Agency to non-peaceful purposes. The obligation to impose such safeguards 
was a statutory requirement. Moreover it was, in his view, essential 
that the new provisions be given wide effect as soon as possible, both in 
order that the production of nuclear weapons might be restricted to as few 
countries as possible and because failure to secure adequate safeguards 
machinery could well place in jeopardy the future of the Agency as a supplier, 
or a broker in the supply, of nuclear materials and facilities.. The new 
text was the result of long and careful discussion, and his delegation was 
prepared to accept it as it stood. His Government also considered that it 
was imperative to expand the very useful work the Agency was already doing to 
assist the developing countries through its fellowship and training schemes 
and had therefore decided for the first time since New Zealand had joined the 
Agency to make a voluntary contribution to the Agency's funds commencing with 
the sum of $5000 in 1966, 

GC(IX)/PR.94 
page 27 


95* In conclusion, .the New Zealand delegation wished to express its appreciation 
of the.dedicated.leadership given to the Agency's Secretariat by the 
Director General, to whose re-appointment it gave its unqualified support. 


96. Mr. SOLE (South Africa) associated his delegation with the•congratulations 
to the President and expressions of appreciation to the Japanese 
authorities. 
97- In past addresses to the Conference he had refrained from referring to 
South African progress in the field of atomic energy and had concentrated 
rather on the particular problems with which the Agency had been confronted. 
On the present occasion;, however, he felt it might be appropriate to say a few 
words about developments in his own country, ,since 1965 bad been something of 
a milestone for South Africa in its nuclear energy programme. The year had 
seen, for example, the inauguration of the research reactor SAFARI I, which, 
with a full power capacity of 20 megawatts, was at present the twelfth largest 
research reactor in the world and the largest in the Southern Hemisphere. The 
South African Government had stressed in that regard that South Africa was now, 
and always would be, happy to share with others the fruits of its research, 
more particularly with its neighbours on the continent of Africa. 

98. Secondly, it was of interest to record, especially in the light of 
numerous forecasts as to a possible shortage of uranium in the 1970's, that 
as a result of new areas which were being developed in South Africa, the 
country's estimated reserves of $8 a pound uranium had now risen from 147 000 
to 180 000 tons of concentrates, thus placing South Africa second only to 
Canada in the world, in terms of exploitable uranium resources. 
99• Thirdly, like a number of other countries, South Africa had concluded an . 
agreement transferring to the Agency the responsibility for the administration 
of the safeguards provided for in its bilateral arrangement with the United 
States. 


100. In view of the fact that it had in the past followed an independent line 
on questions of safeguards policy, declining to align itself with one or other 
group of Powers, it was proper that he should place on record that South Africa 
had found a. commendable willingness on the part of the Secretariat to understand 
the problems and particular circumstances of an individual Member State. 

GC(IX)/0E.94 
page 28 


101. It was indeed essential that due regard should he had to the circumstances 
relevant to a particular project or a particular country. There should not he 
an insistence on dotting the i's and crossing the t's merely for the sake of 
uniformity. 
102. Since the Agency was concerned vd.th safeguards against the diversion of 
nuclear material to non-peaceful purposes, it was inevitable there should also 
he some discussion of one of the major problems of the day - the proliferation 
of nuclear capability. He believed,, however, that little purpose would be 
served by debating,, in the General Conference, the political problems inherent 
in any discussion of how best to combat the dangers of proliferation. On the 
other hand he considered it right and proper that the General Conference 
should pledge itself to make the resources of the Agency available if and when 
discussions in the^ United Nations or amongst the atomic Powers reached a stage 
where it became practicable to use the Agency to help solve the problems 
involved in the control and policing of nuclear armaments, 
103. One matter to which the South African delegation had given particular 
attention over the years had been the streamlining of Conference and Board 
proceedings and of the Secretariat's organization. He believed that the'' 
Agency had achieved an enviable reputation in that respect in the family of 
United Nations organizations. Certainly proceedings both in the Board and in 
the Conference had become a model of expedition. On the Secretariat side, he 
was inclined to think that the Agency had just about reached the optimum as 
far as the size of the establishment was concerned. 'When in the 1970's 
nuclear power achieved a breakthrough on a much wider front than was possible 
in the 1960's, a major expansion of the Agency's staff would probably be 
inevitable, in order to help meet the technical assistance needs of the 
developing countries in the field of nuclear power, but, especially in view 
of the Agency's precarious method of financing, the staff should for the time 
being be kept approximately at its present size. 


104. The successful introduction of biennial programming encouraged him to 
suggest that the Director General might with advantage undertake in the course 
of 1966 a study of the problems implicit in the adoption of a policy of biennial 
budgeting. The additional funds such a policy should make it possible 
to release should, he repeated, bo allocated to expansion of the programme, 
not the staff. 

GC(IX)/OR,94 
page 29 


105. In his statement to the General Conference in 1962 he had recommended, in 
the field of technical assistance, the establishment of direct links, with the 
Agency acting as a catalyst; between experienced and developed atomic energy 
centres in the more advanced countries and newly burgeoning projects in the 
developing countries. He had consequently been particularly pleased to find 
the same idea reflected in t.*ie Director General's statement at the 92nd meeting. 
106. As one of the pioneers of the Agency, associated with its progress from 
the beginning, he had had a special and personal interest in observing its 
growth iron; £;.. rij.,, .;;.* t;u> Lopeful beginnings i-.i ~i\? •.io/.f^ronc-v -vr; the Statute 
in JNTew York in 1956, through two major crises of confidence during the early 
years in Vienna, to the subsequent re-cstablishment of its standing as an 
effective organ of international 00—operation. If he might venture a personal 
comment, he would suggest that the Agency should now concentrate mainly on 
consolidating its scientific prestige and expertise in preparation for the 
inevitable expansion in the 1970!s, bearing in mind that its success and 
effectiveness would rest, not on the size of its budget, but on the calibre of 
the men who ran it , 
107. Mr. ESCHAUZIHIR (Netherlands) noted with satisfaction that the 
adoption of a long-term programme two years previously was beginning to bear 
fruit. The annual report presented by the Board also covered the first six 
months of the biennial programme for 1965-1966, and the progress made in that 
period, although necessarily limited, clearly demonstrated the wisdom of the 
decision. It was to be hoped that the possibility of extending the procedure 
to the budget, which was still established on a yearly basis, would in due 
course be re-examined in the light of practical experience^ nor should the 
possibility of holding biennial sessions of the General Conference be overlooked. 
108. Over the past three or four years it had become apparent that the initial 
difficulties of the Agency in getting under way r/oro over5 it was now aiming 
at certain clearly defined objectives, with the result that Its activities 
were acquiring a routine character, There could of course be no further 
progress without entering new fields and sowing new problems, but at least 
for the immediate future the agency's main concern would be to achieve still 
greater efficiency and to concentrate its activities on selective areas of 

GC(IX)/OR.94 
page jo 


priority from which the greatest possible number of States stood to benefit' 
most. Such selection was not merely common sensef it was a vital necessity 
in view of the increasing requests for assistance from Member States, which 
contrasted sharply with the limited financial moans at the disposal of the 
Agency. It appeared that the lack of resources was most painfully felt in 


such important areas as technical assistance, the nuclear power and reactors 
programme and desalination. The Government of the Netherlands therefore 
greatly welcomed the co-ordination of the agency's activities in the context 
of the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science 
and Technology to Development, which stated in its second report, published in 
May 1965? that the Agency would be able to contribute substantially to a 


"concerted attack on a limited number of especially important problems of 
research or application". It was also gratifying to note that the co-ordination 
of the Agency's activities with some organizations of the United 
Nations family had been intensified. 


109. His Government had noted the Agency's successful co-operation with 
regional bodies in the organization of symposia and conferences, and felt that 
it would be beneficial for all concerned if'the Agency exercised a coordinating 
function in organizing such meetings. A similar system might be 
envisaged for training•personnel„ Regional centres might bo more successful 
and efficient than v/orld centres, and the Agency's role should be one of coordination 
rather than of establishment or operation. 
110. A similar co-ordinating activity should be exercised by the Agency in 
finding underground storage places for highly radioactive wastes, .If, how-ever, 
there was a danger, due to underground flows of water, of radioactivity 
spreading even across regional frontiers, the Agency would 'perhaps be the only 
body suitable for establishing and operating such burial grounds. 
111. On the subject of emergency assistance in the event of radiation 
accidents, he was glad to note that the Agency was investigating the possibility 
of a' system of international mutual assistance in which it could play 
an appropriate part. His delegation felt that a global agreement open to all 
Members of the United Nations or its specialized agencies, which would serve 
as a model for regional agreements, was the most appropriate form, and awaited 
with interest the report of the committee of experts which would prepare a 
draft agreement for the Board's consideration. 

GC(IX)/OR.94 
page 31 


112. His delegation fully supported the Revised Safeguards System provisionally 
approved toy the Board? the system would also apply to reactors with a capacity 
of 100 MW or more, which con'st'i't'uted an important step forward. However, he 
agreed with the delegate of Japan that the Agency's safeguards would he more 
effective if they were also applied to chemical reprocessing plants, and also 
supported the suggestion that a system of reporting and registration he 
established covering international transfers of all nuclear materials. 
113. By promoting the practical implementation of the Agency's functions under 
.Articles II and XII of the Statute, Member States could make a, direct and 
valuable contribution towards preventing the use of atomic energy for nonpeaceful 
purposes, The wider issues o'f non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and disarmament would necessarily have to be solved hy other competent organs 
of the United Nations, but the fac-t that the Agency's .role was thus confined to 
a limited sector in no way diminished the importance of its statutory functions. 
The Agency's safeguards system, if widely accepted ij Member States, would 
constitute a very positive "collateral measure" - in the vocabulary of the 
Geneva Disarmament Commission - which could be regarded as on an equal footing 
with the test ban treaty. 
114. Taking practical steps within the purview of the Statute was, he felt, a 
better way to serve the cause of peace than considering the adoption of 
resolutions on political matters of grave consequence, which were being actively 
discussed in the appropriate United Nations bodies, and which were clearly not 
within the competence of the Agency as "the major technical arm of the United 
Nations" in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
115. It was to be hoped that, as a technical organization particularly well 
equipped for exercising control functions, the Agency could carry out a 
specific task to help prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The 
representative of the Secretary-General of the United Uations had in the course 
of his address to the Conference clearly outlined the extent and the limits of 
the services the Agency might be called upon to render. 
116. He wished to make it clearly understood that his delegation would be 
unable to support any resolution which was not strictly in accordance with 
the Agency's statutory rights and obligations. Under Article III.33,1 of the 

G6(IX)/OR.94 
page 32 


Statute the Agency was bound to "conduct its activities in accordance with the 
purposes and principles of the United Nations, ,..., and in conformity with 
policies of the United Nations furthering the establishment of safeguarded 
worldwide disarmament", which could logically only he interpreted as meaning 


that under special circumstances the Agency could bo an executive agent of 
such United Nations policies, but was clearly not the competent political body 
to frame them, 


117• He wished to express his admiration for the Director General's excellent 
work, and was sure that his re-appointment was an auspicious beginning to a 
new chapter in the history of the Agency, 


The meeting rose at 5.50 p,m. 



Interrnational Atomic Energy Agency GC(IX)/OR.95 
15 December 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 
General Conference ENGLISH 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETTING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Thursday, 23 September 1965, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda.*' 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for 1964-65 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Poland 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic 
Australia 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Denmark 
Hungary 
Republic of Korea 
Thailand 
Switzerland 
Norway 


* GC(IX)/313. 
Paragraphs 
1 .- 114 

i — 19 
20 34 
35 45 
4& 62 
63 68 
69 82 
83 94 


95 -97 
98 -108 
109 -114 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/Rev.2. 


65-7325 



GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 2 


©ENSEAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1964-65 
(GC(IX)/299, 307) (continued) 


1. Mr. BILLIG (Poland) congratulated the President on his election and 
thanked the Japanese Government for its hospitality. Japan had been the first, 
and he firmly believed that it would be the last, country to have suffered 
directly and in such cruel fashion from the effects of atomic weapons. 
2. He then recalled Professor Emelyanov's statement at the Third International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy that the peoples of the world 
were longing for the demilitarization of the atom, and also observed that the 
General Conference was taking place in a country whose constitution forbade the 
use of atomic energy for purposes of destruction? he also referred to Article II 
of the Statute. All that bore witness to the desire of the human race to use 
atomic energy exclusively for peaceful purposes. 
3. He next expressed apprehension in connection with the abnormal situation 
prevailing in some parts of the world, and referred to the acts of aggression 
against the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the attempts of the Federal 
Republic of Germany to gain access to atomic weapons. 
4. For all those reasons it was essential to bring about the complete mobilization 
of all forces, in all areas of international activity, for the purpose of 
putting a stop to aggression, strengthening and preserving peace, and solving 
disputes by means of patient negotiation under conditions of full respect for 
the sovereign rights of peoples. That was a matter of direct concern to the 
Agency for,' as had been repeatedly pointed out, great prospects would open up 
before it if only an international detente could be achieved and a decisive step 
taken along the road to nuclear disarmament. In that connection he thought the 
adoption of the resolution set forth in document GC(IX)/31o would be desirable 
and appropriate. 
5. The Agency's safeguards system could, without over-estimating its importance, 
be regarded as constituting a contribution towards those ends. As had been said 
in the Board of Governors, the system did at the very least represent the "end 
of the beginning". It could guarantee that international assistance intended 
for peaceful'purposes would not be diverted to military uses? but unfortunately 
it could not prevent countries from manufacturing atomic weapons from their 
own resources and hence it was unable to limit the extension of the so-called 

GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 3 


nuclear club. The system likewise could do nothing towards the destruction of 


stockpiles of nuclear weapons or towards preventing the manufacture of such' 
'' 
weapons, as ardently desired by the whole of mankind. 


6. The Agency's safeguards system and the experience gained in applying 
safeguards would be of far greater value if, in Central Europe and also in 
other parts of the world, the system were applied to all nuclear installations 
capable of serving any military purpose., 
7. While recognising the progress achieved by the Agency in developing its 
safeguards system, his delegation was authorized to state that the Polish 
Government was opposed to the procedure whereby the costs of implementing the 
system were met from the Agency's budget,, It considered that it was impermissible 
to burden the budget with such expenditure„ There were also doubts about 
the legality of the procedure, for which there was no provision under the 
Statute„ 
8-With further reference to safeguards he wished to direct attention to the 
highly questionable practice, ever more frequently followed by a number of 
States, of submitting small facilities or small quantities of fissionable 
materials devoid of any military significance to Agency control, while much 
larger facilities which were serving or could serve for military purposes 
remained uncontrolled. In his delegation's view that practice diminished the 
Agency's authority and in no way contributed to progress. 


t 


9. Turning to the problem of disarmament, he referred to the proposal1to use 
for peaceful purposes a small percentage of the resources now expended on 
armaments. If the Agency had those means at its disposal, it could substantially 
expand its activities for the benefit of all its Members, particularly^the less 
developed countries. 
10. The Agency's budget should not increase by more than 5$ per year. The 
Director General should take account of the recommendation by the Board to that 
effect. He also wished to recall that the socialist countries had set an 
excellent example by placing at the Agency's disposal for use by Member States 
seven fully-equipped radiotherapeutic and diagnostic laboratories. The "haves" 
in the 7/est had still not taken the same action in favour of the "have-nots". 

GC(IX)/ORo95 
page 4 


11o Approving of the Agency's work during the period under review and noting 
that no small part of the success.achieved was due to the Secretariat headed by 
Dr. Hklund, the Polish delegation welcomed the unanimous decision of the Board, 
of which Poland was at present a Member, to re-appoint Dr, Sklund as Director 
General for the following four years, 


12, On the subject of some of the more important aspects of the Agency's work 
during the period under review, and also of its plans for the future, he 
observed that the Agency was entering upon a new and more important stage of 
development - that of nuclear power. At the Third International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy and at a meeting of the Scientific 
Advisory Committee at the end of 1964 it had been stated that the rapid 
development of nuclear power held out hopes for accelerated economic development 
throughout the world, and it had been recommended that the Agency should concentrate 
its attention on matters connected with nuclear power. The Polish delegation 
believed that the Agency could play an important role in that field, 
especially by arranging for the exchange of information and experience, by 
training personnel, by intensifying international co-operation and by promoting 
and co-ordinating research on particular subjects. An important problem in 
whose solution the Agency could play a valuable part was represented by the 
economics of nuclear power. He recalled his earlier proposal that the Agency 
should expand its research and ether activities in that field, for example by 


convening in 195? an international conference devoted to the economic problems 


1/ 


of nuclear power,—' 


13, The training of personnel for work on nuclear power should be the first 


item in an Agency programme on those lines. The training of personnel, as was 


well known, was a slow process and it should therefore be begun as soon as 


possible. In that connection he would suggest that the Agency should appeal 


to those of its Members which were implementing large-scale programmes for the 


construction and operation of nuclear power stations to provide more facilities 


for Agency fellows to gain practical experience at nuclear power installations, 


14. As regards Agency fellowships, he wished to" emphasize that Poland greatly 
valued assistance in that form, and for its part was placing at the Agency's 
disposal five fellowships a year tenable at Polish nuclear centres. His 
1/ GC(VIII)/OR.85, para, 72, 



GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 5 


. 


delegation was therefore critical of any tendency to restrict the fellowship 
programme, and would like to see a considerable reduction in the length of time 
taken to process applications for fellowships. 


15. On behalf of the Polish Government he expressed satisfaction that a 
symposium on the use of radioisotope instruments in industry and geophysics was 
to be held in Warsaw in October lyo5. It was also gratifying to observe that 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics, the concept of which Poland 
had supported from the very beginning, was successfully performing its task of 
giving assistance in the field of theoretical physics to the developing countries 
and promoting the exchange of scientific thought between East and West, 
16, The success of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics prompted 
his delegation to support- the idea of establishing an international centre for 
nuclear medicine and to follow closely the negotiations connected with it, 


17. The Agency's work on nuclear data also deserved attention. Shortly before 
the opening of the Conference, a regular meeting of the International Nuclear 
Data Scientific Working Group had completed its work in Tokyo, The preceding 
session of the group had been held in Warsaw, The results of the meeting bore 
witness to the strengthening of international co-operation in the field in 
question and to the Agency's role as co-ordinating body. His delegation was 
likewise following with interest the expansion of the Agency's co-ordinating 
activity in other .fields, such as the development of standards for radiological 
protection and regulations governing the transport of radioactive materials, 
Polish experts were taking an active part in those activities, and the regulations 
themselves had been taken as a basis for preparing the rules governing 
transport of radioactive materials in the countries belonging to the Council 
for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON). Agency activities of that kind, 
which had a practical significance, would also enjoy Poland's support in the 
future , 
18, The report of the Board of Governors and the draft budget gave rise to a 
number of minor comments, which the Polish delegation would bring up in the • 


Committees as the need arose. 



GC(IX)/ORo95 
page 6 


19o In conclusionj he stated that notwithstanding the amendments to the 
Statute, the area of Africa was still inadequately represented* The system of 
representation of Member States in the Board of Governors should he modified. 
However, the amendment proposed by the Congo had not been sufficiently well 
thought out and did not take account of the actual situation,. He did not 
consider that the matter had. reached a stage at which it could be discussed at 
the present session, 

20. Mr. NSUMM (Czechoslovakia), congratulating the President on his 
election to his position of responsibility and expressing the hope that under 
his guidance the Conference would move ahead in a spirit of mutual understanding 
and co-operation, thanked the Japanese Government for its invitation 
to the Agency to hold its General Conference in Tokyo, in the capital of a 
country which twenty jears before had been the victim of atomic catastrophe the 
worst tragedy in the history of mankind, resulting from the dropping of 
bombs on Hiroshima-and Nagasaki. 
21. That terrible event had given birth in an overwhelming majority of mankind 
to a determination to see to it that there should be no repetition of such a tragedy 
in the future. 
22. Today, twenty years later, when the predominant trend in international 
relations was towards peaceful development and the peaceful settlement of 
disputed issues, as strikingly illustrated by the Moscow agreement relating to 
a partial ban on nuclear weapons testing, the conflict between the forces of 
peace and progress and the forces of war was becoming intensified. The world was 
witnessing aggression in the Democratic Republic of Viet-lTaro, whose territory 
was being subjected to daily bombardment, and one could even hear the voices 
of madmen calling for the use of nuclear weapons. 
23. In the light of those developments, the Czechoslovak delegation considered 
it essential that steps should be taken to prevent the danger of an outbreak 
of nuclear war. That meant helping to solve the problem of outlawing the use 
of nuclear weapons, which would in turn lead to the prohibition and destruction 
of nuclear weapons and thereby to the creation of favourable conditions for 
resolving the problem of general and complete disarmament. 

GC(IX)/0F*95 
page 7 


24„ Those were the lines that should guide the work of the Agency, which, 
under its Statute, was under an obligation to conduct its activities in 
accordance with the principles of the United Nations and in conformity with a 


policy of establishing safeguarded general and complete disarmament throughout 


the world. 


25, With those facts in mind, his delegation and the delegations of other 
countries were supporting the resolution contained in document GC(IX)/3l6„ 


26o On the subject of safeguards, he said that first of all agreement had to 
be reached on the principles involved in preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and on general and complete disarmament. Only then could consideration 
be given to the types of control and observation, in which the safeguards system 
could play an important part. It was in that sense that the Czechoslovak delegation 
supported the Agency's system of safeguards, 


27o As far as the peaceful uses of atomic energy were concerned, nuclear 


research was being developed in Czechoslovakia on the basis of the work of the 


Institute for Nuclear Research and that of other institutes and industrial 
plants. The first Czechoslovak atomic power station represented an original 


type of heavy-water converter. The country's nuclear power programme was based 


on further improvement of that reactor, which in due time would be supplemented 
and later completely replaced by fast reactors. An essential part of the programme 
would be the solution of complex problems relating to fuel cycles, 


28, Other areas of nuclear research were also being developed extensively in 
Czechoslovakia, For example, satisfactory results v/ere being obtained in the 
disposal of radioactive waste, over $1,25 million was being spent on irradiation 
equipment, labelled compounds, paints and the like, and around two hundred 
scientists and technicians were being trained in the department of atomic sciences 
of the Czechoslovak Institute of Technology, Extensive international co-operation 
and assistance, mainly from the Soviet Union, was a typical example of collaboration 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy for the benefit of the people of the 
two countries, 


29, Czechoslovakia fully supported, and would continue to support, the Agency's 
assistance activities, especially the training of specialized staff. It was 



GC(ix)/OR.95 


page 8 


taking an active part in the v/ork of the Agency. At the end of 1964 and the 
beginning of 1965 it had sent an oncological laboratory to Oran. Every year it 
made available to the Agency a number of fellowships for study in scientific 
institutions and schools., In 19^5 "khe number of fellowships had been increased 
to ten. In 1966 the Agency would have at its disposal five long-term Type II 
fellowships for studies at higher educational institutions and four short-term 
ones, also of Type II, for studies in the country's scientific institutes. 
Czechoslovakia had been the scene of a number of successful Agency symposia 
and of a summer school in theoretical physics, and the Czechoslovak Government 
was proposing that the Agency should hold a symposium, a conference or one of 
its summer schools or courses in the country during 1956„ 


30. As regards the activity of the Agency during the past year and the proposed 
tasks for the j^ear to come, he wished to mention the attention which the Agency 
had thus far devoted to applying the results of the Third International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, especially with regard to the 
economic evaluation of various types of nuclear power stations and the drafting 
of guide-lines for the future devel'opment of nuclear power, A further contribution 
had been the working out of a programme for the development of special 
reactors for the desalting of sea water. In his opinion, in its future activities 
with regard to nuclear power, the Agency .should pay greater attention to 
the economic aspects of the problem and also to the development of research and 
the mastery of fast-neutron reactors. 
31. Czechoslovakia was greatly interested in ihe Agency's v/ork on the use of 
radioisotopes and radiation in agriculture, especially as regards the selection 
and conservation of products, animal protection and improved productivity in 
cattle-breeding. 
32. Czechoslovak experts had a high regard for the work of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. In view of the results and experience 
gained there, it was essential to reach a speedy decision on the.establishment of 
an international centre for research in medical applications of radioisotopes. 
It was also necessary tc co-operate more closely with WHO. 
33. Among the physics problems on which the Agency was working, nuclear data 
processing and, more particularly, the development of neutron diffraction studies 

GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 9 


appeared to be. particularly useful. By including such a programme in its 
activities, the Agency was supporting a development which was likely to become 
technologically significant, Czechoslovakia would be greatly interested in 
co-operating with the Agency in that field, too, during the years to come, 


34' A very important part of the Agency's activity continued to be its concern 
with matters of health and safety in relation to nuclear equipment and in the 
handling of radioactive waste* Insufficient attention was paid to that subject 
in the annual report, 


35. Sir Phjljp BAXTER (Australia) said his delegation was particularly 
pleased at the President's election and greatly appreciated the excellent 
facilities being provided for the Conference by the Government of Japan, 
Although of the opinion that as a rule the General Conference should meet at 
Agency Headquarters, Australia considered that the holding of the ninth session 
in an Asian venue was most opportunef attention would thus be focused on the 
dynamic development, particularly in regard to the utilization of nuclear power, 
that was taking place in Asia generally and the Pacific area, 
36, Australia wished to extend a warm welcome to the two new countries admitted 


to membership, and particularly to Jamaica as a fellow member of the British 
Commonwealth, 


37• Kone of the first-generation power reactors had shown costs low enough to 
make them attractive for Australia, since it possessed supplies of cheap coal 


for power production^ but the second-generation systems, particularly those using 
heavy-water moderation, appeared to offer the- possibility of economic operation 


that might be useful for some parts of the country. The matter was under con


tinuous study and possibly the day was close at hand when a start might be made 
on building Australia's first commercial nuclear power station^ undoubtedly 


others would follow quickly, In the meantime, Australia's main research pro


gramme, aimed at a third-generation system, continued to make excellent progress 


and would fit into the over-all nuclear power programme at the appropriate time 


in the future, 


38, The Australian Government fully supported the re-appointment of the Director 
General for a further term of office; under his direction the Agency had grown in 



GC(ix)/oa.95 


page 10 


stature and increased its capability, both in range and in depth, to fulfil 
more effectively the purposes of the Statute, 


39• Australia wag gratified at the decision to hold the next meeting of the 


Study Group on Research Reactor Utilization at Sydney in February/March 1966 
and at the prospective visit of the Director General at that time, Everything 
possible would be done to maintain a high scientific standard and to make the 
meeting profitable and enjoyable for the participants,, 


40, His country would be pleased to receive additional Agency fellowshipholders 
and to assist, where possible, in the training of nuclear scientists 
and engineers from abroad. The Australian School of Nuclear Technology would 
begin formal courses in 1966, covering various aspects of reactor technology, 


the production and use of radioisotopes, health physics, waste management and 


so on? students from Asian counti'ies would be welcomed. 


41, The Agency was to be oommended for the increasing attention being given to 


the technological uses of radiation, particularly in preservation of foodstuffs 


and the eradication of insect pests; matters of especial importance for meeting 


the food needs of the world's rapidly growing population. For some time past, 
experiments had been conducted in Australia on insect pest elimination, using 
the sterile-male technique. Good progress was being made, too, on work on the 


fruit-fly problem, and the disinfestation of wheat and other cereals and flour 
was also under study. Costs in connection with the latter were influenced by 


the stage at which the wheat was treated (in rural bulk-storage centres or point 


of export). Obviously, luywevor, radiation disinfestation would be of little value 


if, during subsequent transport, the facilities used were still infested, 


Australia awaited with keen interest the results achieved with the disinfestation 


plant to be installed in Turkey with the assistance of the United Nations Special 


Fund and the Agency, and also those achieved in the programme on fruit juices 
being carried out jointly by the Agency, the European Nuclear Energy Agency and 


the Oesterreichische Studiengesellschaft fur Atomenergie (Austrian Atomic Energy 


Research Organization), 


42, Australia was also greatly interested and glad to participate in the 


Agency's work on the measurement, compilation and evaluation of nuclear data -a 


field in which its own efforts had been considerably increased over the past few 



GC(IX)/ORo95 
page 11 


years, Spithermal sub-critical and critical experiments had been conducted, 
using beryllium oxide, with fissile materials such as uranium-235? plutonium-239 
and uranium-233? as well as in some cases thorium and natural uranium. Measurements 
were being performed of the number of prompt neutrons per fission in 
plutonium-241 and uranium-233? taking account of the energy dependence relation


ships. The Agency's interest in that work and in possible co-operation in 


certain absolute measurements for californium-252 was gratifying. 


43. 
With reference to the draft resolution submitted jointly by the Soviet 
2/ 
and other delegations—7, he said there were few countries, if any, represented 
in the Conference that would not share the general desire to see the world solve 
rapidly the complex and intricate problems inherent in progressive and total 
disarmament, coupled with inspection. But those problems were at present under 
discussion elsewhere, particularly in the United Nations General Assembly, by 
delegations specializing in the matters involved? and there was nothing to be 
found in the Agency's Statute which would empower the Conference properly, but 
above all usefully, to discuss the question. On the grounds that the Conference 
was incompetent to consider such matters, his delegation would be unable to 
support the draft resolution in question, 


44* Australia had been glad to participate in the detailed work of reviewing 
the Agency's safeguards system. In its view, the Revised Safeguards System—' 
was an undoubted improvement over the one now in force? the basic principles 


remained the same but were better and more simply expressed. His delegation 
would therefore support approval of the revised system. 


45o Lastly, his delegation would support acceptance of the report of the Board 
of Governors for the past year and of the relevant budget, despite sharing the 
misgivings expressed in the Conference regarding the trend of Agency expenditure. 
It hoped the Board would examine that matter carefully for the future. 

4*5. Mr. STRIZHAK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) congratulated 
Mr. Asakai on his election to the office of President of the General Conference. 


He took particular pleasure in doing so because Mr. Asakai represented a country 
which was extending splendid hospitality to the Agency. 


2/ GC(IX)/316. 
3/ GC(IX)/294, Annex. 



GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 12 


47. If one assessed realistically the situation which had now come about in 
international affairs, it was difficult not to concede that the present session 
of the Conference was beginning its work in difficult circumstances. By now 
everyone was aware of the dangerous political course being followed by those who 
were spreading war in South-east Asia and performing acts of aggression against 
the Democratic Republic of Viet-Sam. Such actions increased tension throughout 
the world and, accordingly, the danger of broad armed conflict which would have 
serious consequences for people everywhere5 for no one could be sure when the 
delicate boundary between local war and a broad thermonuclear conflict would be 
overstepped. 
480 He thought it important to mention that fact before the General Conference 
at its session in Japan^ firstly because Japan, which had invited the Agency to 
Tokyo, had experienced 20 years earlier the horrors of the first nuclear bombardmentsj 
and secondly because the success of the Agency's work depended on a good 


climate in international affairs. 


49•> In the opinion of his delegation it was essential to take immediate steps 
to limit the arms race. By now it was perfectly clear that the success of the 
Agency's activities was directly related to a solution of the fundamental 
problem of disarmament, and to a cessation of the nuclear arms race. The only 
possible conclusion to bo drawn from Article II of the Statute was that the 
Agency could not wash its hands of such matters and strike the attitude of 
neutral observer. Quite the contrary, the Agency's Member States should steadily 
increase their efforts to fulfil what could only be regarded as a basic duty. 
The Ukrainian delegation, as co-author of a resolution on the subject submitted 
to the ninth session of the General Conference, could not agree with the statements 
made by the delegates of Australia and the Netherlands, the purport of 
which was that the Agency should make no clear declaration of the wishes of its 
Members regarding cessation of the nuclear arms race and of nuclear tests. That 
was, to be sure, a political question, but it was nevertheless intimately related 
to the Agency's activities^ the Agency in fact had a particularly great interest 
in achieving a solution of the disarmament problem and in putting the nuclear 
industry on a peaceful footing. 

50. The Ukrainian delegation believed that the General Conference should, at 
its ninth session, approve a resolution proclaiming that the Agency's Member 

GC(IX)/OE.95 
page 13 


States were opposed to the use of nuclear weapons and urging all Members to 
co-operate in the interest of successful negotiations on general and complete 
disarmament? it should take steps towards the rapid conclusion of an agreement 
on the prohibition of nuclear weapons. He noted with satisfaction that a 
number of delegations were in favour of that proposal, 


51, His Republic, like many other States of the world, was profoundly 
interested in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Ukraine had made good 
progress in nuclear physics, nuclear geophysics, radiation chemistry, radiation 
metallurgy, radiation biology, the applications of radiation in medicine, the 
use of isotopes in industry and in agriculture, the development of equipment 
incorporating radiation sources for use in industrial processes, and so on. 


In 1965 more than 50 scientific research establishments and higher educational 


establishments in the Ukraine had engaged in such work in close co-operation 
with industry, 


52, Neutron activation analysis was finding ever wider application in industry, 
Sadioisotopes and nuclear radiation were also being widely used in geological 
work. In the oil fields of the Ukraine various types of pulsed—neutron 
generators had been put into service, and with their assistance it was possible 
to detect not only the location of water-oil and gas-liquid interfaces and their 
movement in the earth, but also layers saturated with oil and gas. The Ukraine's 
efforts in nuclear physics were also being extended^ new laboratories equipped 
with the latest instruments were under construction, 


53, A great deal of attention was being given to the training of nucle-ar 


scientists. The main training centres - the universities of Kiev, Kharkov and 


Uzhgorod - all had their own research laboratories and were doing well in pro


viding young scientists for work, in the economic and scientific life of the 


Republic, 


54. International co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy had lately 
begun' to take new forms, Ukrainian scientists were taking part in the scientific 
work of other countries and, conversely, were inviting scientists from abroad to 
participate in the work of Ukrainian scientific institutions concerned with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

GC(IX)/0H.95 
page 14 


55. He drew attention to the fact that the developing countries of Asia and 
Africa were taking a particularly keen interest in the Agency's work, as was 
only natural in view of the enormous possibilities offered by nuclear power, 
nuclear desalting, and the applications of isotopes in industry, agriculture 
and medicine. In that connection he wished to recall that at the eighth session 
of the General Conference the delegate of Senegal had urged the Agency to hold 
an international conference in Africa on the uses of atomic energy for the 
development of African countries„ He believed that that proposal deserved 
consideration, 
56. The Ukrainian delegation also supported the distinguished delegate of Ghana 
in his appeal, made the previous day, to the effect that the Agency should provide 
more active assistance to the developing countries of Africa in connection 
with the training of scientists. At present a large number of students from 
Ghana and other countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America were successfully 
undergoing training in higher educational establishments in the Ukraine, 
57. Turning to the report of the Board of Governors, he wished to make a number 
of comments on various aspects of the Agency's work. Among the defects of the 
Agency's scientific programme he mentioned a certain lack of clarity of purpose, 
and a sometimes arbitrary choice of subjects for scientific conferences and 
projects as well as training courses. For example, out of nine training' courses 
held d.uring the previous year the applications of radioisotopes in industry had 
been touched on - and then only partially - in one alone. It was important to 
determine what the most important subjects were and to concentrate one's efforts 
on them:; moreover, the best possible use should be made of the results obtained 
under national programmes. 
58. The diversity of the Agency's programme was itself, in some ways, a defects 
there was too little concentration of effort on the most important subjects, and 
occasionally the subjects themselves were ill-chosen. As a consequence there 
was an arbitrary distribution of efforts and resources among the various activities, 
A significant part of the Agency's effort was concentrated, for example, 
on the medical applications of radioisotopes, even though WHO was dealing with, 
the same problems and a great deal of work was being done on the agricultural 
applications of radioisotopes, despite the fact that that was FAO's province. 

GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 15 


On the other hand, the Agency was giving too little attention to the use of 
radioisotopes in industry, a subject with which no other international organization 
concerned itself. 


59. In some of its activities the Agency had unquestionably scored notable 
successes., That was particularly true of the conferences and symposia, the 
publications programme, the training of scientists, the publication of nuclear 
constants and a few other fields of activity. 
60. The laboratories at Seibersdorf and Monaco were doing a certain amount of 
useful work, but they could hardly be expected to make a weighty contribution 
to the applications of atomic energy for peaceful purposes throughout the world, 
nor could they do much to assist the developing countries. 
61. Having outlined some of the defects of the Agency's programme, he reserved 
the right to return to them in more detail during the meetings of the Committees. 
62. Lately the Agency had given a great deal of attention to safeguards. During 
the year under review the working group convened to review the Agency's safeguards 
system had completed its workf a new safeguards document, more satisfactory than 
its predecessor, had been drafted. His delegation supported it. At the same 
time, however, he had to point out that in disregard of the Agency's Statute, 
which provided that the Agency's purpose was "to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world", the representatives of certain Western countries were more and more 
frequently claiming that the Agency's main task'was to exercise control functions. 
He wished to stress once more that the Ukrainian delegation did not share that 
view. 
63. Mr. von BULOW (Denmark) said that his delegation had studied the annual 
report of the Board of Governors with much interest. It showed that the Agency 
had some solid achievements to its credit. In particular, his delegation had 
noted the progress that had been made in the provision of technical assistance 
to the developing countries, in international scientific collaboration and in 
safeguards. 
64. Accordingly, a vote of thanks was due to the Agency and its staff for the 
excellent work that had been done. In particular, however, he wished to 

GC(IX)/OK„95 
page 16 


congratulate Mr. Eklund on the achievements of his first four years as Director 
General, and to extend to. him the 'best wishes of the Danish Government on the 
occasion of his proposed re-appointment, which was sure- to receive wide support. 


65o The Danish Atomic Energy Commission wished to emphasize its willingness to 
help the Agency with its training programme; special funds had in fact been set 
aside for that purpose in the Commission's budget, and an increasing number of 
Agency-sponsored fellows would be welcomed at the Rise' Research Establishment. 


66. With regard to international scientific collaboration, Denmark had noted 
with particular interest the Agency's recent progress in the collection and 
dissemination of nuclear data of fundamental importance to the peaceful applications 
of atomic energy. 
67. Safeguards figured prominently in the Board's annual report,, The Director 
General had-mentioned in his introductory statement to the Conference a fact 
which the Danish delegation was pleased to recall, namely that one of the first 
bilateral .agreements to be placed under Agency safeguards had been that concluded 
between Denmark and the United Kingdom. The first team of Agency inspectors was 
expected to arrive in Denmark in October. He sincerely hoped that by assuming 
responsibility for the administration of safeguards in relation to such agreements 
the Agency would gain practical experience in implementing its system, and 
that that experience would prove valuable for the further evolution of the safeguards 
programme. 
68. In conclusion, he congratulated Ambassador Asakai on his election to the 
high office of President and asked him to convey to the Government of Japan 
Denmark's sincere gratitude for the kindness and hospitality accorded to the 
Conference. 
69. Mr. TBTENYI (Hungary) said that in thanking the Japanese Government 
for the invitation to hold the Conference in Tokyo he also expressed his 
sympathy to the Japanese people, two of whose towns had been victims, 20 years 
previously,:of a terrible atomic bombardment which had cost hundreds of thousands 
of people their lives. The scientific discovery of the atom must never again be 
used for mass extermination. 

GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 17 


70. The Hungarian delegation had already repeatedly pointed out in the past 
that the effectiveness of the Agency's work depended to a great extent on 
success in limiting the atomic weapons race, in achieving mutual understanding 
between the peoples of the world and in maintaining peaceful co-existence„ It 
therefore could not agree with the Netherlands and Australian delegates that 
the Agency should not concern itself with questions relating to nuclear disarmament. 
Two years previously, at the seventh session of the General Conference, 
the Hungarian delegation had welcomed the Moscow partial nuclear test ban treaty, 
which had made a positive contribution to the lowering of international tensions 
and had also had a definite influence on the Agency's work. His delegation 
welcomed the agreement concluded between the Soviet Union and the United States 
of America regarding collaboration on sea water desalination, which had been 
signed in 1964. 
71. Whilst welcoming the two treaties, it regretted that those steps had not 
been followed up and had not led to further progress towards the final banning 
of all types of nuclear and thermonuclear weapon tests, prevention of the spread 
of weapons for mass destruction and the abolition of such weapons, It also 
regretted that, 20 years after the catastrophe which had occurred in two 
Japanese towns, bombs were again falling, the new victims being the peaceful 
Vietnamese people. He resolutely condemned the aggression against that country. 
Ultimate emancipation of the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America could not 
be prevented by force. 
72. Membership of the Agency had grown to 93? yet it still was not complete, 
since the only legitimate representative of the Chinese people, i.e. the Chinese 
People's Republic, still had not acquired its lawful placo in the organization. 
73. Regarding the provision of assistance to the less developed countries, hecalled 
attention to the assistance programme proposed by the socialist States. 
Under that programme, Hungary was supplying Afghanistan, through the Agency, 
with radiological oncological equipment for the establishment of a medical centre 
in Kabul University. That constituted an example of how the atom could serve to 
heal, rather than exterminate, mankind, 
74. As the Agency's resources were limited, they had to be used wisely and . 
economically. Its budget was growing too rapidly. The increase of 11*36 in 1966 

GC(IX)/OH.95 
page 18 


was unjustified, especially as it was not associated with any extension of the 
assistance supplied to the developing countries,: Eis delegation could not agree 
with the unconstitutional practice whereby the Agency horc- the costs of applying 


its safeguards to bilateral agreements, instead of such costs being borne by the 


countries which were parties to the agreements. The Hungarian delegation under


stood the need for Agency safeguards but did not, and would never, agree to the 


safeguards system restricting and impeding wider .application of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, 


75* The safeguards system could serve as a means to limit the spread of nuclear 
weapons only if it were applied exclusively in cases where there was a real danger 
of fissionable materials being used for military purposes. The Agency's safeguards 
activities should be subject to direct control by the Board of Governors, 


76, Regarding the Agency's activities during the past year, he mentioned the 
valuable work it had done in training personnel, the exchange of information, 


the organization of conferences, symposia and panels and so on. However, he did 
not agree with the tendency to decrease the number of fellowships, and noted that 


the membership of a number of panels was sometimes weighted too much in favour of 


representatives of the Western countries„ The achievement of closer co-operation 


depended on the cessation of that practice. In the preparation of conference 


programmes, consideration should be given to the meetings being organized by 


other international organizations. It often turned out that the scientific 


level of conferences could be raised and expenditure reduced by organizing them 


jointly with other bodies, 


77. Speaking of the definite improvement in the work of the Secretariat in 
recent years, he said he was pleased that Dr, Eklund had found it possible to 
agree to an extension of his term of office as Director General, 
78, He then proceeded to a short review of the development of atomic science in 


Hungary and indicated that important work was going on at the Central Institute 


of Physics Research in Budapest. In the course of reactor physics research, 


advances had been made in the chemistry and physics of organic moderators and 


coolants. For use in investigating the physics of the atomic nucleus a 


pressurized Van de Graaff accelerator had been put into operation. It had thus 



GC(IX)/0E.95 
page 19 


been possible to determine magnetic moment by means of measurement of the 
internal magnetic field, and the ratios of the cross-sections of various nuclear 
isomers had also been established. At a number of chemical and biological 
institutes research was going, on in radiation chemistry, radiochemistry and 
radiobiology. In 1964 a total of 5000 consignments had been dispatched by the 
Isotope Centre* Hundreds of isotope-labelled inorganic and organic preparations 
had been produced, 


79. The application of the methods of atomic technology also required the production 
of nuclear instrumentation, and the past year had seen considerable 
progress in that direction, A semiconductor- multichannel analyser had been 
developed and had gone into production, Few types of counting equipment for 
laboratory use had been evolved, and likewise medical equipment including 
roentgenometer, positron scanners and circulographs,, 
80. The past year had also seen the production of a number of process-control 
instruments based on the us. of isotopes, including in particular an instrument 
for controlling the mixture in blast furnaces. Progress had also been made in 
the use of labelled isotopes to analyse various technological processes, 
81o Apart from their uses in industrial research, the application of isotopes 
in medicine and agriculture was continuing to develop. Experiments were being 
carried out with a new type' of instrument for measuring soil humidity and 
density. A number of fresh diagnostic methods had been introduced into hospitals, 
distinguished by the use of new types of labelled compounds and of isotopes with 
very short half-lives, Pharmaceutics was proving to be an important area for 
the medical and also for the industrial application of isotope methods* During 
the past year the Hungarian Isotopes Institute had evolved an extensive programme 
for the use of isotopes and radiation in drug technology,, 


82, In conclusion he said that the Hungarian Government had. proposed that the 
Agency should participate in the execution of that programme, and on the basis 
thereof extensive international co-operation was already being organized in 
connection with the radiation sterilization of drugs and biogenic products and 
the development of isotope methods in pharmacology. He hoped that the programme, 
in which the Agency was already participating, would be further expanded in the 
future. International co-operation based on the programme was a brilliant 



GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 20 


example of the realization of the high ideals contained in the Agency's Statute, 
a realization to which the Government of Hungary was always prepared to contribute. 


83. Mr. YUN (Korea) joined in the congratulations to the President on his 
election and in expressing appreciation te the Japanese Government for enabling 
the Conference to meet in Tokyo, He also wished to pay a tribute to the Director 
General and the staff for the excellent work done, and to the Board of Governors 
for vigorously developing the Agency's programme to serve- the particular interests 
of the developing countries, 
84. It was Irjs Government's policy to make the maximum use of the TRIGA Mark II 
reactor at its disposal for the practical application of atomic energy in industry. 
The Korean.Atomic Energy Research Institute had given great emphasis to basic research, 
and development with that object in view. 
85• The Radiology Research Institute, set up in November 1963 and responsible 


for researph. on and treatment of malignant tumours, had brought Korea significant 


progress .in.medical science* Its cobalt-60 teletherapy unit, the first to be 
installed .in the country, was doing useful work in the treatment of cancer, 


86, In order'to further plans to increase agricultural production, an agri


culture, division had,been set up in the Atomic Energy Research Institute in 
April 1965? the division was scheduled to bo expanded in the near future to 
become an agricultural research institute. Its work in applying radiation in


fertilizer and seed.improvement, nutritional physiology, food storage and insect 


control was expected greatly to e.dvanoe Korean agriculture, 


87, ' The'utilisation of atomic energy in industry was at present limited in 


extent but efforts were being made to expand the work. On the other hand, a 


nuclear power' plant with an output capacity of 200 000 kW was projected. The 


Agency had provided a preliminary survey mission in 1963 and a site survey team 


in June 1965 to review three promising sites. His Government was planning to ask 


for an over-all survey mission to be sent in 1966 and hoped the request would be 


given sympathetic consideration. 


88, It was regrettable that the study group meeting on problems and prospects of 


nuclear power application in developing countries, scheduled to be held in Manila 


in September 1965, had had to be postponed, in view of its potential usefulness 


for Asian countries interested in nuclear energy as a means of meeting their 


power needs. 



GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 21 


89• His country was grateful for the expert services provided to it in the past 
and hoped that a suitable candidate would soon he found to fill the post of 
expert on waste disposal for whn ch provision had been made in 19&4. 


90. Korean experience had shown that extensive training of large numbers of 
competent scientists and technicians was the most effective means of promoting 
the application of atooiic energy in developing countries. Greater emphasis 
should therefore he placed upon the Agency's training programme rather than on 
the provision of-expert services. More funds should be allocated for that work 
in the coming year. 
91. His delegation had consistently advocated the granting of more research 
contracts to developing countries and would again urge the need for action to 
that effect. Six research contracts awarded to Korea had been concluded and 
four of them renewed for a further period. In view of the encouragement to the 
research workers concerned, it was sincerely hoped that favourable consideration 
would be given to Korea's application for further research contracts under the 
1965 programme, and for renewal of these currently being undertaken. 
92. The Regional Study Group on Reactor Utilization would undoubtedly facilitate 
co-operation among the countries of Asia and the Far East on problems of 
reactor operation and radioisotope production. His Government would ask that 
a meeting of the Study Group be held in Korea in the near future. The continuous 
and prompt exchange of up-to-date scientific and technological data and 
information on current national activities would be highly beneficial to the 
developing countries of the region, and the Agency, and in particular the 
regional officer, should assume an active role in promoting such exchange. 
93. The regional officer system, established as an experimental measure, had 
proved most helpful, and he hoped that the officer stationed at Bangkok would 
be maintained and provided with a larger staff., 
94. In conclusion5 he again expressed his country's appreciation for the 
excellent work being done by the Agency, as the sole body with world-wide 
responsiblity for promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
95. Mr. 7EJYABT-RM0SRISHT (Thailand) congratulated the President on his 
election and thanked the host Government for its hospitality. 

GC(IX)/OR,95 
page 22 


96, The Agency's technical work wars proving to be of great benefit to the 
developing countries and with the tapering off of Trilateral arrangements 
requests for technical assistance were increasing rapidly. During the past 


six years the value of requests for experts and equipment had increased by 400$ 
hut the percentage which the Agency could meet had declined to about 30%, 
Although allocations under the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and 


Special Fund allocations were slowly growing, the Agency's share would not 


increase sufficiently to aee-x rapidly rising needs* The technical assistance 
position was unhealthy and action must be taken to increase 'the Agency's 


Operational Budget if requirements were to be met. It was gratifying that the 


Director General was trying to economize in other directions,, 


97, Thailand looked forward to taking part in the regional seminar on health 


physics to be held in Bangkok, and in the advanced training course on the 


application of radioisotopes in medicine, 


98, Mr. HOCHSTRASSSR (Switzerland) congratulated the President on his 


election and thanked the Japanese Government for its generous hospitality, 


99. The Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
had served to make it widely known that the use of nuclear energy for the production 
of electricit-/ had become an attractive economic proposition in several 
parts of the world - a fact that would have deep repercussions on the Agency's 
programme, calling for gradual adjustments in the future. The main emphasis 
hitherto had been on the practical applications of radioisotopes? in the future 
there would be a certain shift to the use of nuclear energy for power production, 
while maintaining the valuable activities in the first area. Limitation of 
resources would, however, make a careful selection necessary, bearing in mind 
that many radioisotope applications were of interest to other international 
organizations as well, such as WHO and FAO, 
100. The coming transition would also require adequate budget flexibility, 
necessitating a cautious approach to long-term commitments. The Agency would 
have to confine itself to helping new initiatives at the start and leave the 
further work to others. Efforts to secure the support of interested countries 
from the outset in work of that kind would be particularly useful. 

GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 23 


101. The economically more advanced countries had to impose restraint in their 
demands on the Agency.so that available resources could be used as far as 
possible for meeting the urgent needs of the developing regions. His' Government 
was ready to make a voluntary contribution to the Agency's work in addition to 
its regular assessment, and to offer additional scholarships at Swiss universities 
for able students from developing countries, Swiss agencies supporting 
research were also willing to co-operate, insofar as their limited means would 
allow, in financing programmes of common interest. As in the past? his country's 
educational ana re .-search institutions would gladly accept Agency fellowshipholders 
for study purposes. It was the responsibility of the more advanced 
countries to build up their educational facilities at their own cost and to 
accommodate a certain proportion of foreign students? the Agency should avoid 
allocating funds for training institutions outside developing countries. 
102. In the same connection, there should be wholehearted support for efforts to 
reduce administrative expenditure and it was to be hoped that the Director General 
would be able further to streamline the Secretariat. The prospective introduction 
of an electronic computer should be helpful in that respect. Also, past experience 
should be called upon in order to minimize the expenditure for the holding of 
the General Conference^ various useful suggestions put forward had not as yet 
been acted upon. 
103. The advent of Qeonomic nuclear power had had far-reaching consequences for 
his own country, which had decided for its construction programme to switch 
over immediately from hydroelectric to nuclear power stations. A first large 
pressurized-water power reactcr of 350 W;!{e) had been ordered and should enter 
into operation in 1969. Two further projects were at present under study. The 
first large installation would be of foreign design but it was hoped that Swiss 
industry would also gain access to the rapidly expanding market for nuclear 
reactors through its present development work on a heavy-water-moderated reactor 
type and its participation in the Dragon high-temperature reactor project. 
104. In the present circumstances, the question of safeguards was therefore of 
great practical importance to Switzerland. Although fully intending to honour 
its obligation to use nuclear materials furnished from outside for peaceful 
purposes only, Switzerland fully recognized the need for controls. The revised 

GC(IX)/OR„95 
page 24 


safeguards system before the Conference for approval v/as a considerable improvement 
over the one in force, despite the fact that the text still left much to 
interpretation. Practical experience alone would show whether the revised system 
would he a threat to the economical use of nuclear power plants., Nevertheless 
his Government was willing to approve it in the hope that co-operation would he 


forthcoming in the event of the need for further revision proving necessary. 


105• The world still badly needed a universally acceptable and effective system 


of disarmament, but that problem was outside the Agency's competence and, more


over, was already being dealt with elsewhere, 


106, The putting into application of a revised safeguards system at a time when 
the use of nuclear power was rapidly spreading would place a heavy responsibility 
on the Director General and the staff. Solutions striking a reasonable balance 
between the Agency's two basic tasks of promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy and preventing diversion to military purposes would have to be worked out, 


10T. The increasing collaboration of the Agency with regional organizations was 
a necessary development since many problems had to be treated on a regional basis. 
He particularly welcomed the good relationship that had been instituted with 
the European Nuclear Energy Agency, which had led to joint sponsorship of a 
number of initiatives, 


108. In conclusion, he paid a tribute to the Director General and the staff for 
their unstinting work; in the future, the Agency would, he was confident, continue 
to help in bringing to mankind the gr.at benefits to be derived from the peaceful 
application of atomic energy, 
109. Mr. BQYESEN (Norway) congratulated Ambassador Asakai on his election 
as President of the Conference and asked that his delegation's thanks should be 
conveyed to the Government of Japan for its hospitality and for the excellent 
arrangements it had made, 
110. As a fellow Scandinavian he took particular pleasure in congratulating 
Mr. Eklund on the renewal of his appointment as Director General of the Agency, 
which had received the unanimous approval of the Board and was sure to be welcomed 
by the Conference. 

GC(IX)/OR.95 
page 25 


111. In his brief talk he would address himself to only a few specific questions. 
Firstly, he wanted to stress a point on which he believed there was general 
agreement, namely that it was in the interest of all Member States to keep 
extraneous political issues out of the Agency and out of the Conference's 
deliberations. The Agency bad two main objectives, to promote the exchange 
of equipment and the dissemination of nuclear technology, and to prevent the 
misuse of nuclear material.5 for dangerous military purposes. Obviously, if it 
was successful in the latter venture, that would be an achievement of great 
political i.mportanc :•? lv:t the b..,st way to ensure success, in his opinion, was 
to have no poll tiers in tht. Agency at all, Tht question of disarmament, as 
such, was not the Agency's proper sphere.. 
112. One of the most important tasks facing the Conference was to consider the 
revised and improved safeguards system. If one compared the .Agency's success in 
bringing about agreement on the revised system with the endless disarmament 
negotiations that had been going on since 1945? one would have to concede that 
it was no mean achievement. But the system was also of importance in itself 
and not just as a measure of international co-operation. Clearly it had its 
limitations^ for the time being at least only small quantities of nuclear 
materials would be subject to control. 
113. Perhaps the most gratifying aspect of the safeguards system, therefore, 
was its significance for the future. Its evolution would have a close bearing 
on the problem of proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Agency's present 
safeguards programme should be regarded not as the end of the road but as the 
beginning of a long process of evolution. Without denying the worth of the 
present system, one could foresee that future safeguards must inevitably be 
more comprehensive and more binding. What was needed was a universal system, 
under the aegis of the United rations, through which all nuclear activities 
having potential military applications could be closely supervised, Only with 
such a system could the prohibition which th. Soviet delegation was calling for 
become really meaningful. A prohibition alone would accomplish little, and it 
was not the Agency's job to issue onej but the Agency could make a large contribution 
to the practical arrangements which would eventually bring about a 
prohibition. 

GC(IX)/OR-95 
page 26 


114. In that connection .budgetary questions became relevant. He could not agree 
with, the delegate of Prance§ the safeguards programme was eminently suited to 
international financing. If there was agreement that the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons must be prevented, it would be in the interest of the world community and 
not merely of particular countries, least of all the countries that might 
be asked to accept controls - that that should be done. Finally, it should 
be stressed that the Agency must provide incentives which would encourage 
countries to accept safeguards, not the reverse. The Agency's principal task, 
after all, was to ensure that the possibilities of atomic energy were exploited 
to the greatest possible extent, while still avoiding the undoubted diangers 
inherent in it. 
The meeting rose at 1 p0m. 



V \ International Atomic Energy Agency GC(IX)/OR.96 

16 December 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


General Conference 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Thursday, 23 September 1965, at 3'15 P.m. 
Presidents Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) 
CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* 
10 General debate and report of the Board of 
Governors for1964-65 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Argentina 
Mexico 
Yugoslavia 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland 
Italy 
Viet-Nam 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
India 
Sweden 
Brazil 
Ceylon 

* GC(IX)/313. 
Paragraphs 
1 - 149 


1 17 
18 25 
26 41 
42 69 


70 -83 
84 -96 
97 105 

106 


125 
126 132 
155 138 
159 149 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/Rev.2. 


65-7329 



GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD OE GOVERNORS FOR 1964-65 
(GCXlX)/299, 307) (continued) 


1. •' Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said that his country would continue to 
give every support to the Agency, whose activities were developing in strict 
accordance with its statutory obligation "to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world". 
2. One of the most important aspects of the Agency's activities at the 
present time was indubitably the growth in the economic possibilities.of 
nuclear power plants and it was clear that the Agency had made a correct 
assessment of the situation in deciding to promote work on the construction of 
power reactors. 
3. Confidence in the future of nuclear electricity had encouraged his country's 
engineers to initiate preliminary studies with a view to assessing the 
feasibility of setting up a power reactor of 300-500 I£7 in Argentina% 'the' 
plant would represent the first contribution of nuclear energy towards meeting 
the steadily growing electricity requirements of the country. The studies, 
which were being carried out in collaboration with Agency experts, would 
shortly be completed and it was hoped to start work on the construction of the 
reactor in the near future. 
4. An agreement concluded with the Agency provided for technical assistance 
to be given to Argentina to enable it to bring into operation the 5-MW 
experimental and production reactor RAEP. The reactor, which had almost been 
completed, had been designed and was being constructed entirely in Argentina. 
5. Great interest also attached to work done in connection with the largescale 
desalination of sea water| rapid progress could be expected in that 
field thanks to the constant improvement of techniques and the exchange of 
technical knowledge. The organization of regional groups to study the use of 
research reactors was also an extremely useful aspect of the Agency's work and 
would prepare the way for collaboration between scientists and research 
centres in the areas in question. He also wished to draw attention to the 
assistance given to the inter-American conference on the technical and economic 
problems of producing nuclear electricity in Latin America, which had-"taken""' " 
place in Puerto Rico in February. , 

GC(IX)/0E„96 
page 3 


6. Another very important aspect of the Agency's work concerned the organization 
of research and the provision of facilities in the biological sciences, 
and it was fitting that those activities should he carried out in collahoration 
with WHO. In that connection it was disconcerting to learn from a study 
prepared by the Agency that the numher of radium sources per head was 25 times 
less in the developing countries than in the technically advanced nations 
despite the fact that certain varieties of cancer that were particularly 
vulnerable to small radiation sources were more prevalent in the former. 
7. The work done "oy the Joint FAO/lAEA Division of Atomic Energy in • 
Agriculture, which had been of direct benefit to Argentina, was deserving of 
praise. A mission of experts had visited Argentina to study the feasibility 
of installing a pilot irradiation unit for grain disinfestation. Working in 
conjunction with technicians of the National Commission and officials of the 
National Grain Board, the mission had toured the interior of the country and 
had visited five field and six loading elevators. The visit had shown that it 
was possible to install the unit in one of the silos inspected, The mission 
had also discussed with representatives of the refrigerating industry and 
Commission experts possible lines of work on the irradiation of meat and meat 
products with, a view to controlling salmonellosis and other infections. Since 
agriculture a.nd stock-breeding represented Argentina's main sources of 
revenue, it was clear that such activities were of considerable importance for 
the country's economy, For its part, Argentina had collaborated with the 
Agency in disseminating information on the use of radioisotopes and had sent 
experts to organize and give courses in Paraguay and Bolivia* Praiseworthy 
efforts had also been made by the Agency in the field of health and safety, 
particularly in connection with the problem of radioactive waste disposal, 
The Agency's work, in that connection was of major importance and his country 
was happy that an Argentine representative was taking part in the work of the 
Radiation Committee. 


8. Argentina was glad to note that progress had been made in the field of 
safeguards, the operation of which was one of the main objectives of the Agency. 
It had been the first Latin American country to apply the Agency's safeguards,having 
concluded an agreement in December 1964 transferring to the Agency bhe 
administration of the relevant provisions laid down in an agreement with the 
United States. 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 4 


9. On the subject of the costs of safeguards, there was disagreement as to 
whether they should he home by the Agency or by the country in which they 
were applied- The attitude of Argentina was quite clear, namely that they 
should be borne by the Agency, The reasons had been explained in the Board 
of Governors. 
10. A definitive agreement on that matter should be worked out as soon as 
possible before too many instruments had been concluded under the Agency's 
auspices. 
11. Countries like Argentina which bad transferred responsibility for the 
administration of safeguards in relation to their bilateral agreements to the 
Agency, or countries which intended to do so, clearly had the right to have 
definitive information on the provisions that would be applied, without beimg 
exposed to the possibility of changes in the immediate future. 
12. In the field of technical assistance, many countries, including Argentina, 
had benefited from the Agency's collaboration. His country made a special 
point of backing up those efforts to the maximum extent possible by providing 
professional training, fellowships and experts5 and by organizing regional 
courses such as the second Pan-American course on nuclear metallurgy, held in 
Buenos Aires during 1965. 
13. Argentina was fully aware of the value of having Agency assistance 
available for its nuclear programme and it made every effort to meet its 
financial obligations towards the Agency even though that sometimes involved 
genuine sacrifices because of the economic difficulties with which his 
country was beset at the present time, 
14. The fusion of the Secretariat's technical assistance services into a 
single department would give greater flexibility to activities in that field 
and his country therefore welcomed the re-organization that had been effected. 
15. A word of caution needed to be said in connection with the funds used by 
the Agency to pay for technical assistance activities, which were one of the 
most useful aspects of the Agency's work from the point of view of the 
developing countries. As was well known, the technical assistance programme 
was paid for out of the voluntary contributions of the Member States, which 

GC(IX)/OR„96 
page 5 


would amount to a total of atout $8 900 000 for the period 1959-66, The 
Agency could also call on funds from the Expanded Programme of Technical 
Assistance (BPTA) and the United Nations Special Fund, Between 1959 and 1966 
a total of 111 600 000 would have been made available to the Agency from those 


sources„ In other words, the Agency had to rely on outside resources for 
more than ^ofo of the funds required in order to pay for one of the most 

important aspects of its work. That state of affairs should be reviewed by 


the Member States, since it was in the last resort from them that all those 


contributions came. 


16. He was glad to note that a number of new States had joined the Agency 
during the period under review and he looked forward to the admission of new 
Members in the future. 
17• Argentina would continue to give enthusiastic and resolute support to the 
Agency. It was his pleasant duty to praise the excellent work being done;by 
the Director General and the members of the Secretariat, to all of whom he 
extended his sincere congratulations. 


18. Mr. CARRILL0-FL0EES (Mexico) associated himself with the general 
gratitude expressed to the Japanese Government for the generous hospitality it 
had offered to the General Conferences he also congratulated the President, 
and stated that the Mexican delegation was in favour of the re-appointment of. 
the Director General, whose activity during the past four years at the head 
of the Agency had won him the grateful recognition of all Member States. 
19. He welcomed the new Member States, in particular Costa Eica, with which 
Mexico had numerous cultural and historic connections. 
20. A brief review of man's attitude towards atomic energy in three important 
historical contexts might not be without interest. In 1945 "the atomic age 
had begun- in tragic circumstances. The opening of Pandora's box had led to 
widespread terror and "had initiated a period of peace based not on mutural 
respect but on reciprocal fear. 
21. In 1955 prospects had appeared at Geneva which had allowed scientists 
of all countries to establish channels of co-operation. It had been a time of 
great optimism. The possibility of using sea water as--a-fuel -had seemed 
imminent and it had been felt that the revelation of scientific "secrets" 
would restore to science its traditional character. 

GC(IX)/OR. 96 
page 6 ' 


22. The present session of the General Conference was being held at a moment 
when nuclear progress had reached an advanced stage of development. Nevertheless, 
the reaction of many people was distrust. If electricity had begun 
with the electric chair, many more homes would still be using oil lamps. 
Confidence had steadily risen, however, and there had appeared on the horizon 
a possibility which promised cheering results: :the pairing of atomic energy 
and the sea to produce fresh 'water. Like the delegate of Israel, he believed 
that to he perhaps the most interesting way in which atomic energy could he 
used for peaceful purposes, 
23. The Mexican Government had shown great interest in research on the 
desalination -of brackish and salt water by atomic energy, a type of research" 
which was rendered particularly attractive by the conditions peculiar to the 
country. Mexico had just installed its first nuclear centre, whose design 
and coming into being owed much to the contribution of the Agency, its experts 
and in particular its Director General, whose moral and intellectual authority 
had been freely lent to. the task. . ' 
24. Mexico was already taking the first steps to use, not only the products 
of experimental reactors, but also power reactors intended'to provide water , 
and electricity. The country offered exceptional possibilities of application, 
and he was sure-that-the Agency and the more advanced countries would provide 
valuable collaboration. 
25. The Mexican delegation wished to pay tribute to the work of the Agency 
as reflected in the agenda of the present session. The second session of the 
Preparatory Commission for the Denuclearization of Latin America had been held, 
in Mexico,City in August 19^5• The Commission had drawn up draft articles on 
inspection and control which would be incorporated in the multilateral treaty 
to be signed with a view to establishing in Latin America a zone free ofnuclear 
weapons. The Latin American countries had seen fit to adopt, as a. 
.. 
means of providing the control machinery which would be required if the region 
was to remain denuclearized, the Agency safeguards system, which would thus 
become for the first time a means of contributing, on the regional scale, to 
nuclear disarmament and world peace. 
26. Mr. SALOM-SUICA (Yugoslavia) congratulated the President on his 
election and thanked the Japanese.Government for its generous hospitality. . 

GC(IX)-/QR.96 
page 7 


27. At previous sessions of the General Conference, his delegation had 
expressed the hope that international relations would continue to improve, thus 
creating conditions favourable to disarmament and the maintenance of a durahle 
peace, together with-the possibility of releasing considerable material 
resources for developing the less fortunate regions -of the world. The Agency 
would then have been able to play a more important role. . That hope had not 
been realized. Yugoslavia did not cease to fight for the liberty of peoples, 
for peaceful co-existence and co-operation, against the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, for banning the testing and use of nuclear weapons and for 
general and complete disarmament. Faithful to that policy and anxious to-, 
hasten the advent of an era more favourable to disarmament, the Yugoslav 
delegation was submitting to the General Conference, together with other 
delegations, the draft resolution issued in document GC(IX)/3l6. 
28. The Agency had shown satisfactory results in the course of the past year, 
and credit was due as much to the Secretariat as to the Board, which had 
shown a great spirit of conciliation. 
29. Without wishing at such an early stago to pass judgement on the Agency's 
biennial programme, he was pleased with its positive tendencies and with the 
efforts made to carry out the integrated projects of technical assistance, the 
co-ordinated research programmes and the enterprises common to the Agency and 
to other organizations of the United Nations family. 
30. With regard to nuclear power and reactor technology, the Agency's activity 
was rather limited, especially from the economic and technical point of view. 
It might even be claimed that it was in a state of stagnation, in relation to 
the increasing number of requests for technical assistance and the speed of the 
progress made throughout the world. 
31. The explanation provided, to the effect that the lack of resources and the 
shortage of staff made it impossible for the Secretariat to carry out some 
of its tasks relating to nuclear power, power reactors and economic assessments, 
was hardly satisfactory. 
32. The carrying out of economic studies and the analysis and dissemination 
of the results obtained should he one of the Agency's main preoccupations; it 
should publish the results in due time, and promote the development of modern" 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 8 


methods of economic assessment and comparison, in particular with regard to 
the problems posed by the optimization of nuclear power stations and their 
integration in power grids. 

33 • The Agency had been very aotive in the field of organizing technical and 


scientific meetings, training courses, etc, and, for some years, the number 
of those meetings throughout the world had been increasing, together with the 
risk of duplication^ It would therefore be advisable to co-ordinate those 
activities better, to draw up a more satisfactory calendar for the scientific 
meetings organized by the Agency and to define the criteria for the choice of 
subjects to be studied, 


34* It would in that connection be extremely useful to set up a large international 
centre for assembling and disseminating knowledge, information and 
scientific and technical data, which might become an important means of international 
co-operation in the field' of scientific information. 


35• The Revised Safeguards System would mean that the effectiveness of safeguards 
would be increased, while affording the possibility of adapting them to 
the rapid development of nuclear energy in the countries where they were applied 
and of lightening the burden which they constituted for countries receiving 
assistance. He hoped that the Agency would continue to do everything to 
secure'a still greater improvement In the effectiveness of the' safeguards 
system, by simplifying application procedures and reducing the cost to the 
receiving countries. 

36. Regarding the Consolidated Budget, the Yugoslav delegation- could not, 
under present conditions, approve the intention still further to increase'the 
staff of the Secretariat and of the Seibersdorf Laboratory, but it was in 
favour of the increased allocations under the Operational Budget intended "to 
finance the technical assistance and training programmes and also of those 
under the Regular Budget for health and safety and scientific and conferences 
publications. 
37• -An increasing number of countries in process of industrialization were 
intending to build nuclear po?/er stations, preparing nucle-ar power programmes 
or drawing up power reactor projects. However, such work called for heavy 
initial investments and the establishment of a nuclear infrastructure. The 
supply of capital in those countries was extremely limited, and if the conditions 



GC (IX)/OR.96 
page 9 


governing the grant of foreign credits were more favourable, the development 
of the nuclear power industry would be accelerated. Action should therefore 
he,taken to mobilize the financial resources available through international 
credit institutions and establish a more favourable atmosphere, in-financial 
circles, which would make it possible to meet the individual or group requests 
submitted by Member States in connection with nuclear power station construction, 


in accordance.with Article XI.B of the Statute. 


38, From the very beginning, co-operation between the Agency and Yugoslavia had 
been highly constructive and fruitful. As far as technical assistance and 
EPTA were concerned, emphasis had been placed primarily on fellowships and 
training, which had enabled Yugoslavia to launch a national atomic energy 
programme. Assistance had then been extended to research contracts, experts, 
and specialized equipment, and valuable aid had likewise been rendered in the 
spheres of nuclear research and agriculture by the Special Fund. Yugoslavia 
had thus been able to draw up an extensive programme for the construction of 
modern laboratories intended for research on means of increasing agricultural 
production and of applying nuclear techniques to veterinary medicine and 


sylviculture. As the Director General had stated, the Agency was executing 
agent for the Special Fund under that project, and great credit was due to the 
Agency staff, whose valuable aid had been of great assistance to Yugoslavia. 


39* Other projects, including one for the establishment at Skoplje of a centre 
for application of radioisotopes in industry and hydrology, were in process of 


implementation with Agency and United Nations assistance. 


40. For its part Yugoslavia had been able to place experts at the Agency's 
disposal and also to make available a number of fellowships, which had been 
granted principally to trainees from the developing countries. Furthermore, 
Yugoslavia was ready to intensify all forms of co-operation with the Agency 
in the fields of power reactor and nuclear power station technology. The 
country's research centres, industry and design offices had undertaken studies 
which showed that the electricity grid would required nuclear power stations 
as from 1972-75. 
41. The Agency had made effective use of its limited resources, and he was 
convinced that, in view of the changes that had occurred in the world, it would 
become even more the focal point of a broader and more constructive co-operation 
in matters of nuclear energy, particularly as regards its applications in the 

GC(IX)/OR.96 


page 10 


developing countries, and that, under the guidance of its present Director 


General, the dynamism which the Agency had acquired would achieve its full 


expression, especially in the sphere of nuclear power. 


42. Sir William PENNEY (United Kingdom) congratulated the President on his 
election and expressed his delegation's gratitude to the Japanese Government for 
the arrangements it had made for the General Conference. 
43• His Government shared in the universal desire that atomic energy should he 
used only for peaceful purposes, and had a high regard for the Agency, both for 


its work in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy-and for its valuable 
contribution'towards ensuring that all nations could share in the great benefits 


deriving from-those uses. 


44* The previous year had been highly satisfactory in the United Kingdom as 
regards progress on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Magnox power 


stations, which constituted the first phase of the United Kingdom nuclear power 
programme, had established themselves as reliable in performance, with high 


availability. Nine years of operational experience had now been accumulated 
with the Calder reactors, and over three years with the first two civil stations% 

the ninth civil power station of the Magnox type would probably be completed 
within about three years. 


45* Regarding the second phase of the United Kingdom nuclear programme, a most 


important decision had teen the selection of the advanced gas-cooled reactor 

system for its first station, the Dungeness 'B' station, to generate 1200 MW(e). 


It was significant that nuclear power was now competitive with conventional 
power in the United Kingdom. Dungeness 'B1 would, on conservative financial 
assumptions, generate electricity at 15$ below the cost of generation in base


load coal-fired stations. 


46. Work was also progressing on other systems. In two years' time a 100-MW(e) 
steam-generating, heavy-water reactor, which should be attractive in small as 
well as large sizes, would be commissioned. fi.ll the thermal neutron systems 
could develop still further, and the United Kingdom was beginning to realize 
the wide hopes for nuclear power which it had always entertained. 
47o By the end of 1966 the main centre of the United Kingdom interest in 
converters, the Dragon reactor, built jointly by a group of European countries, 


GC(IX)/OR„96 
page 11 


in England, should have completed a year's operation at full power and the 


data on which to assess that reactor type would then be available. 


480 The United Kingdom had growing confidence in all aspects of the fastreactor 
system, to which the Atomic Energy Authority was applying more than 


40% of its reactor development effort. Attention was mainly concentrated on 


liquid-metal cooling and on plutonium-uranium ceramic fuels, as the technologies 
likely to lead most quickly to economic exploitation, and the very large fuel 
development programme was supported by the 60-55?/ Dounreay Experimental Reactor, 
which continued to operate woll. Within about fifteen years the fast-reactor 
system would find increasing application in the United Kingdom's commercial 
programme. 


49- The universal and growing use of isotopes was very striking. Experience 
in the United Kingdom, as a supplier and user of radioisotopes, had shown' that 
their use continued to increase at ahout 15% each year on average over all 
fields of application, A significant growth point v/as the use of neutrondeficient 
isotopes. 


50. The use of gamma radiation for sterilizing medical supplies was now thoroughly 
well proven and ahout 1-g- megacuries of cohalt-60 had been installed for that 
purpose. 
51. The growth of world population and the rise in standards of living was 
leading to increasing awareness of the pressure on the world's fresh-water 
resources1 the situation was already precarious in many countries. The United 
Kingdom Government therefore recognized the urgency of the Agency's xvork in 
studying prospects for largo-scale economic desalting of brackish or sea water, 
and had allocated resources for the development of desalination techniques. 
The further development of existing techniques using thermal-heat sources would 
he studied and the prospects for using nuclear power for the purpose would be 
examined. 
52. Health and safety was a question of general interest, and recent experience 
in the United Kingdom had shown that plants previously thought to he inaccessible 
could in fact he entered. Examples were the decontamination and partial 
demolition of the first plutonium separation plant at Windscale, where no 
difficulty had been encountered in meeting high standards of health and safety,. 
and the retrieval of a camera (used for photographic inspection of a Calder 
reactor during refuelling shut-down) which had accidentally fallen between the 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 12 


graphite core and the pressure shell| in the latter case the limiting factors 
had proved to he heat and coolant atmosphere, not radiation, the exposures in 
the case of personnel involved all being within a quarterly limit of three rads. 


53. The Agency was carrying out a most important function in drawing up generally 
acceptable codes in the field of health and safety, as when conflicting views 
stemmed from long-established national practice, or national legislation, they 
could be deeply entrenched. The Agency had done a valuable service in providing 
the revised regulations, published in 1965, covering the complex problems raised 
by the transport of radioactive materials-'5 solution of these problems was of 
vital importance for the growth of international trade and co-operation in the 
nuclear field. The United Kingdom was pleased that its experts had been able 
to play a full part in helping to work out the regulations, and hoped that the 
code would win from all countries the speedy acceptance which it merited. 
Using rules derived directly from those produced by the Agency, the first charge 
of fuel elements for the Tokai-mura nuclear power station in Japan had been 
safely and satisfactorily shipped from the United Kingdom. 
54* The organization of conferences and symposia, and the early publication of 
the records of the proceedings, was establishing the Agency as a main channel 
of information exchange. Even in such an important field, however, there was a 
risk of reducing the value of the books and pamphlets through holding,, and 
publishing the proceedings of, too many conferences. An over-wide interpretation 
of atomic interests was also undesirable. 


55. The United Kingdom considered that an outstanding achievement of the Agency 
during the past year had been the elaboration of a revised safeguards system, 
which had been provisionally approved by the Board in February, and was now 
before the Conference. The United Kingdom hoped that it would form a generally 
acceptable basis for future safeguarding operations. Besides participating 
in the work of the Working Group to Review the Agency's Safeguards System, the 
United Kingdom had contributed to the growth of the safeguards system by being 
party to two safeguards agreements involving the Agency, the other parties 
being Denmark in one case and Japan in the other. 
56. Negotiations involving safeguards were also beginning between the Agency, 
the United Kingdom and Sweden, Still more significantly, the United Kingdom 
1/ STI/PUB/97. 



GC(IX)/OE.96 
page 13 


had offered to submit one of its own nuclear power stations. Bradwell, to 


Agency safeguards, and negotiations to implement the offer were in progress. 


The Bradwell station with its two reactors, each producing 150 Mlf(e) , was the 


largest station so far to he put under Agency safeguards. The United Kingdom, 


convinced of the value of the safeguards system, was confident that the Agency's 


Inspectorate would soon learn how to remove the natural anxiety of reactor 


operators that inspection might interfere with efficient operation, and was glad 


to offer the inspectors experience on large power reactors. It was to he hoped 


that the example would help to build general confidence in the system and would 


encourage other countries to.introduce safeguards more wid.!,>-. 


57• The Agency should continue to givo special attention to the use of isotopes, 
particularly their application to some of the biological and. agricultural 
problems of the less-developed countries, a task in which the United Kingdom 
would be glad to assist other Member States. 


58. The United Kingdom delegation believed that the Department of Technical 
Assistance, established in 19&4? was functioning satisfactorily. The structural 
change which brought training into the Department had been amply justified. Of 
all the kinds of technical assistance which the Agency provided, training was 
perhaps the most important, because it enabled the developing countries in time 
to help themselves. It was however essential to ensure, as far as possible, 
that the nationals of developing countries were trained for tasks that would 
arise in the nuclear programmes of their own countries, so that their skill was 
not wasted. 
59o The realization that resources available to the Agency for training were 


limited ha,d moved the United Kingdom, during the past year, to submit to the 


Board a memorandum on financial support for training centres. Clearly, the 
Agency would not have enough resources to support over a long term every 
regional training centre that was proposed^ even a single commitment of that 
nature tied up resources on which many other calls would arise. The United 
Kingdom memorandum examined that question and suggested certain criteria by 
which the Agency might bo guided in its policy. 


60o In 1958? ^e United Kingdom had offered to make available to the Agency 

cost-free attachments for periods of up to two years at the Wantage Research 
Laboratory of the Atomic Energy Authority. The offer had been renewed several 


times since 1958 and, under the scheme, a number of Agency fellows had been 



GC(IX)/OH.96 
page 14 


awarded places at Wantage and had worked as members of the research teams. The 
arrangement had been of mutual benefit.to those concerned, and the offer to 
receive Agency fellows at Wantage remained open, as did the offer made in 1963 
by the United Kingdom Central Electricity Generating Board to accept a limited 
number of Agency fellows without charge at its nuclear power stations and its 
Research and Development Laboratory. 


61. The United-Kingdom delegation had no hesitation in endorsing the Board's 
recommendation that Dr. Eklund be offered a further term of four years as 
Director General. Many suggestions would certainly emerge from the General 
Conference, particularly about the future work of the Agency. The United 
Kingdom delegation wished to offer some comments which were intended to be 
constructive. 
62. The Agency was faced with a number of difficulties in the field of its own 
competence, some of which had already been referred to by previous speakers. 
The problem of how to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and evon more 
the problems raised in the efforts to secure general and complete disarmament 
were extremely complicated, much more so, in fact, than those problems with which 
the General Conference properly had to deal. They could not be resolved by 
simple appeals to Member States to show goodwill or to undertake certain 
commitments unconditionally. 
63. Those problems had occupied numerous sessions of the Geneva Disarmament 
Committee of the United Nations and were now to be taken up by the General 
Assembly. The United Kingdom had taken an active part in the discussions and 
had put forward constructive proposals. If the General Conference widened its 
debates to include broad and deep questions for which the United Nations was the 
proper international forum, the inevitable consequence would be that the quality 
of the Agency's work in its specialized field would suffer, 
64= Any efforts by the General Conference to intervene in matters beyond its 


competence could serve only to complicate, rather than to advance, the achievement 
of disarmament. In the view of the United Kingdom and of many other 


delegations, the proposal in document GC(IX)/5l6 was, even on the widest 


interpretation, quite outside the objectives and the functions of the Agency set 


out in Articles II and III of the Statute. That was true even if the proposal 
was couched in terms of an appeal rather' than a request or invitationf there was 


no magic in the use of the word "appeal" that exempted it from the ordinary 
provisions of the Statute. 



GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 15 


65. On behalf of the United Kingdom and certain other delegations, he wished to 
introduce the following draft resolution: 
"The General Conference, 


(a) Recognizing the desire of Member States to support measures 
and negotiations designed to obtain agreement on general and complete 
disarmament under effective international control, 
(b)' Noting with deep satisfaction that disarmament negotiations are 
continuing to be actively pursued in the appropriate political organs 
of the United Kations,' and 


(c) Bearing in mind that the objectives and functions of the Agency 
are as set forth in Articles II and III of its Statute, and that 
pursuant to these objectives and functions the Agency has established 
a system of controls to enable it "to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world" and, at the same time, to "ensure, so far as it is able, 
that assistance provided by it or at its request or under its supervision 
or control is not used in such a way as to further any military 
purpose", 
decides that it is not competent to deal with the draft resolution oouUin^ii 


in document GC(IX)/3l6." 
66* Turning from problems of disarmament to the Agency's affairs, he wished to 
comment on the need for stringent control of finance. The United Kingdom did 
not favour a too rapid growth in the Agency's expenditure. Governments vrere 
concerned with the rising costs of scientific work, and there were many fields 
of endeavour to be supported. When the Conference came to consider financial 
questions, the United Kingdom delegation would press strongly for the Secretariat 
to make future improvements in its planning practices. The present two-year 
plan represented a good beginning, but did not go far enough. In future years, 
the biennial plan should be more detailed and more closely related to the likely 
cost of each phase of the programme. The annual budgets and future plans should 
be based on a realistic assessment of when the necessary manpower was likely to 
become available. 

67. The financing of the Agency's Operational Budget continued to be a matter 
of anxiety to the United Kingdom delegation. Quite rightly, the Agency was 
concerned to help the developing countries though it was important that the 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 16 


Secretariat should not regard research contracts which had a scientific purpose 
as a concealed form of technical assistance. Hitherto, the United Kingdom had 
supported the successive annual requests for voluntary contributions to the 
Operational Budget which the Secretariat had put forward. Apart from providing 
money, the United Kingdom had found, and continued to find, many places at 
educational and training establishments in the United Kingdom for students sent 
by the Agency, and had provided, without charge to the Agency, experts for shortterm 
missions to developing countries. It was a matter of deep concern that a 
number of Member States systematically under-contributed or did not contribute 
at all to the Operational Budget, and it was clearly inequitable that a few States 
should be expected to go on paying for the work done under that Budget if other 
States did not join in. It was not enough to contribute only "in kind". He 
did not underrate the intention behind the gifts of equipment made available to 
the Secretariat or to particular countries through the medium of the Agency, nor 
did he doubt the potential usefulness of the equipment in question, but such gifts, 
however good in themselves, might not be what the developing countries really 
wanted. They might think that particular gifts would tend to direct too much of 
their own effort in a particular direction, whereas they wished to decide for 
themselves. Unless the Agency had flexibility in the use of its resources, the 
true wishes of Member States could not be properly met, 


68. He hoped to see a steadily increasing measure of collaboration between the 
Agency and other international organizations which had an interest in making use 
of the techniques of atomic energy. The Agency oould not and should not seek to 
keep the use of atomic energy as its private business, and he therefore welcomed 
the establishment of a Joint FAO/lAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture. 
Such developments should in principle facilitate close co-operation between the 
two organizations', and might be a solution which could be applied elsewhere. 
69* The United Kingdom delegation had been pleased to note in the Director 
General's latest periodic report an increasing number of references to co-operation 
with various international organizations in projects concerned with training, 
research and the drawing up of regulatory codes. The Agency's importance in 
international affairs was increasing, and would continue to do so in measure with 
the ever-increasing peaceful use of atomic energy. 

70. Mr-. SCARLATO (Italy) congratulated the President on his election and 
thanked the Japanese Government for its generous hospitality. The fact that the 
General Conference was meeting in Tokyo emphasized yet again the extent and worldwide 
scale of the role played by the Agency in the nuclear field, and had great 
symbolic and moral value. 

GC(IX)/0fl.$6 
page 1? 


Jl. Twenty years after the tragic days of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, atomic 
energy was no longer a terrible force capable of bringing to humanity only 
grief and destruction, but was becoming one of the principal factors in the 
economic and social development of the world. 

72. He noted with great satisfaction the re-appointment of Mr. "Eklund as the 
head of the Agency's Secretariat, and was sure that he would lead the Agency 
on to ever higher and more important goals. He also noted with equal satisfaction 
the excellent work carried out by the Agency in all its fields of 
activity and the brilliant results obtained, in particular the success of the 
Irternational Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste 73,0 
The Trieste Centre had been set up not only to develop the study of 
theoretical physics, but also with other important aims in mind, such as 
international co-operation and assistance to developing countries. The study 
of physics had been considerably advanced by the contribution of the scientists 
of exceptional quality participating in the Centre's activity. Plasma physics, 
high-energy physics and elementary-particle physics had been extensively 
studied, and the results obtained had appeared in some 90 papers. The Centre 
vas also a stimulating meeting-place for scientists from the 'East and the West. 
Twenty-eight countries had been represented there and groups from the Soviet 
Union, the United States and Western Europe had participated in the two 


seminars organized during its first year. The Centre had encouraged and 


significantly aided physicists from developing countries, 


74. The Director of the Centre, Professor Salam, and his co-workers deserved 
congratulation. There were, however, still financial problems? the contributions 
received did not, in fact, meet the Centre's needs. The Agency's 
financial participation covered only a small part of the Institute's budget? 
Italy and from time to time various other organizations provided the rest. 
Furthermore, Article 10 of the agreement between the Agenc-- and Italy on the 
setting up of the Centre provided for a duration of only four years? it was, 
however, desirable that the Centre should become a permanent institution of the 
Agency, financed appropriately under the Agency's budget. 

CC(IX)/0H.96 
page 18 


75" He welcomed the reorganization on the administrative level of the 

Secretariat's services concerned with technical assistance, which had led to 


improved and more rapid operation. He also approved the setting up of the 
Joint FAO/lAEA Division of A comic Energy in Agriculture. 


76o By approving the Revised Safeguards System en 25 February 1965. the Board 
of Governors had adapted the Agency's safeguards system to the new demands 
made on it hy the latest technological developments$ the Agency was thus in 


a position to carry out effectively one of its basic tasks, the control of the 
use of nuclear installations and equipment for peaceful purposes. 


77. The continual process of change also included the revision of standards 
and regulations for transport, safety and health. The Agency had undertaken 
that task with the aid of experts from Member States in order to have always 
available up-to-date texts corresponding to the needs dictated by the rapid 
development of nuclear technology. 
78. In Italy, the first five-year plan of the National Fuclear "Rnergy 
Commission, which had ended in 19^4j had above all made it possible to lay the 
foundations necessary for further developments research centres and laboratories 
had been built and equipped, personnel had been trained and technological 
research had been undertaken. The second five-year plan, with a budget of 
150 000 million lire, had been approved in Fay 1965? and had therefore barely 
begun. The purposes of the Italian nuclear programme could be summed up as; 
(a) the greatest possible reduction in the cost of centres of proven type, as 
regards both the initial outlay and the cost of the power produced; (b) the 
development of advanced converter reactors which would combine the lower cost 
of reactors of proven type with limited fuel requirements; and (c) the development 
of fast breeder reactors. 
79. Italy had already acquired considerable experience in the construction 
and operation of reactors of proven type. The three nuclear centres in 
operation were providing a mass of valuable information for the construction 
of new installations. 
80. In the field of thermal-neutron converter reactors, Italy's efforts were 
principally concentrated on heavy-water reactors. The steam-cooled reactor 
programme had been under way for some time, and the Commission had decided to 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 19 


accelerate it, providing special financial arrangements under the second fiveyear 
plan. It would thus be possible to develop in Italy a converter reactor 
with particularly interesting characteristics. 


8l. In the field of fast-hreeder reactors the Commission had for some time 
been carrying out an extensive research programme which would continue and 
would, in fact, be reinforced by the second five-year plan. 


82o Apart from its programme on the different types of reactors, the 
Commission was also interested in the problems of fuel fabrication and 
processing^ in particular, a study would be made of the recycling of plutonium 
in thermal-neutron reactors,, Thg development of the programme would no doubt 
give rise to a large number of problems, of which some would be difficult to 
solves that in turn had led to agreements for collaboration with various 
countries. 


83. He hoped that the Agency could play a decisive part in ensuring,once and 
for all, that atomic energy was a factor promoting the economic and social 
development of humanity and constitute, unencumbered by ideological and 
political differences, the highest meeting-point of all those who deeply 
believed in atomic energy as a peaceful instrument for the creation of a 
better "world. 
84. Mr. L^-VAH-TFxOI (Viet-Nam) warmly congratulated the President on his 
election and added that the delegation of Viet-Nam was particularly grateful 
for the hospitality offered by the Japanese Government. 
85. A welcome marked by such fine courtesy as the delegates to the Conference 
had everywhere encountered must have enabled them to discover, with delight, 
that eternal spirit of Japan which a Japanese poet of the eighteenth century 
had compared to the exquisite fragrance of the cherry blossoms beneath the 
first rays of the morning sun. Moreover, the achievements of the valiant 
Japanese people in every sphere would.serve to demonstrate what could be 
accomplished in the way of technological progress if a people was willing to 
make the necessary effort and to rely first and foremost on its own work for 
the" building of a better future. 

GC(IX)/ORo96 
page 20 


86. Very soon twelve years would have ^one 'by since 8 December 1953 when 
President Eisenhower, speaking before the General Assembly of the United Nations, 
had launched his appeal for a concerted international effort aimed at enlisting 
the atom in the service of peace. No doubt the hopes raised by that appeal 
were far from having been realized in full:; it was nonetheless true that, 
through President 'Eisenhower1s initiative and through the creation of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, a new type of international collaboration 
had been under way for nine years, whose benefits were being felt more ©very 
day by the underprivileged nations of the world. As a Member of the Agency, 
Viet-Nam was particularly happy .to say again how keenly it desired to see the 
Agency pursue and increase its efforts aimed at bringing the benefits of the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy to a steadily increasing number of 
countries. 
87. The record achieved by the Agency over the past four years, under the 
guiding hand of Mr. Eklund, was very promising indeed? without reserve, Vietnam 
wished to associate itself with the words of praise which had been spoken 
on that subject. In congratulating Mr. Eklund on the confidence that the Board 
.had shown in him by renewing his mandate, Viet-Nam wished to assure the 
Director General of its continued support r.nd willingness to participate in 
the beneficial activities of the Agency. 


88. Co-operation between the Agency and the various specialized agencies 
interested in the peaceful applications of atomic energy was gratifying, and 
he was also glad to note that certain projects for regional co-operation, as 
well as reciprocal arrangements between institutions in developing countries 
and in the more advanced countries, had been successfully carried out during 
the past year. The Agency's contributions to the practical applications of 
radioisotopes and to the standardization of measurements in radiological 
protection were highly appreciated, as was the support the Agency had consistently 
given to the developing countries with a view to building up their 
programmes on uranium fission. Such support had enabled Viet-Nam to carry out 
a programme of practical research designed principally to extend the use of 
radioisotopes in agriculture and medicine. 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 21 


89. With the assistance of experts and equipment obtained through the Agency, 
a radioisotope laboratory had been set up in the Faculty of Medicine at Saigon^ 
its thyroid programme was already in full swing. A laboratory for the 
agricultural applications of radioisotopes was to be established in Saigon 
before the end of 1965= In the very near future Viet-ITam hoped to be able to 
take an active part in research on soil fertility, using radioactive tracers 
for the purpose^ very special importance was attached to that project, in 
fact, because of the dominance of agriculture in Viet-N'am1 s economy. The 
radioisotopes required for the two laboratories would be furnished largely by 
the Dalat Nuclear Research Centre, whose work consisted for the most part in 
activation analysis, studies on animal and plant metabolism, research on 
mutations brought about by X-rays and neutron irradiation, and measurements of 
water flow by means of radioisotopes, 
90. With regard to radiological protection, the measurements of radioactivity 
in air and rain water undertaken at Dalat since 1961 had now been extended to 
Saigon. The films on dosimetry provided by the Dalat centre had proved to be 
particularly useful. Establishments engaged in radiation work were subject to 
regular control at Saigon, and a system of radiological control for the whole 
country would be instituted when the decree regarding protection against 
ionizing radiation, drafted with the Agency's assistance, was promulgated in 
the near future. The authorities? of Viet-Ham planned to make frequent use in 
years to come of that new type of assistance, in order to provide their country 
with an appropriate body of legislation conforming to the recommendations of 
the Agency. They hoped that the basic standards for radiation protection, 
recently adopted by the Board, would obtain the force of law by being incorporated 
in the national legislation of an increasing number of countries. 
Finally, they were pleased to note that the regulations for transport of radioactive 
materials had already been incorporated in a number _>f the most important 
international conventions, 
91 o In the past year, Viet-TJam had done its best to disseminate a knowledge 
of atomic science and to interest an increasing number of its own technicians 
in the new disciplines associated with it. Introductory courses in the 
techniques of applying radioisotopes in medicine and agriculture had been 
organized, and popular scientific pamphlets had been published. 



GC(IX)/0E.96 
page 22 


92, Viet-Nam was well aware that it lacked the personnel and the means 
required for nuclear research and placed all its hopes in the Agency's technical 


.assistance programme. As in the past, it would accept visiting professors and 
fellowships with gratitude. With regard to research, it hoped that the Agency 
would continue to contribute to its programme for the application of isotopes 
in medicine and agriculture,, 


93o Technical assistance constituted one of the most valuable aspects of the 
Agency's work, tmt the fact was that the resources available for that purpose 
were becoming ever more inadequate to meet the volume of requests. The Agency 
was faced with a serious problem in that respect, which could be solved only 
if all Member States, particularly the advanced ones, recognized their moral 
obligation to make an adequate contribution to financing the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. In spite of the difficult situation in which it. found 
itself, Viet-Nam had been anxious to obey the call of international solidarity 
by pledging a contribution to the General Fund for the coming year equal to its 
assessment under the Agency's Regular Budget for 1966. 


94. The establishment of the post of Agency regional representative for South 
East Asia and the For East marked a fresh stage on the road to consolidating 
'regional co-operation. Thanks to the contacts which he had already made with 
the authorities responsible for national atomic programmes, the representative 
would be in a position to concentrate his main efforts in those fields in which 
the Agency's assistance would be capable of benefiting several countries simultaneously. 
95• He greatly regretted that reference had been made at the Conference to the 
aggression of which Viet-Nam was at present a victim. However, since such 
reference had been made, and to avoid any misunderstanding, he would just like 
to restate the facts and say that Vict-Nam was indeed at present going through 
the tragedy of a war which it did not want and which had been imposed on it 
from outside by the very people who were preaching co-existence while depriving 
the Vietnamese people of the right freely to decide their own destiny. 


96. Whatever the vicissitudes of the moment, Viet-JS.am maintained an unshakeable 
, faith in the work of international co-operation going on under the auspices of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency. The General Conference could rest 



GC(IX)/OR„96 
page 23 


assured that Viet-STam would spare no efforts to ensure that its people, in the 
fullness of time, participated in the grand undertaking of enlisting the atom 
in the service of man.. 


97. Mr. MOMBONG (Democratic Republic of fchc Congo) associated his 
delegation with all those which had addressed -their congratulations to the 
President and expressed thoir thanks tc the Japanese Government. 
980 He felt himself obliged to refer to the nuclear explosion which had taken 
place on 16 October 196.4 in fcho Taxi a Makan desert in China, and was wondering 
anxiously what were now the chances for the survival of civilization on earth 
following an atomic war, That question involved another and more direct ones 
how could one promote fche peaceful uses of atomic energy while at the same time 
ensuring that its use for military ends was net promoted at the same time? 


99. The establishment of a safeguards system undoubtedly constituted a praiseworthy 
and necessary action, but care should be taken to ensure that the system 
was not unnecessarily burdensome. The principle by which control of nuclear 
materials should involve inspection of the facilities in which the materials 
were located and also inspection of the equipment directly connected with their 
production was valuable but at the same time dangerous. Its effect was to open 
the door tc interpretations which might lead to an endless number of disputes, 
for it was difficult to evolve a safeguards system which did net seriously 
hinder the development cf atomic energy in the developing countries. The great 
majority of those countries still lacked the expertise and experience necessary 
in highly specialized techniques, and would bo unable to develop a nuclear 
infrastructure without the assistance cf the Agency or of the major industrial 
Powers. The safeguards system should therefore be sufficiently strict to 
prevent the use of nuclear technical assistance for military purposes while at 
the same time avoiding taking on a discriminatory character vis-a-vis the 
developing countries. 
100. The present draft sought to avoid that reef by introducing the concept of 
"principal nuclear facilities'^ it provided that facilities of that kind should 
be regarded as "substantially supplied" under a project agreement and hence 
subject to safeguards "if the Board has so determined". The Board of Governors 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 24 


thus became the arbiter in the matter, and it was therefore necessary that all 
the various interests should be equitably represented and defended therein. 
That was why the Congolese Government had considered it necessary to call 
attention to what.it believed to bo serious defects in the Agency's governing 
body by proposing an amendment to Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. Deferring to 
the wishes of the Board, the Congolese Government was prepared to agree that 
its amendment should be taken up at the tenth session of the General Conference. 


101. Without going into greater dc-iail, be would stress h-.re and now that a 
number of countries retained their seats on the Board in an arbitrary manner,-
One of them in particular seemed to remain permanently on the Board by virtue 
of Article VI.A.1 of the Statute. The country which had been technologically 
the most advanced Member seven years ago, whsn the Agency had been set up, WF,S 
now no longer necessarily in that position^ similarly, the countries which 
had been uranium producers ten years age might very easily no longer be so now. 
Refusal to recognize hard facts was an unscientific attitude and resulted in 
giving way to the demands of a purely political equilibrium, which like all 
day-to-day politics was necessarily unstable. 
102. Turning to the Agency's budget, he considered that the additional 
expenditure automatically resulting from the increased ccst of living in 
Vienna should not always be met by the elimination of scientific work and 
still less by that of technical assistance activities, as appeared to have been 
the case when, in the last few weeks, it had been necessary to make up 
$100 000 spent on salary increases. If in such circumstances the budget could 
not be increased.; consideration should be given to reducing the Agency's staff. 
lOJ. Some months previously the Dongo had officially inaugurated its Atomic 
Energy Commission (Commissariat aux sciences nucleaires). The Trico Centre 
at Leopoldville was expanding continually, but it still needed equipment and 
scientific staff from outside in order to be able to provide, in the Congo and 
the neighbouring countries which so desired, all the benefits of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, 


IO4. The Congolese Government had greatly appreciated the Agency's generous 
assistance, which had taken the form of the provision of research equipment 
and the grant of research contracts. It hoped that the Agency would favourably 
consider the four new research contracts which the Congolese atomic centre had 
proposed during the present year. 



GC(IX)/0H.96 
page 25 


105. Having had occasion to observe the competence of the Director General and 
his administration? the Congolese dclagation would ho happy to give its full 
support to Mr. Sigvard TDklund's candidature for a further term of office as 
Director General. 
106. Mr. TYABJI (India), after congratulating the President on his 
election and? through him,, thanking the Japanese Government for extending 
such warm-hearted hospitality tc the Conference, observed how fitting it was 
that, twenty years after the War, the representatives of so many nations of the 
world should be brought together in Tokyo by an Agency devoted solely to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and that they should reaffirm in that setting 
their determination to do everything possible bo ensure that atomic energy 
would never again be used for destructive purposes. 
107. He also wished to welcome the six new Members of the Agency, and to assure 
them of India's whole-hearted co-operation. 
108. While not everything that had happened in the world since the last session 
had been for the good of mankind, the spectacular achievements of the Soviet 
Union and the United States in the field of space research did fall into that 
category. The two countries concerned had accomplished their great feats in a 
spirit of competitive but peaceful co-existence which was heartening to all 
who desired peace. 
109. On the other hand,the explosion of two atomic devices by the People's 
Republic of China against the wishes of the majority of nations, as manifested 
by the great number of signatures to the tost ban treaty, could only be 
described as deplorable. If China proceeded tc stockpile atomic weapons it 
might not be possible for a number of other countries, including India, which 
were capable of producing such weapons but which so far had refrained from 
doing so, to continue their present policy. 
110. The Indian view was that the way to stop the further spread of nuclear 
weapons was not so much to prevent more countries from acquiring them as to 
make those countries which already had them give them up. An atmosphere 
propitious to progress in that direction could be created by changing the 
present general approach to the problem. The custom of dividing countries into 

GC(IX)/0H.'96 
page 26 


nuclear Powers and non-nuclear Powers, depending on whether they had or had. not 
developed atomic weapons., should ho abandoned as anachronistic ,• for it belonged 
to the days when atomic programmes existed' only for military purposes and 
significant peaceful uses of atomic energy had not been developed. That stage 
had now been passed. 


111. The history of the development of atomic energy was a good illustration 
of that point. The first atomic bomb had been exploded in 1945 but, although 
nuclear po'wer had made its initial appearance in the early ninetcen-fifties, 
large-scale atomic power stations capable of producing electricity at an 
economically competitive cost compared with conventional power sources were only 
now being built. The fact that it had taken twenty years from the explosion 
of the first bomb to develop economic nuclear power showed that the technology 
of the latter was far more complex and difficult than that required for producing 
basic atomic weapons. There were now countries, such as Canada, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Japan, Sweden and India, which had made substantial 
progress in mastering the techniques of nuclear power but which had not devoted 
any of their resources to the military aspects of atomic energy. To describe 
such States as "non-nuclear" was therefore quite incorrect, and was indeed 
harmful* by the wrong emphasis which it placed on the military aspects of 
nuclear energy it did a disservice to the cause of the Agency, whose sole aim 
was to encourage its peaceful uses. 
112. Turning to the agenda of the Conference, he observed that one of the most 
important items related to the adoption of the Agency1s revised safeguards 
system. India had always taken the view that the Agency's obligation under 
its Statute to ensure that the assistance it gave was not used for military 
purposes sliould be reasonably interpreted and implemented. The original 
safeguards system had seemed to attempt the-impossible; and by so doing had 
achieved little. Thanks to the efforts which had been put into devising the 
revised system, the approach to'the question of safeguards was now much more 
reasonable, and hence the system was more likely to be effective. In 
particular, the revised system had abandoned the concept that safeguards had 
to be attached to all and every kind of assistance. Under the new arrangements 
safeguards would only be attached if a "principal nuclear facility" were 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 27 


supplied "wholly or substantially" by or through, the Agency. That meant that 


the provision of conventional equipment and materials would not involve safe


guards, and it had been precisely the attachment of safeguards to such items 


that had made the original system discriminatory as between industrially 


developed and under-developed countries. 


115= Although India was gratified that some of the mere unjust provisions of 
the original system had no?/ been removed, and was prepared tc accept the new 
arrangements, there were still a number of serious defects which vitiated the 
effectiveness oven of the revised system. For example, the Agency would still 
be able to supply fissionable materials under safeguards to a country which had 
a military nuclear programme. That would mean that some of that country's own 
fissionable materials could be released for military purposes. Thus, even 
with its full safeguards system in operation, the Agency might be furthering 


military objectives, and the conclusion was that if the Agency was really to 


ensure that assistance given by it was not diverted from peaceful uses, it 


should abstain from giving any assistance in the form of fissionable materials 


to States which already had an atomic weapons programme. 


114. That was only one example which illustrated the basic futility of trying 
to make the world safe by applying safeguards to some and not to others* The 
mere attachment of safeguards to the provision of a nuclear facility by the 
Agency or by a State in no way covered the problem of how to stop the use of 
atomic weapons by countries which had developed them on their own or with the 
assistance of others. In the atomic age security was indivisible, and so also 
must be the- system intended to ensure that security. The fact of the matter 
was that genuine safeguards could not bo developed independently of the 
solution of the disarmament problem. 
115• Some States had voluntarily placed a few of their reactors under Agency 
safeguards, but if those countries had stockpiles of atomic weapons or had 
other reactors in which they were producing plutonium, the measure of Agency 
control thus established provided no guarantees toother States which considered 
themselves threatened. 



GC(IX)/OR,96 
pago 28 


ll6o On the other hand, a reactor could contribute nothing to -a country's 
military potential unless there was available a plant for extraction of 
plutonium from the irradiated fuel. In that connection ho would recall a 
proposal made by the Indian delegation to the Conference on the Statute in 
1956, under which all gaseous diffusion and chemical processing plants would 
be placed under international control, thus obviating the need for attachment 
of safeguards to source materials, equipment or reactors and eliminating the 
danger of a clandestine increase in stockpiles of weapons„ India still believed 
that that would be the correct procedure to follow. 

117. Referring to the progress of India's nuclear programme during the past 
year, he said that the construction of the Tarapur Atomic Power Station of 
was making rapid progress and that the station was expected to be 
operational by 1968. India's second nuclear power station was being constructed 
in Rajasthan and would have an output of 200 MW(e). The single reactor, of 
the natural-uranium, heavy-water type, would go into service in' 1969. 


ll8o While those two stations were being built with the assistance of the 
United States and Canada respectively, the second 200-MY/(e) unit at the 
Rajasthan station would be built using India's own resources, as would a twinreactor 
4-00-MW(e) station to be situated some forty miles south of Madras, 
That additional capacity was expected to be installed by the end of 1970, when 
India would have some 1.2 million kW of nuclear capacity in operation., 


119. A further 1.8 million kW was expected to be installed by the end of 1975• 
The grids into v/hich the Tarapur, Rajasthan and Madras stations would feed 
l 


their power would then be large enough to use reactors with a capacity of 
500 or 600 MW(e), and the capacity of each of those stations would be expanded 
accordingly. By then it was expected that at least one other station would 
have been built as well. 


120. The large-scale programme he had just described was being undertaken 
because the economics of nuclear power had made significant progress. It was 
estimated that the Tarapur station would deliver power at a- cost of about 
6 mills per kWh, while at the Rajasthan and Madras stations the cost was 
expected to be somewhat less. 

GC(IX)/OB.96 
page 29 


121. The two latter stations would each require about 200 tons of heavy water, 
and it was proposed shortly to embark on the construction of a plant to 
produce that quantity each year. India already had facilities for producing 
metallic and ceramic reactor fuel, out for the large programme new envisaged 
it was proposed to erect more extensive facilities to fabricate all the special 
materials required. A mine was being developed to produce a thousand tons of 
uranium ore per day, and a mill to extract uranium concentrates from the ere 
would go into operation in 1966. The plutonium plant, completed in 1964? had 
been in regular operation. All .these plants and facilities had been designed 
and built ~bj Indian acior.tiots and engineers. 
122. He wished to stress once more India's desire to give all possible assistance 
to other developing countries in their efforts to enjoy the fruits of 
atomic energy. India regularly offered fellowships to the Agency, and there 
were now scientists from a number of countries working at the Atomic Energy 
Establishment at Trombay. In pursuance of that policy of assisting other 
States, India had in 19&4 given a neutron crystal spectrometer to the 
Philippines atomic energy research centre, and had recently agreed to install 
an i.sotope laboratory in Afghanistan. 
12J. In order to assist the Agency in its operational programme, India had 
decided to contribute $35 000 to the General Fund for the present year. Owing 


to India's difficult foreign exchange position, the contribute on would be in 
rupees, but in terms of size it was more than it would have been had it been 
based on assessment. He wished to reaffirm his Government's view that the 
Agency's Operational Budget should be based on voluntary contributions. 


124. The harnessing of atomic energy for peaceful purposes opened up new 
prospects for serving mankind. At a conference devoted to atomic energy it 
was therefore appropriate to refer to the most important long-term problem 
facing the world, namely, the provision of the under-nourished and ill-housed 
populations of the world with better standards of living. To solve that 
problem energy had to be supplied in adequate quantities, and it was known that 
conventional energy sources-were or would become inadequate. It was there that 
atomic energy could make its greatest contribution to human welfare. 

GC(IX)/OR,96 
page JO 


125. It seemed appropriate for him to conclude his remarks by quoting what 
Dr. He J. Bhabha, Chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission, had said in 
his presidential address to the first Geneva conference on the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy; "For the full industrialization of the under-developed 
countries, for the continuation of our civilization and its further development, 
atomic energy is not merely an aids; it is an absolute necessity", 
126. Mr. BRYWIELSSON (Sweden) said that his delegation was happy to join 
with ethers in extending its congratulations to the President on his election, 
and also highly appreciated the hospitality of the Government of Japan and the 
excellent arrangements for the Conference in Tokyo, 
127. Nuclear-power was now becoming economically competitive even in Sweden 
in spite of the very low prices of conventional fuels and the considerable 
reserves of hydro power still remaining in the country. The main effort in 
Swedish nuclear development had been devoted to the adaptation of tank-type 
reactor technology to heavy-water reactor systems, Swedish experience had 
shown that the heavy-water-moderated and -cooled system made efficient and 
economical use of natural uranium and showed great promise for adaptation to 
a thorium-based fuel cycle. The operation of Sweden's first power reactor in 
Agesta had given good results. The next project - the direct-cycle heavy-water 
boiler at Marvikon - was proceeding according to plan and would bo completed in 
1968. The development work done on tank-type heavy-water reactors in Sweden 
had also yielded valuable experience for the construction of light-water 
reactors. A contract had been placed with Sv/edish industry in the summer of 
1965 for the construction of a 400-MW(e) light-water boiler at Oskarshamn, 
which would bo completed by 1970. 
128. Thereafter nuclear power was expected to contribute most of the new 
generating capacity needed in Sweden. Prom about 1975 onwards at least one big 
nuclear power unit would be added to the grid every year, 
129. He had given that information on the Swedish nuclear power programme 
mainly as a background to Sweden1s views on the most important subject before 
the Conference, namely, safeguards. Sweden had consistently stressed the 
importance of developing an international control system that would win 
universal acceptance. The new safeguards provisions which were before the 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 31 


Conference represented a considerable step forward, and Sweden hoped that they 
would obtain unanimous approval., As mentioned by the Director General in his 
statement, Sweden had already declared its wish to apply Agency safeguards to 


its bilateral agreements with the United Kingdom and the United States of 
America. Furthermore, Swedish industry was now offering nuclear power plants 
on the world market and the Swedish Government expected that the Agency safe


guards system would provide the framework for that commercial activity. 


IJOo In vie:? of the rapid expansion and technological development now expected 
in the nuclear field it was, however, quite clear that the new safeguards 

system would need revision in the not too distant future. The rules would have 


to cover other installations than reactors, so as to include the whole fuel 
cycle. The Swedish power industry and manufacturing industry would face impor


tant decisions in the next few years, and it was essential that the technical 
and economic implications of safeguards, when applied en a large scale, should 
be clear. The studies required for the extension of the system should therefore 
be started as soon as possible. 


131. Turning to the Agency's general programme of work, his delegation 
considered that it vras developing in a sound manner. Sweden supported the 
Agency"s activities in the field of technical assistance and believed that it 
was of great importance to place those activities on a firm financial basis. 
Sweden was therefore once more going to contribute its share of the target set 
for voluntary contributions to the General Fund, and would in addition make a 
special contribution to the Agency laboratories in the form of ^30 000 worth 
of instruments. 
132. The Agency's work in organizing conferences and symposia was of great 
value to all Member States, and his Government was happy to welcome the first 
Agency symposium to Sweden in November 1965133. 
Mr. do LIMA (Brazil) congratulated the President on his election and 
thanked the Japanese Government for its hospitality. 
134. Largely thanks to the Agency's help Brazil occupied a relatively important 
position in South America in the application of nuclear energy. Particularly 
valuable collaboration had been established with France and the United States. 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 32 


There were now three reactors in the country and three critical facilities. 
Owing to the regular operation of the Sao Paulo swimming-pool reactor, it 
had been possible to increase greatly the medical applications of radioisotopes 


for diagnosis, therapy and research.. Medical demand for certain radioisotopes 
was being met entirely from domestic production and shipments had started to 
Paraguay, Bolivia and Peru. As the production of processing cells was not 


adequate, plans were under way for a new radioisotope production and chemical 
processing plant. . . 


135• There would be advantage in establishing.a large radioisotope production 


centre in Sao Paulo where much experience had been gained^ the centre would 
be able to supply short and medium half-life radioisotopes to other South 


American countries<> 


136. He welcomed the important meetings arranged by the Agency in South America 
as they had provided countries with an opportunity for exchanging ideas and 
seeking solutions to similar problems. 
1J7" As a token of Brazil's support for the Agency, Congress had already 


approved the Convention on Privileges and Immunities with the Agency and would 


shortly be ratifying the Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage. 


138. Brazil, being a large country with areas that were without hydro resources 
and too remote to be supplied with oil at economic cost, stood in great need 
of nuclear energy in the near future. The Brazilian Nuclear Energy Commission 
had recently submitted to the President certain considerations on nuclear power 
problems. No decision had yet been taken on whether or not to initiate 
immediately a programme of nuclear power production but sooner or later 
reactors would undoubtedly be operating in the country. For that and other 
reasons Brazil was anxious to collaborate in the discussion on safeguards. 
139. ' Mr. KRELTSZHEIM (Ceylon) said that as a resident of'Tokyo for the 
past few years he was no stranger to the hospitality and courtesy of the 
Japanese people, but could, not let the present opportunity pass without an 
expression of thanks and appreciation to the Government of Japan for the painstaking 
and excellent arrangements it had made for the session. He also 
congratulated the President on his unanimous election. 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 33 


140. Coylon was thankful to thn Agency for its continued assistance in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
141. The Ceylon Government had taken steps to set up a statutory body and an 
advisory committee to deal with all matters relating to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Once those bodies were- set up it was proposed to draw up 
regulations pertaining to the import, transport, storage, use and handling of 
radioactive material and the disposal of radioactive waste. Ceylon appreciated 
the various offers cf assistance the Agency had already mado in that connection. 
142. The Radioisotope Centre established in 196I with the assistance of the 
Agency had been continuing with its own research projects and undergraduate and 
post-graduate training programmes and had also been assisting the Department 
of Agriculture, the Tea, Rubber and Coconut Research Institutes, the Department 
of Health and some University Departments in some of their research projects. 
Ceylon was now in a position to offer a few places for persons from other 
countries to follow general courses on the use of radioisotopes or for specific 
research projects. Pour places had been offered to the Agency during the past 
year but unfortunately no suitable candidates had been available at the time. 
Ceylon was thankful to the Agency for having arranged n regional course at the 
Radioisotope Centre and hoped that the Agency would use it for further regional 
courses, which wore urgently required in agriculture, medicine and radiological 
protection. 
143- Among the other types cf assistance Ceylon was receiving from the Agency, 
he referred particularly to the Agency advisers who had been assisting the 
Cancer Hospital and the Department of Agriculture in a number of research and 
training projects, the two research contracts awarded to the University of 
Ceylon for medical and biological studies, and the equipment supplied to the 
Department of Geological Survey. 


144. Ceylon welcomed the appointment of the regional officer who was now 
stationed in Bangkok and hoped that his appointment would lead to the setting 
up of a regional office, which would help the Agoncy to become more intimately 
aware of the needs and problems of the area. 

GC(IX)/OR.96 
page 34 


145 • Ceylon appreciated the wide variety of literature received on atomic 
energy and kindred subjects, The Agency might consider setting-up regional 
libraries to facilitate exchange, of literature and information as many countries 
were not in a position tc have comprehensive libraries themselves. 


146. He was-aware of the practical difficulties which the Agency faced in the • 
placement of experts and advisers. He was aware too that the Agency functioned 
with limited funds. Those difficulties and limitations had their repercussions 
in the receiving countries. Advisers occasionally had to leave before the 
projects they had come to advise- on were complete. At times equipment due to 
arrive with the expert was received only after he had left. The financial 
necessity of drawing equipment from a. wide variety of sources resulted in a 
lack of uniformity in the equipment made available. If some arrangement for a 
more uniform supply of equipment could bo made, it would help in' the twin 
problems of•maintenance .and repair on the one hand and the procurement and 
build-up of a stock of spares on the other. 
147* The Agency might also consider undertaking more regional projects, 
particularly in agriculture and medicine, with provision for a free exchange 


of techniques .and results. A careful balance between long-term and short-term 


projects would have to be worked cut. 


148. The Agency's revised safeguards' system was a definite improvement on the 
previous system in that the provision of know-how and financial assistance and 
the supply of conventional equipment had been clearly excluded from the scope 
of safeguards. It was also necessary that the system bo implemented with that 
measure of tolerance which would cause the minimum interference in the growth 
of atomic energy programmes in developing countries. 
149. In conclusion, he welcomed the re-appointment cf the Director General for 
a further term of office. 
The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(IX)/OR.97 
20 December 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 
ENGLISH 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Friday, 24 September 1965, a-t 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


10 General debate and report of the Board of 1 - 101 
Governors for 1964-65 (continued) 


Statements by the delegates of: 
Romania 1 - 17 
Austria 18 - 28 
Federal Republic of Germany 29 - 57 
Indonesia 58 - 50 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 51 - 65 
Algeria 66 - 72 
Colombia 73 - 84 
Morocco 85 - 91 
Turkey 92 - 98 
Burma S9 - 101 

* GC(IX)/513. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/Rev.2. 


65-7535 



GC(IX)/OR„97 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AM) REPORT OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1964-65 (GC(IX)/299, 507) 
(continued) 


1. Mr. HULUBEI (Romania) congratulated the President on his election and 
thanked the Japanese Government for its generous hospitality in a beautiful 
country which twenty years previously had suffered the terrible effects of the 
destructive power of nuclear energy. 
2. Romania wished to do everything it could to contribute towards the fight 
against atomic weapons and for world peace., It was striving to arrest the 
armaments race, and was working for general disarmament and the creation of 
denuclearized zones as well as for the unconditional prohibition of nuclear 
weaponso The Romanian people unreservedly supported any reasonable measure for 
facilitating international co-operation and for clearing the difficult path 
towards world progress, both economic and social, Experience showed that most 
international problems, including the dangers of a nuclear conflict, could be 
overcome if the principles of national sovereignty and independence and noninterference 
in internal affairs were respected. In that connection, his 
Government considered that the imperialist intervention in Viet-Nam was causing 
unnecessary suffering and endangering world peace,, 
3. He warmly congratulated Jordan and Jamaica, the Agency's two new Members, 
and expressed the hope that their efforts would be both beneficial to their 
peoples and conducive to fulfilment of the Agency's noble aims. He also hoped 
that out of respect for the principle of universality, other peoples not yet 
represented in the Agency would be admitted to share in the common work, aims 
and aspirations. 
4o The Board of Governors' annual report and the Director General's statement 


shewed that on the whole the Agency's work was systematically being directed 


towards the goals set in the Statute. He paid tribute to the qualities of the 
Director General, an eminent scientist who was directing the Agency along a 
definite scientific path. His delegation supported the proposal for his 


re-appointment for another four years. 


5. The services given by the Agency indicated that the time was approaching 
when it would play an important and essential role in the peaceful application 
of atomic energy despite international difficulties which were still hampering 
nuclear activities,, As other delegates had examined the Agency's activity in 
detail he would confine himself to just a few comments. 

GC(IX)/OR,97 
page 3 


6. Special mention should be made of the work done during the past year by the 
Division of Scientific and Technical Information. International meetings had 
been carefully organized and most of the topics considered had been of increasing 
interest to Member States. The numerous and excellent publications were much 
sought after and extremely useful. 
7. The concentration of different forms of technical assistance in one 
Department had proved satisfactory, given the importance of such activities among 
those being carried out in the Agency. 
8. Extremely interesting research in agriculture, such as the eradication of 
harmful insects through the sterilization of males, crop disinfestation and the 
sterilization of fruit and fruit juice by irradiation, was proceedings in close 
collaboration with the specialized agencies of the United Nations. He also 
emphasized the importance to all Member States of the Agency's activities in the 
realm of health and safety, particularly its revision of the Safety Standards 
and the Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials—'. He also 
mentioned the collaboration with specialized agencies on radiation protection 
and'the disposal of radioactive waste, 
9. The Agency's Laboratory had produced standard radioisotope sources for 
114 institutions, and 15 Member States had received assistance under the 
co-orelinateeL research programme on rice and maize. Twelve countries had also 
received help in research on male sterilization techniques for destroying 
noxious insects. 
10. The Division of Nuclear Power and Reactors had also been very busy, both on 
power reactors and reactor physics. It was studying the use of plutonium in 
thermal-neutron reactors and of thorium in converter and breeder reactors. He 
also mentioned the work of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste organized by the Agency in conjunction with UNESCO. 
11. The Board had approved the revised safeguards system. Romania had taken 
part in the work of revision and was ready to vote for the new system. Its 
application would reveal its merits and defects, and it could be revised when 
that proved necessary. 
1/ STI/PUB/97. 



GC(IX)/OR„97 
page 4 


12c The Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energyheld 
in Geneva had shown that the world could rely on atomic energy for progress, 
and it could be claimed with justice that the first steps in the nuclear age had 
been taken. The forecasts made at Geneva had been confirmed by intense activity, 
in both the highly industrialized and the less advanced countries,, 


13. Romania was striving to develop its industry, and an average annual 
increase of 10.5$ for industrial production was planned up to 1970. The output 
of electrical and thermal energy was to increase at an even higher rate in the 
coming years and was to be nearly doubled in five years. Use must be made of 
nuclear energy, and it was planned to put into operation two nuclear power 
stations with a total capacity of 1000-1200 KW before 1975. 
14. His delegation believed that the Agency's activities in the coming years 
should be directed in particular towards solving urgent problems such as those 
relating to nuclear power stations and associated matters| such problems should 
be given a prominent place in the next biennial programme. The Agency had in 
the past rightly included in its programmes matters of major interest, of the 
type of those that had been mentioned, for the applications of radioisotopes 
were of great economic importancef but greater weight should now be given to 
problems of nuclear power. The Agency could undertake studies of great 
international interest, such as comparative technical and economic studies of 
the different reactor types, comparative studies of different types <3f fuel, 
studies on the best way of constructing power reactors and studies relating to 
the use of nuclear power in merchant fleets or space travel. 
15. No doubt all delegates were familiar with Resolution 1090 (XXXIX) of the 
Economic and Social Council of the United Eat: ons regarding the use of human 
resources, which were recognized to be an essential factor in the economic and 
social development of developing countries in particular, The United Nations 
and other international bodies, including the A ency, wore asked to give that 
resolution the attention it deserved. According to certain writers, two-fifths 
of the increase in production were due to skilled labour. The United Rations 
Committee on Science and Technology had stressed that the size and distribution 
of a country's trained and specialized manpower resources determined, in the 
final instance, its capacity. It was therefore necessary to reinforce the 
intellectual potential of a country that was being helped to develop, if 
technical assistance was to have any point. Such countries would not be really 
free or masters of their fate unless they disposed of a highly-skilled labour 
force. 

GC(IX)/OR„97 
page 5 


16. Training should be an essential part of the Agency's programme. The 
results so far obtained had been satisfactory and had also been noted by the 
Economic and Social Council in its resolution of 2 July 1965- His delegation 
hoped that in the context of the rapid development of nuclear power, the Agency 
would give special attention to the training of exports. In its view, a 
carefully prepared plan for training the personnel who were so essential to the 
success of the Agency's work should, if possible, bo included in the coming 
biennial programmes, perhaps in collaboration with USEE SCO. 
17. In conclusion, he earnestly hoped that the work of the present session would 
be crowned with a full measure of success, 
l8o Mr. HAYl'ISRLE (Austria) congratulated the President on his election and 
thanked the Japanese Government for having invited the Conference to meet in 
Tokyo and for having facilitated the work of delegations by the efficiency of 
the arrangements it had made, 


19o He welcomed the new Member States which had joined the Agency in the past 
year and those States whose applications for membership had been approved by 


the Conference. 


20„ It had been encouraging to read the annual report of the Board, which 
contained detailed information on the progress made in carrying out the Agency's 
biennial programme for 1965-66, and to hear the statement made by the Director 
General on the opening day of the Conference, which had emphasized that the 


2/ 


implementation of the Agency's long-term programme—' was making good headway,, 
Both the report and the Director General's statement had made it clear that the 
Agency had before it many opportunities for constructive work. 


21. A number of the items referred to were of particular interest to Austria. 
A very promising start had been made with the International Programme on the 
Irradiation of Eood and Fruit Juices, which was being carried out jointly by the 
Oesterreichische Studiengesellschaft fur•Atomenergie (Austrian Atomic Energy 
Research Organization), the European Nuclear Energy Agency and the Agency, and 
for which Austria bore a major share of the cost. Another important project being 
2/ IKPCIEC/50. 



GC(IX)/OR,97 
page 6 


carried out at the Agency's Laboratory at Seibersdorf involved research on 
eradication of the Mediterranean fruit fly in Central America. While on the 
subject of the Agency's Laboratory he wished to mention that Austria continued 
to place at the Laboratory's disposal about 25?6 of the capacity of the Austrian 
5_MW research and test reactor free of charge. Investigations were going on 
near Vienna in collaboration with the Arency and within the framework of the 
International Hydrological Decade with a view to opening up new sources of 
water supply. The isotope techniques being developed as a result of those 
investigations - particularly those based on the use of tritium - would be 
equally applicable to the problems of other countries. 


22. Austria was particularly pleased to note that the work of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste was developing successfully. In that 
connection he wished to state that if the Agency should one day wish to establish 
a similar institute for research in the medical applications of radioisotopes9 
his country would be glad to be of assistance in every way possible. 
23. Another matter of particular interest was the question of non-destructive 
techniques for testing irradiated reactor fuel. The fact that an adequate 
solution to that problem seemed to have been devised by Austrian scientists 
working in conjunction with the Agency was significant not only from the 
technical and economic standpoint in general but also from the standpoint of 
the Agency's safeguards system in particular. 
24o The revised safeguards system was one of the central topics of the present 
session of the General Conference and could become the key to further progress 
in international co-operation. Austria had already' accepted the principle of 
Agency control by entering into an agreement with the Agency and the Government 
of the United States of America. That agreement had been ratified and was due 
to come into force shortly. 

25o Another item of interest to Austria was the question of the elaboration of 
a draft agreement on emergency assistance to be provided in the event of 
radiation accidents. It would be useful if the General Conference could underline 
the urgency of the problem since, unless there was international agreement, 
the assistance needed in such cases might be held up by internal obstacles of 
a legal and administrative nature. 


GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 7 


26. As far as the budget estimates for 1966 were concerned, the proposed 
increases seemed reasonable and his country would support the budget as 
submitted- He was glad to state that Austria would be able to increase its 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund in 1966, Under the technical 
assistance programme useful work had been done in the past year. Austria had 
accepted 19 post-graduate students from 14 Member States and had spent 
considerable sums on its contx-ibuticn to the fellowship programme* Austria 
was at present considering an extension of her fellowsnip programme with a 
view to enabling Agency fellows to attend lectures at Austrian universities, 
27. His delegation was extremely pleased that Dr. Eklund was willing to serve 
the Agency for a further four-year term. Austria was convinced that, aided by 
his able staff, he would continue to lead the Agency on to further successes. 
28. One of the sources of the Agency's strength was its determination to tackle 
the limited tasks entrusted to it in a thoroughly realistic manner. All Member 
States, whatever their political or ideological background, had come to realize 
that the complex problems posed by the rapid rate of technical progress could 
only be solved through international agreement. It was in that spirit that 
Austria would continue to give its full support to the work of the Agency. 
29= Mr. SCHULTE-^SPJiAM (Federal Republic of Germany) conveyed his 
delegation's congratulations to the President on his election and its thanks and 
admiration to the Japanese Government and people. Although his country was not 
a Member of the United Nations, it had joined all the specialized agencies and 
had always endeavoured to contribute to the realization of the United Nations 
aims and objectives. It also did all in its power to support the programmes of 
the United Nations and its agencies. 


30. In the same way as the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses 
of Atomic Energy had shown that the use of nuclear power had now come of age, so 
the Agency's achievements during the past year had shown that it, too, had reached 
maturity. 
Jl. From his country's standpoint, the Third' International Conference had also 
shown that no major changes were required in the national atomic energy programme 
drawn up for the years 1963-67. A shift had, however, occurred as far as 
priorities in reactor development were concerned. Up to a few years previously 
the electricity industry, for commercial reasons, had still been reluctant to 



GC(IX)/ORo97 
page 8 


order major power stations and the reactor industry had only just started to 
develop some prototype reactors of advanced design. For their part the research 
centres had believed they had plenty of time for the long-term programme of breeder 
development. It now appeared that breeder reactors were being developed 
energetically all over the world and immediate and close co-operation between 
research centres and industry was therefore required in order to be able to 
build prototype breeders of approximately 25O-IW capacity as soon as possible., 
It was very satisfactory to find that the smaller prototype reactors with a 
capacity of 25-100 ¥iv'r developed under the transitional programme, at a time when 
breeders had still seemed a long way off, were proving of inestimable value as 
the forerunners of full-scale breeders. 

32. The Federal Republic deeply regretted that the progress it had achieved in 
reactor development should have aroused the suspicion in certain quarters that 
its atomic energy programme also served military purposes and would permit the 
production of nuclear weapons. He took the present opportunity of emphasizing 
yet again .that all his country's nuclear installations were, and would remain, 
exclusively devoted to the peaceful uses of atomic energy* There were no 
classified establishments in his country and all activities in the atomic 
energy field were subject to virtually unlimited control. During the past few 
years the Karlsruhe lluclear Research Centre, which had been the main object of 
suspicion, had been visited by more than one hundred thousand people, among them 
a great number of outstanding experts from many countries - including countries 
in Eastern Europe - who had been quite free to inspect all the installations at 
their ease. Apart from bilateral controls under agreements with the United States, 
the United Kingdom and Canada, every nuclear installation in his country was 
subject to the comprehensive and rigid security control system of EURATOM, which 
was generally considered the most comprehensive and effective multilateral system 
of security control in the world. 
33. His Government also approved the Agency's efforts to devise 3. world-wide 
control system which should be as uniform as possible and should not discriminate 
against any State, and specially appreciated the progress made in that respect. 
34o The annual report of the Board showed that the Agency had during the past 
year made useful contributions in many other fields as well. In particular he 
congratulated the Agency on the success of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste, which was a good example of the way in which the Agency could 
help its Members by a programme of specialized training and co-operative research 
on a regional or international level. 


GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 9 


35. The Government of the Federal Republic was always particularly glad of the 
occasion to arrange Agency meetings on its territory, and also to co-operate in 
the Agency's work on hydrology, where the forthcoming results of the research 
contracts awarded to the lieidelherg and Munich laboratories would be of special 
importance for the developing countries. 
36. In order to encourage co-operation b.etwcen the research centre of Garchin'g 
near Funich and foreign reactor stations, the Federal -Republic was again prepared 
to offer two fellowships and the necessary experimental equipment, with which the 
fellows would first work at Munich and which they would then take home with them. 
Sxperts from the Federal Republic were willing to assist the fellows in their 
future work once they had returned to their native countries. 
37. His delegation approved the Agency's programme for 1966 and regarded the 
10fo increase in the Regular Budget as reasonable and inevitable. The 
re-appointment of the Director General for a further four years strengthened 
its confidence in the Agency's future. 
33„ Mr. SIWABESSY (Indonesia) congratulated the President on his election 
and said that the choice of Tokyo as the venue for the General Conference was 
recognition of the important part played by Japan in the application of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. It was regrettable that one Asian nuclear Power 
had been excluded from the deliberations. 


39. He expressed appreciation of the work of the Director General and supported' 
his re-appointment. 
40. Indonesia had received valuable assistance from the Ar ency but 'was 
disappointed with some aspects ,of the policy followed, particularly during the 
past year. 
41. In his country the planning, co-ordination and supervision of atomic energy 
activities had been entrusted to the Institute for Atomic Energy, which had now 
been upgraded to the level of a Government department and the Director General 
of which now held the rank of cabinet minister. The department's technical work 
was carried out in-three centres. In Jogjakarta there was an isotope laboratory, 
a reactor simulator and •cobalt-60 unit for experiments in biology and 
agriculture, and a -specialized laboratory. There was also a subcritical 

GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 10 


assembly with which difficulties were being experienced, the output of neutron 
sources being too low. The Agency was helping to make good the deficiency. 
The Triga Mark II reactor had been completed in Bandung and had been operating 
since the end of I9S4. It was now being mainly used for the production of 
radioisotopes. 


4?-. Progress had been made in constructing the Serpong reactor, bought from 
a friendly nation. The reactor was expected to become critical by the end of 
1966. 


43• At "the seventh regular session of the General Conference, his delegation 
had expressed the desire to organize a regional isotope training course and 
as a first step in that direction five national courses had been arranged and 
had given good results. 


44• AS part of the effort to become self-sufficient and produce nuclear 


source material at home, five national survey teams were making a complete 


survey of resources, Although Indonesia had adequate hydro and fossil power 
resources it had to keep abreast of the search for more economic methods of 
power production, and preparations were under way to launch a nuclear power 


pilot project in 1970. 


45• A pilot thorium plant had been constructed and would soon start operating 
with a daily capacity of one ton of monazite. 


46. His country had benefited from help given by the Agency and under bilateral 
agreements in the form of grants, credits, technical assistance, the procurement 
of equipment and the training of experts. However, bilateral arrangements 
were often more satisfactory because of undue delays in implementing agreements 
with the Agency. The processing of applications for fellowships and experts had 
been slowed down unnecessarily and some of the experts had not come up to 
expectations. The same delays had occurred with equipment. His Government 
wondered whether those difficulties had resulted from deliberate discrimination 
or obstruction. 
47• The Soviet delegate had rightly emphasized that the safeguards system must 
be applied without discrimination and in a way that would not hamper the 
scientific progress of developing countries. That warning was equally applicable 
to every other Agency operation. 



GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 11 


48. A more equitable geographical distribution of staff would prevent prejudice 
and discrimination., 
49 • It would be disastrous if mankind's fear of an atomic holocaust were 
exploited by the nuclear Powers to keep others out of their club and the appeal 
for the non-proliferation of atomic bombs would remain a hollow one if not 
accompanied by a call for a total ban on the production of atomic weapons and 
the destruction of existing ones* 


50. The French delegate had. been right in pointing' out that the increase in 
the number of countries producing nuclear weapons might increase the chances 
of an expansion in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
51. Mr. KRASIIT (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) congratulated the 
President on his election and thanked the Japanese Government for having 
invited the General Conference to hold its ninth session in Tokyo and for 
having thus provided an opportunity of observing at first hand the advances 
made by Japan in the economic, technical and cultural fields. He then gave 
a brief review of the advances made in the nuclear sphere in the past year. 
52. The world's first nuclear power plant had been put into service in the 
Soviet Union a little over 11 years ago. He had participated personally in 
the development and start-up of that plant and recalled the exhilaration experienced 
by all his colleagues when the first several thousand kilowatts 
obtained from the fission of the uranium nucleus had been fed into the 
electricity grid. Barely ten years later the delegates to the third Geneva 
conference had been unanimous in emphasizing the benefits to be obtained from 
making increasing use of nuclear power plants. A number of countries had 
announced their intention of building such plants in the next few years, which 
would mean that the world's nuclear electricity potential would rise to a total 
of several tens of millions of kilowatts. It was clear that the exchange 
of scientific knowledge and practical results on the international scale was 
bound to play an increasingly important role in the rapid development of 
nuclear power production. 
53• He then gave a brief outline of the progress made in his country over the 
past year in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The IRT-2000 reactor, v/hich 
was used for research purposes, had been successfully operated. In 1965 a 



GC(IX)/OR,97 • 
page 12 


second reactor, intended for physics studies, had been brought into service 
and would be used for a wide variety of reactor physics studies. The • 
Byelorussian Nuclear Research Centre also had a radiochemistry laboratory, which 
was equipped with a gamma-irradiation facility, and work on the construction 
of a more powerful Installation, to be used for the irradiation of materials, 
was proceeding apace. „ 


54. Thanks to the IHT-2000 reactor? the second reactor for physics studies, the 
radiochemistry laboratory and other facilities, the Academy of Sciences of the 
Byelorussian Republic ha.d been able to..organise an independent nuclear power 
institute, where its scientists would be able to work on the practical application 
of the latest scientific and technical achievements obtained in the 
nuclear field and the improvement cf the technical parameters of nuclear pov/er 
plants. During the past year work on the training of experts at the university 
and of highly qualified staff had been stepped up thanks to the organization 
of more advanced courses of practical training. In the near future nuclear 
energy would be playing an important role in his country's economy. The progress 
being made in Byelorussia was thus clear evidence of the fact that atomic 
energy could make a real contribution to the welfare of the peoples of the 
world, 
55* I"t had to be borne in mind<, however, that nuclear energy could also be 
used for military purposes and everyone was fully aware of the enormous destructive 
potential of nuclear weapons. Several delegates had already recalled the 
twentieth anniversary of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki tragedies, which mankind 
could not and should not forget, Everjrthing should be done to ensure thab 
nuclear weapons were never again used and that the greatest discovery ever' 
made by man - nuclear energy - should be applied'solely for peaceful purposes, 
for the advancement and welfare of humanity, 


56. In that connection,, great importance attached, to the draft resolution 
which had been submitted by the delegations of the Soviet Union and various 
other countries and which called on Member States to refrain from the use of 
nuclear weapons, to take steps to accelerate the conclusion of an agreement 
on the prohibition of nuclear weapons and to render assistance in every 
possible way to the success of the negotiations for general and complete 

GC(IX)/QR.97 
page 13 


disarmament and for the prohibition and destruction of nuclear weapons.^ 


His delegation had been one of the sponsors of that resolution and had noted 


with satisfaction during the general debate that'it was supported by a large 


number of other delegations. 


57- It was felt by a number of countries, however, that the Agency was not 


competent to deal with political questions, particularly those concerning 


disarmament and the prohibition of nuclear-weapons, and should confine its 


attention to-purely technical matters, it was that mistaken attitude which 


had led to the .presentation, on the initiative of the United Kingdom delegate, 
•of a resolution expressing doubts as to the competence of the Conference in 


the matter. -The resolution Was an attempt to hide, by various means which 


were contrary to the Agency's Statute and the Conference's Rules of Procedure, 


the unwillingness of certain countries to accept "the prohibition of nuclear 


weapons and the curtailment of the arms race. 


58.- He felt ..that countries had a right to confront the Agency with a question 
such as the banning of nuclear weapons. Specialists understood better than 
anyone else the- consequences of resorting to those terrible weapons, and'' 
therefore every possible step should be taken to outlaw them. The Agency, as 
an organization called upon to aot in accordance with the aims and'principles' 
of the United Nations in order to forward the cause of peace and international 
co-operation, should not turn its back on the-'problems of banning nuclear, 
weapons. . 


59• The fact that two years previously the Agency had welcomed the conclusion 


of the Moscow agreement on the prohibition of nuclear weapons testing in the 


atmosphere, in outer- space and under water, and that it had adopted several 


resolutions on the study of the social 'and economic aspects of disarmament, 


again showed that it could and should occupy itself with questions of 


disarmament. 


60.' As an organization charged with promoting international co-operation, the 
Agency was deeply interested in the stabilization of the international situation. 
It had unfortunately to be admitted that the present session of the General 


3/. GC(IX)/316. 



GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 14 


Conference was taking place in an exceptionally unfavourable international 
situation. By taking a course leading to the aggravation of world tension 
and the creation-of ..new breeding grounds for war., certain Western Powers were' 
accelerating the arms race and opposing the implementation of any effective 
measure which would permit general and total disarmament to be attained. 


61. On the subject of the Agency's activities in the past year, he noted that 
the objectives set had been attained. The Igency had based its work on the 
valuable conclusions regarding the world exploitation of atomic energy reachedby 
the third Geneva conference, in whose organisation it had played an active 
part. The clearest expression of that contribution was the fact that the Agency 
was increasingly interested in nuclear power and related questions. A very 
useful part of the Agency's activity, and one which should be encouraged, was 
scientific and technical documentation and the organization of scientific and 
technical conferences, symposia and seminars62. 
He particularly noted the great importance to specialist circles of the 
Agency's -publication of-the proceedings of seminars and conferences. The 
publication of the Reactor Directory also made it possible to profit by 
experience. He hoped that the Agency would further expand its activity in 
that field, and that symposia and technical meetings in various branches of 
atomic energy and reactor physics would become an aid to the systematic exchange 
of experience, A particularly good idea was that of setting up-a centralized 
service to collect documentation on nuclear constants and establishing 
at the Agency a mechanized centre for the rapid treatment and distribution 
of the constants necessary for practical work. 
63. Although .the coming- year could be expected to bring some improvement in 
its work, there were still numerous imperfections in the Agency's operation,, 
For example, the Agency's' technical assistance resources were dispersed by its 
staff among a large number of countries and projects. In addition, many of 
those projects were of no real importance in themselves, and often served only 
the individual interests of particular laboratories, which made the assistance 
valueless. Technical assistance projects had so far been implemented extremely 
slowly, and the receiving countries had to wait months for their realization. 
The senior staff of the Agency also showed a tendency to widen excessively- the 
range of scientific activity and research undertaken by the Agency itself. The 

GO(ix)/ca.97 
page 15 


Byelorussian delegation, among others, had already frequently pointed out that 


the role and the function of the igency were quite different. It should he 


essentially an organ of co-ordination and information in scientific and 


research matters, while scientific research should be carried out principally 


by the Governments of Member States, 


64- He ivould now go on to another aspect of the agency's scientific.activities, 
that of research contracts-. He recalled that the total sum spent .on financing 
research contracts oirjCii-th^ establishment of the x^inc^ was about. <>5 million.' 
That was a very considerable sum. However, the extent to which the results ofthe 
work had benefited Kember States was not known. The Byelorussian delegation 
warmly supported the proposal made by the Soviet delegation at the June.'meeting 
of the Board of Governors, requesting the Secretariat to prepare a general report 
on the research for which 1>5 million had already been spent.. Such reports': 
should be prepared periodically and should be included in the annual report to 
the General Conference, together with the information on the Agency's technical 
assistance. 

65. The statements by„numerous delegates,at the General Conference showed the 
lively practical interest of all countries of the world in the widespread 
application of the present achievements .of atomic science.; the most recent ••. 
work.and research should bring further advantages and lead to-discoveries in 
a large number of branches of nuclear science. It was sufficient to mention 
problems such as the nuclear super-heating of steam, the development of hightemperature 
reactors, in particular breeder reactors, .and the use of plutonium 
for power reactors, The success of such research would be even greater when, 
international co-operation was better organized and more effective.. 
66,-. Ifc. BENCHuIKH (Algeria) congratulated the-President on his, election.' 
His delegation .was convinced that the President's efficiency-and his -enlightened 

devotion to the cause of international co-operation would contribute-substantial


ly to the success -of ,the Conference, His delegation also extended-its .con


gratulations to the other officers of .the Conference on their election.. -He. also 
wished to express his thanks to the Japanese Government for having invited the, 
Conference to meet in Tokyo and for giving delegates an opportunity of 


experiencing the traditional hospitality and kindness of the Japanese people. 



GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 16 


67. His delegation welcomed Jordan and Jamaica on their admission to the 
Agency. His own country, which had been discharging responsibilities in the 
international sphere for the past three years, intended to contribute in every 
way possible -to the•work being carried out by the Agency with a view to 
promoting international co-operation. It was for that reason, among others, 
that his delegation deplored the absence of the representatives of numerous 
African peoples, which were subjected to apartheid or colonial domination, 
of the people of Palestine, which had been expelled from its homeland and was 
forced to lead a wretched existence on, the borders of its own country, and of 
the people, of. the' People's Republic of China, whioh was debarred from admission 
to the Agency-on. ideological grounds.-, The restoration of their legitimate 
rights to those peoples so as to.enable them t<3 participate in it would enable 
the Agency to ensure the maintenance of peaceful co-operation and thus help 
to diminish the threat to international security presented by the present state 
of affairs. 
68. ' It was superfluous to emphasize that the changes that had taken place in 
Algeria opened up a new phase in the struggle for the attainment of the objectives 
of the Algerian revolution, i.e. material and scientific progress through 
utilization of the country's intellectual and material resources. Algeria 
faced a situation which would require large-scale intervention on the part of 
all-the specialized agencies of the United Nations and his country considered 
that relations between the Agency and the specialized agencies should be even 
closer than at present. 
69. Many countries were in the same position as Algeria and their requirements 
were enormous. It was imperative therefore that the Agency should lose no time in 
making additional efforts to enable countries to tackle their development 
problems under the most favourable possible conditions. The Conference should 
therefore give priority to the problem of ensuring that countries such as 
Algeria were represented on a broader and more realistic basis on the executive 
bodies of the Agency. It was in that spirit that his delegation had supported 
the re-appointment of lip. Eklund for a further term as Director General. 
70. In connection with the problem of safeguards, his country, which had.j5.pt, 
yet reached an advanced stage of nuclear development, trusted that,, the .system 
which was finally elaborated would not'widen the gap existing between the 

GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 17 


industrialized and the developing countries, Ills delegation also hoped that 
the resources required to implement the system would not adversely affect the 
Agency's technical assistance budget. 

71. Algeria was deeply attached to the cause of peace and international 
co-operation. It was anxious to make a modest contribution to the work being 
carried out by the Agency to build a better world, in collaboration with all 
those countries which were committed to the ideal of justice through progress. 
72. In conclusion he expressed the conviction that the Agency would rapidly 
overcome the difficulties facing it and that, strengthened by the confidence 
of its Member States, it would not fail to justify the hopes placed in it by 
the peoples of the world. 
75* Mr. JlARULAffDA (Colombia) associated himself with the congratulations 
that had been addressed to the President on his election and expressed his 
appreciation to the Japanese Government for having invited the Agency to hold 


the General Conference in Tokyo. He then gave a brief outline of the progress 
made by Colombia in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 


74. Colombia had made considerable strides in the nuclear field thanks to the 
efforts made by the Government and the Congress and to the assistance provided 
by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission. 
75- The IAN-R1 reactor, which had been operated since February by the Nuclear 
Energy Institute, had been given to Colombia by the United States under the 


"Atoms for Peace" programme. It had.been set up at the Institute, which also 
housed a radiochemistry laboratory and a laboratory for nuclear physics, 
together with other ancillary facilities. 


76. The reactor was of the swimming-pool type and used 90^-enriched uranium235. 
I"twas moderated with ordinary water and had a graphite reflector. The 
reactor core and all the ancillary equipment had been designed to ensure safe 
and flexible operation for the purposes of research and training. 
77• Since the reactor had been brought into operation, it had been used for 
irradiation work for research and training, for activation analysis and for 
research on solid-state physics. 



GC(IX)/0E.97 
page 18 


78. In connection with the agricultural applications of radioisoto-pes, 
research of considerable importance had. been carried out which had provided 
information on soils and on methods for applying fertilizers,' Particular attention 
had been paid to the conservation of foodstuffs by irradiation and 
good results haa been obtained with potatoes treated with cobalt-60 with a,view 
to increasing storage times and to studying the effects of gamma radiation. 
The irradiated samples had been stored for eight months under strictly predetermined 
temperature and humidity conditions and it had been found that the 
irradiation had not impaired the quality of the product in any way. 
79. As for the application of fertilizers labelled with radioisotopes, a series 
of phosphorus-52 experiments had been carried out to study the effects of various 
methods of applying phosphate fertilizers on phosphorus uptake and on 
the growth of barley5 radiophosphorus studies had been carried'out" to study the 
influence of phosphate fertilizers on the growth of ricef research had also 
been done on the development of roots, etc. A contract had been concluded 
with the Agency providing for research on corn. The per hectare yield for corn 
was very low in Colombia and the purpose of the project was to determine the 
best method and the best time for applying the fertilizer,' 
80. Two years previously the Institute had carried out research of considerable 
importance for the economy of Colombia. The ?acadodes Pyralis Jyar worm 
caused considerable losses in cotton crops every year and it was hoped to 
exterminate it by the sterile male -technique, which had been used'to excellent 
effect in similar cases-. The results obtained hitherto were promising and 
indicated that the dose should be at least 20 000 rads,' 
81. In medicine and biology close collaboration had been established with 
the National Cancer Institute. Recently a study had been made of the analysis 
of iodine in urine and blood by neutron activation analysis. It was planned 
to analyse other elements which it was practically impossible to detect by 
other means because of their low concentration. 
82. The Institute was also doing work of direct interest to industry, viz. 
industrial gamma radiography, which could be used to check welds'in pressure 
tubes. • 

en (IJ.)/OR. 97 

page 19' 


83•. On the .training side the Institute was working in close collaboration with 
universities and researchcentres, and physicians,. chemists, agronomists, physicists 
andstudents were able to. make use of the Institute's,.laboratories to acquire 
further knowledge* It would be seen, ther-efore, that in. Colombia'the. promise " 
implied in the."Atoms for Peace" programme was being fulfilled, ' 


84. In conclusion he wished to congratulate the Director General and the staff 
of the Agency-oh the vvay in which they had handled the technical assistance 
requests submitted by 'Colombia. -His delegation would take great pleasure in 
supporting the re-appointment'of the Director General for a further term of 
office, ' 
85. Kr•" EL FASSI (Morocco) congratulated the President on his unanimous 
election "atad thanked the Japanese Government for the welcome it had extended 
to the Conference* 
86. The Moroccan Government had just concluded, in Tokyo, a project agreement 
with the Agency under ivhich the Agency would make arrangements to facilitate 
the delivery to ilo'rocco of a Rum-7 X-ray apparatus and a Luch cobalt therapy 
unit. The equipment, which had been placed at the Agency's disposal free of 
charge by the Soviet Union, would be used to develop the Radiology and Cancer 
Centre at Casablanca. 
87^ A similar agreement had been concluded between the Government of Afghanistan 
and the Agency. It would be seen, therefore, that the Agency was discharging . 
its statutory responsibilities in an effective and positive manner ""oy encouraging 
and facilitating the development and practical utilization of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes, taking particular account of the special needs of the 
developing countries„ In the name of his country he thanked the Government 
of the Soviet Union and 'the Agency, •
•• • 


88. It was not the firibt time that ?;Iorocco had benefited from the Agency's 
assistance, llorocco's requests for experts, fellowships and equipment had on 
the whole been met, Studies carried out in collaboration with the Agency had 
indicated interesting possibilities for the use cf radioisotopes. It had not 
been possible to embark on the construction of power reactors because nuclear 
electricity costs"were still too. high. On 'the other hand, it was planned to 
build a small research reactor to produce short-lived radioisotopes with a 
view to making extensive use of nuclear techniques in the near future. 

GC(IX)/OR.97 
page 20 


89. His country was devoted to the principles of loyalty and respect for law. 
AS a Member of the Agency it intended to exercise its rights and discharge its 
obligations in a fair and straightforward manner. It would refrain from any 
action that might hamper the effective operation of the Agency. His delegation 
would vote in favour of the budget and would rely on the Secretariat to ensure 
that the increase in the post adjustment allowance for Vienna staff would not 
adversely affect the programme of assistance to the developing countries. It 
would also support the revised safeguards system> \vhich would help strengthen 
the role of the Agency as well as serving the cause of world peace. 
90. During the present session, new Members would.be elected to the Beard. 
As an outgoing Member, iiorocco wished to point out that, if the aim of the 
majority of the Agency's Members was to step up assistance to the developing 
countries, the present composition of the Board failed to reflect that principle. 
The proposal submitted by the Congo had been criticized on the grounds that it 
upset the extremely precarious equilibrium that existed at present5 what was 
needed, however, was to ensure a more stable equilibrium by broadening the 
basis of representation on the Board. Article VI.A.J of the Statute should 
again be amended with a view to increasing the representation of Africa and 
the Middle East. It was to be hoped that the next Board would carefully 
review that problem and would present an equitable draft proposal to the tenth 
session of the General Conference. 
91. His delegation welcomed the two new Member States, Jordan and Jamaica. 
It wished to thank the Director General for having agreed to serve a new term 
and wished him every success. For the developing countries his re-appointment 
was a guarantee of efficiency and impartiality, 
92. IJr. "53EHBEL (Turkey) thanked the Japanese Government for its hospitality. 
Japan was an outstanding example of a country that had converted its economy 
from an agricultural to an industrial one in a short space of time and had 
proved that unremitting national endeavour could make up for the lack of natural 
resources. He congratulated the President on his election and expressed satisfaction 
at Mr. Sklund's re-appointment. 
93• It was gratifying that two new countries should have joined the Agency. 



GC(IX)/ORv97 
page 21 


94. The fact that it was the experts.' view that the problem of persistentlylow 
income levels could be solved through science- and technology' brought hope 
to developing countries at a time when the gap between their real income and 
that of industrial countries was widening. It was thus essential to find a 
means of disseminating scientific knowledge from the advanced to the less 
advanced countries by giving them massive technical assistance and training 
their experts. To that end-the developed nations should pool their resources 
so as to narrow the technological gap between themselves and the rest. 'It 
would be extremely useful if the Agency's budget could--be increased for--purposes 
of disseminating information and supplying equipment, 
95* TCis Government was grateful for the valuable technical assistance it had 
received during the past year, thanks to which certain projects had been 


initiated. 


96. He welcomed the reorganization of the Secretariate technical assistance 
activities, proposed'by his delegation in 19&4? which should result in a better 
integrated programme and staffing economies. The Agency was to be congratulated 
on having set up a panel to study the problem of the shortage of trained 
experts in nuclear science-and technology- in-th'e-developing countries. 
97• The creation of a Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in agriculture 
so as to develop a single programme for both agencies and to ensure full cooperation 
between their technical services should serve as a model to other 
United Rations bodies. In a short space of time the Division had made considerable 
progress. The pilot project on the use of radiation for the disinfestation 
of stored grain in Turkey ought to benefit other Member States faced 
with the same problem. 


98. In conclusion, he said that a regional study group on irradiation 
techniques would be meeting in November in Istanbul and was being jointly 
organized by the Agency and the Turkish Atomic Energy Commission. 
99. Mr. STBVSI'TS (Surma) joined in congratulating the President on his 
election and assuring the able Director General of the Burmese delegation's 
confidence in him and his most competent staff. Although he personally was 
a stranger to the complexity of atomic energy matters, the debate had convinced 
him of the great role the Agency was destined to play in the future welfare of 
mankind. 

GC(IX)/OR,97 
page 22 


100. Though it had only a modest atomic energy programme, Burma was greatly 
interested in the various peaceful applications of atomic energy and was keeping 
in close touch with the Agency's valuable work. The foundation of a sound 
atomic energy programme had already been laid by the establishment of courses 
in nuclear subjects at the various universities, co-ordination in all matters 
relating to atomic energy and the Agency being the responsibility of the Atomic 
Energy Centre. Burma greatly appreciated the technical assistance it'received 
from the Agency and only regretted that the Agency's resources for technical 
assistance appeared to be severely limited. He would therefore appeal to all 
Member States, especially the more advanced ones,'to do their utmost to increase 
their voluntary contributions to the Agency in order that developing countries 
might receive adequate assistance. • 101. 
He recalled that Burma had always supported the designation of other Member 
States to represent South Asia on the Board and had itself declined election. 
As Burma was now for the first time allowing its candidature to go forward, he 
appealed to all delegations for their support. 
•The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(IX)/OR.98 
16 December 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 


General Conference ENGLISH 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Monday, 27 September 1965, at 10.15 a.m. 


President: Mr. ASAKAI (japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 

agenda* 


21 Appointment of the Director General 1 - 52 
16 Safeguards 55 - 54 
11 Opening date of the tenth regular session 

55 
22 Annual reports on the Agency's activities 56 - 59 
25 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 40 - 41 
17 The Agency's accounts for 1964 42 - 45 
20 The Agency's relations with intergovernmental 44 - 45 
organization's 

* GC(IX)/313. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/REV.2. 


65-7337 



GC(IX)/OR.98 
page 2 


APPOINTMENT OF TEE DIRECTOR GENERAL (GC(IX)/3C4) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that on 17 Juno 1965 the Board of Governors 
had appointed Mr. Sigvard Eklund to the post of Director General for a period 
of four years to run from 1 December 1965. There was a request by the Board 
for approval of the appointment in document GC(IX)/304> which contained a 
draft resolution that the Board was recommending the Conference to adopt, 
2. The draft resolution in document GC(IX)/304 was adopted by acclamation. 
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bklund entered the meeting. 


3. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Eklund that the General Conference 
had approved his appointment. He was pleased to he the first to congratulate 
him and invited him to take the oath of office prescribed by Provisional 
Staff Regulation 1.11. 
4. Mr. EKLUND took the following oath* 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience 
the functions entrusted to me as Director General of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, to discharge these functions and to regulate my 
conduct with the interests of the Agency only in view, and not to seek 
or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from 
any Government or other authority external to the Agency." 


5. He thanked the Board and the General Conference for the honour they had 
shown him in renewing his appointment for a period of four years. In 
accepting, he had weighed the pros and cons. On the.one hand, his personal 
feeling was that the experience gained during his first term of office should 
render it possible for him to make a useful contribution to the Agency in the 
years to come. On the other hand, he believed that a rotation of holders of 
senior posts in international organizations was highly desirable, and he had 
also experienced a certain frustration which seemed necessarily to accompany 
the position of Director General of the Agency. 
6. The results obtained by the agency in the past four years had been 
possible only because the help and understanding he had requested on his 
initial appointment had been freely given. One could not over-emphasize the 
importance of a favourable political climate in carrying out the work of an 
international organization. Both in the Board and in the Conference, the 
prevailing spirit in the past few years had been one of co-operation and 
understanding between Member States, and he hoped that that spirit would 
continue to prevail in the future. 

GC(IX)/OEo98 
page 3 


7. Substantial progress had been made with, nuclear power, particularly 
as regards putting it on a commercial basis. In several countries the industry 
was now able to offer fixed-price contracts for proven types of reactor and 
was even carrying on a considerable amount of development work. That 
situation would no doubt affect national organizations as well as the Agency, 
For the developing countries, the commercial availability of power reactors 
would increase the interest in acquiring them, if those countries could at 
the same time obtain technical assistance and financial help. They would 
therefore probably appeal to the Agency, and he would endeavour to see that 
its assistance 7/as adequate to meet their needs8. 
In the same context, the Agency had made' efforts to encourage activity 
in the field of emergency assistance in cases of radiation accidents. That 
problem had already been very closely s.tudied by the Board and it had been 
hoped that it would have been possible to submit to the Conference at its 
current session a draft of an international convention by which emergency 
assistance could be mutually rendered by countries engaged in nuclear 
activities. He hoped that a test could be submitted at the next session. 
9. Desalting was a problem which had been approached with enthusiasm, for 
it offered the possibility of meeting the growing demand for fresh water. The 
immediate needs were confined mainly to water for domestic purposes, but the 
stage was approaching when desalting would also allow the production of water 
for industrial uses. However, by far the most important use would be for 
irrigation! to desalt the very large volume of water that would be needed for 
that purpose nuclear power offered the best prospects. It was also very 
suitable for dual-purpose plants to produce electricity and heat in the 
proportions appropriate to any given case. The Agency would continue to 
interest itself in that important new development, and would be ready to 
co-operate with other organizations and countries engaged in research on 
desalting and its application, with the aim of reaching a realistic evaluation 
of the situation. Large pilot plants would have to be constructed and brought 
into operation to achieve that aim. He hoped that Member States would cooperate 
with the Agency so that countries in need of assistance could be given 
something more than reports on future prospects. 

GC(IX)/ORo98 
page 4 


10. He continued to attach, great importance to regional projects- At the 
inauguration of its plutonium plant in January 1965 India had offered to 
arrange for the plant to reprocess irradiated fuel elements for countries 
in the region and for the Agency, provided that the plutonium so produced 
was used only for peaceful purposes. That was a very interesting development 
and was worthy of emulation even by advanced countries11- 
The Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab Countries 
in Cairo had been operating successfully since 19&3• Although such centres 


should gradually become the full responsibility of their founding members, 
he was convinced that the Agency, once it had agreed to the establishment 
of a centre, had the responsibility of helping to overcome difficulties in 


the initial years


12- The success of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics showed 
that it was an activity which should continue although it might ultimately 
require resources beyond those at present available to the Agency- He would 
therefore seek to widen the area of support for it- The suggestion that the 
Centre should act as host to a conference on the entire spectrum of theoretical 
physics in 1967 had been very well received by leading theoreticians- The 
proposal would be presented in greater detail in the programme for 1967. 


13o The United Nations Special Fund had increasingly recognized the Agency's 
competence by making it an executing agency- He was sure that the Agency 
could do even more in the future by way of carrying out the Fund's projects-
He intended to foster co-ordination and co-operation with other United Nations 
bodies, including the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 
whose interest in nuclear power would certainly grow with, the recent 
commercialization of the nuclear industry


14. States were making increasing contributions to the development of the 
less advanced countries of the world and to the United Nations and its 
specialized agencies- However, a point would be reached when the level of 
financial support for international agencies would present new problems- For 
that reason the proliferation of specialized agencies which encroached to 
some extent on the work of existing bodies should be viewed with. concern-
Such encroachment was not serious unless the establishment of new 
organizations affected the financial resources of existing ones

GC(IX)/0E.98. 
page 5 • 


15. The Agency's membership of the United Nations family posed in that 
respect a co-ordination and collaboration problem of some magnitude.,. He was 
desirous of obtaining help from Member States in the form of harmonized 
instructions to their representatives at different United Nations 
organizations, so as to ensure a consistency which did not always exist at 
present. He expressed his belief in and admiration for the work done by 
regional organizations, but was somewhat concerned at their taking on tasks 
of a world-wide character which were -the proper function of international 
organizations created for that purpose, 
16, The authors of the Statute had sought to anticipate intelligently the. 
functioning of an organization then in process of creation. Sight years' 


experience of the Agency's operations might justify amendment of certain 
articles of the Statute so as to increase the Agency's effectiveness. Such 
matters as the frequency of the Conference's sessions, the composition of the 
Board of Governors and how often it should be changed, biennial budgeting 
and the unification of the budget were examples of problems calling for 


careful study. The Statute itself provided for revision., 


17. He wished to take the opportunity of stressing how wise it had been to 
choose Yienna as the Headquarters of the Agency and of expressing his 
gratitude for the generosity and understanding unfailingly shown by the 
Austrian Government and the municipal authorities of Vienna. 
18. When the next long-term programme was considered, the relative importance 
of the Agency's different functions should be defined more precisely. The 
situation then might not be the same as that originally envisaged by the 
Preparatory Commission and might require changes in the Secretariat's 
structure. He'was convinced of the need to strengthen the technical 
assistance programme and regulatory activities? particularly safeguards. 
19. Referring to personnel matters, he expressed satisfaction at the cooperation 
he had received from the staff. He had always emphasized the need 
for the Director General to be given maximum freedom of action, uninfluenced 
by national or other considerations, in recruiting staff for the Agency. The 
aim should be an equitable geographical distribution provided that efficiency 
did not suffer, and Member States should not insist upon a post vacated by 
one of their nationals being immediately filled by another, especially as it 
was sometimes necessary to terminate certain work in order to provide for 

GC(IX)/ORo98 
page 6 


other activities. Rotation of nationalities in a post was necessary not only 
to provide fresh views on the Agency's work hut also to give all Members their 
just share of representation in the Secretariat. He intended to give special 
attention to personnel policy and the organization of the staff. 


20. With regard to finances, the funds received by the Agency from the 
United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance had reached a 
level at which, excluding gifts in kind, they exceeded those available for 
technical assistance from the Agency's own resources., 'While such a trend 
was in one sense to be welcomed, complacency was perhaps not advisable in a 
situation where outside support was relied upon to meet the costs of an 
expansion of technical assistance which was legimately the responsibility 
of the Agency itself. The funds contributed by the Agency should increase 
at least as rapidly as those received from outside sources. 
21. No topic was of greater importance to mankind than the perennial question 
of war or peace. There were continuing hopes of international disarmament, 
starting with nuclear disarmament under international control. Mo other 
organization seemed as suited to exercise that control as the Agency, which 
should therefore be ready to play its part. The Agency had taken the first 
steps in international inspection under the safeguards system, and that 
activity would develop rapidly in the coming years, regardless of progress 
in nuclear disarmament. Future work on safeguards should include studies of 
themeans to be used to safeguard facilities other than reactors, for example 
reprocessing plants. 
22. The progressive increase in the number of nuclear power stations would 
be accompanied by an increased quantity of fissionable material which could 
be used for the manufacture of weapons. By 1970 power reactors would be 
producing about 8000 kg of plutonium per annum, and by I98O the figure might 
have risen to 30 000 kg per annum, some of which would be in countries not at 
present possessing nuclear weapons. 
23= The effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards functions involved willingness 
on the part of Member States to make a concerted effort to place their nuclear 
activities under the Agency's system. That willingness was necessary not only 
when nuclear activities were developed as a result of the supply of material 
assistance by one State to another^ countries advanced in the techniques of 
atomic energy should also be prepared to submit their facilities unilaterally 



GC(IX)/OR.9S 
page 7 


to safeguards, as the United States of America and the United Kingdom of 


Great Britain and Northern Ireland had already done in'respect of one power 


reactor each. 


24. The general trend to limit the uses of atomic energy to peaceful purposes 
was growing- The signing of the partial nuclear test ban treaty in 1963 
had been one of the most important manifestations of that trend, and had 
re-emphasized the Agency's responsibilities for promoting'the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy at the international level„ The general feeling of relief 
which had followed the signing of the treaty was a measure both of deop 
anxiety and of the universally expressed hope that the situation would take 
a turn for the better. Given the will, it was within man's reach to realize 
that hope* If a system of strict international control was developed in the 
future, the scientific and technical resources of the Agency would be available 
to assist in that control in so far as it applied to the nuclear field, 
25o The time might come for considering the establishment of a link between, 
on the one hand, the increased resources available for the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy as the result of a disarmament treaty and, on the other, the 
Agency 7/hich had been set up to promote the use of those resources on an 
international scale, A measure of that kind would not go unnoticed by 
international opinion, which would see that cessation of the proliferation 
of atomic weapons was intended not only to save mankind from utter destruction 
but also to increase and multiply the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and with 
them the chances of progress and welfare in peace. The Agency should therefore 
follow closely the deliberations of the Highteen-Nation Committee on 
Disarmament at Geneva and the negotiations which took place from time to time 
with, the object of creating denuclearized zones„ 


26, He had wanted to share his ideas with the Conference in order to show 
how the present possibilities looked from his observation point., In con


clusion, he wished to emphasize that he was under no illusions as to the 


task facing him in his new term of office. He hoped that ?;Iember States would 
give him their support in facing up to the challenges and opportunities. His 
experience over the past four years led him to believe that that support 
would be forthcoming, so that at the end 03? his service the time could be 
measured not in terms of years but in terms of achievementss 


GC(IX)/ORo98 
page 8 


27. Mr. PETROSYANTS (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics), speaking in 
the name of his delegation, congratulated Mr. Eklund on his appointment to 
the high post of Director General of the Agency and wished him success in 
his difficult task, 
28. With reference to the statement by Mr. Eklund, in which the latter had 
described his personal views on certain aspects of the Agency' s "activity., he 
observed that several of the questions dealt with required very close study. 
He also wished to comment briefly on certain proposals included in the 
statement which were not acceptable to his delegation. 
29. Firstly, Mr. Eklund had rightly pointed out that the Agency's recruiting 
practices should be greatly improved. However, the methods which he was 
proposing would aggravate the situation rather than solve the problem. The 
principal defect of the present policy was the system of permanent contracts. 
It was quite wrong for a technical organization to recruit experts on a 
permanent basis, since within a few years they were transformed into 
bureaucrats. The system did not permit an adequate measure of control over 
the activity of the staff employed on such terms, and should therefore be 
abandoned as soon as possible. 
30. Secondly, the Soviet delegation felt that the question of a unified 
budget rested on a mistaken assumption. It had already been debated two years 
previously, and the majority had declared themselves opposed to the measure. 
He therefore regretted that Mr. Eklund should have seen fit to re-open the 
subject. 
31o Thirdly, certain ideas expressed by Mr. Eklund on the subject of using 


the Agency as a disarmament control organ gave rise to objections. The 


Soviet Union's attitude on the matter had already been made clear several 


times and he did not intend to repeat it. 


32. Fourthly, the Soviet delegation had comments to make on several other 
points mentioned by Mr. Eklund and reserved the right to present them in due 
course. 
SAFEGUARDS (CC(IX)/312, 319) 


33• Mr. BRILLANTES (Philippines), Rapporteur of the Administrative and 
Legal Committee, presented the Committee's report under item 16 of the agendas 
Safeguards (GC(IX)/319). The Committee recommended the Conference to adopt the 
draft resolution appearing at the end of the report. 



GC(IX)/OR.98 
page 9 


34. The draft resolution contained in document GC(IX)/519 was adopted 
unanimously,, 
OPENING BATE OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION 


35. It was decided to fix 21 September 1966 as the opening date for the 
tenth regular session of the General Conference. 
ANNUAL REPORTS ON THE AGENCY'S ACTIVITIES (GC(IX)/502, 305) 


36. The PRESIDENT drew the Conference's attention to the recommendation 
by the Board of Governors (GC(IX)/3C2) on the Agency's report to the 
General .assembly of the United Nations for 1964-65. As the draft resolution 
submitted by the Board was couched in the same terms as similar resolutions 
adopted by the Conference in the past, he suggested that it be adopted,, 
37- The draft resolution contained in document GC(IX)/302 was adopted, 


 The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to consider the draft 
resolution submitted by the Board in its recommendation (GC(IX)/303) on the 
Agency's report to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations for 
1965-66, 


39• The draft resolution contained in document GC(IX)/303 was adopted. 


ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


40. The PRESIDENT explained that the agency's Staff Pension Committee 
included two members and two alternates elected by the Conference, One of 
the members would not be able to continue to sit on the Committee after the 
end of the current session. The Conference was thus called upon to elect 
a replacement, Mr. Helio Bittencourt (Brazil) had been nominated, 
41. Mr. Bittencourt (Brazil) was elected a member of the Agency's Staff 
Pension Committee, 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1964 (GC(IX)/5l8) 


42, Mr. BRILLANTBS (Philippines), Rapporteur of the Administrative and 
Legal Committee, introduced the Committee's report under item 1J of the 
agendas The Agency's accounts for 1964 (GC(IX)/3l8), 


43. The draft resolution contained in document GC(IX)/5l8 was adopted. 

GC(IX)/OR.98 
page 10 


THE AGENCY'.S RELATIONS YiflTff-INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (GG(IX)'/520) 


44. Mr. BRILLANTBS (Philippines), Rapporteur of the Administrative and 
Legal Committee, introduced the Committee's report under item 20 of the 
agenda? The Agency's relations with intergovernmental organizations 
(GC(IX)/320')o 


45. The draft resolution contained in document GC(IX)/;>20 was adopted. 
The meeting rose at 12 noon. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(IX)/OR.99 

20 December 1965 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

General Conference 

Ninth regular session 


OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE NINETY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Tokyo Prince Hotel, Tokyo, 
on Monday, 27 September 1965, at 3 p.m. 

President: Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) 


CONTENTS 


Item of, the _ •, 
agenda* Paragraphs 


12 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 1-26 


13 The Agency's budget for 1965 27 - 28 


14- The Agency's budget for 1966 29 - 32 


24 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 33 - 37 
for 1966 


* GC(IX)/313. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(IX)/INF/82/Rev.2. 


65-7341 



GC(IX)/ORo99 
page 2 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(IX)/298, 514) 


1. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to take up agenda item 
12s Election of Members to the Board of Governors„ The General Committee had 
notified the Conference in its report (GC(IX)/314) "that seven Members had to 
be .elected to the Board during the present session and had specified the 
geographical areas in respect of which elections were required. 
2, Under Rule 8j of the Rules of Procedure elections had to be conducted 
with due regard to equitable representation on the Board as a whole of the 
Members in the geographical areas specified in that Rule. A list of the 
Members which had already been designated by the Board or elected by the 


Conference to serve on the Board after the end of'the current session was 


given at the end of the General Committee's report. 


3* Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure provided that the elections should be 
by secret ballot and that there should be no nominations„ 


4. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Burmese delegation 
and a member of the Hungarian delegation acted as tellers,, 


5„ The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the 


area of Latin America, 
6* A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of v/hich was as follows % 


Ballot papers returnedg 69 


Invalid votes; 2 


Ab stentionss 2 


Valid votes; 65 


Required majority; 33 


Votes obtained; 


Colombia 64 
Venezuela 1 


7. Having obtained the required majority, Colombia was elected a Member of 
the Boardo 

GC(IX)/OR.99 
page 3 


8. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the 
area of Eastern Europe. 
9. 
A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as follows; 
Ballot papers returned % . . IP 
Abstentions% 3 
Valid votes% 67 
Required majority; 34 
Votes obtaineds 


Yugoslavia 64 
Austria 2 
Bulgaria 1 


10. Having obtained the required majority, Yugoslavia was elected a Member of 
the Board. 
11. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect tyro Members from the 
area of Africa and the Middle East. 
12. 
A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as followss 
Members to be elected; 2 
Ballot papers returned; 70 
Abstentions? 7 
Valid votesg 133 
Required majorityg .54 
Votes obtained; 
Tunisia 52 
Ghana 45 
Israel 32 
Senegal 4 " ' 


13o Having obtained the required majority, Tunisia and"Ghana were elected 
Members of the Board. 



GC(IX)/0E.99 
page 4 


14„ The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the area 


of South usia. 


15. 
-i vote was taken by seeret_ ballot, the.result of which .was as follows ; 
Ballot papers returned; . „69... 
Invalid votes; 3 
Abstentionss. 2 
Valid votesg 64 
Required majority; 33 
Yotes obtained; 
Pakistan 41 
Burma 23 
l6o Having obtained the required majority,- Pakistan was elected a Member of 
the Board. 


17. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to elect a Member from the 
area of the Far East,, 
l8o A vote was taken by secret ballot ,,„the result of .which was as follows; 


Ballot papers returned;
Invalid votes;
Abstentions;


Valid votes;
Required majority;
Votes obtained; 


Republic of Korea


Philippines


 69 


1. 
16 
5227 
. 
49 
3 


19. Having obtained the required majority, the Republic of Korea was 
elected a Member of the Board20. 
The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to fill the.remaining vacant 
seat on the Board. 

GC(IX)/OR,99 
page 5 


21. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of which was as followss 
Ballot papers returned; 69 


Invalid votess 1 


Abstentions; . 3 


Valid votes; 65 


Required majority; 33 


Votes obtained; 
Austria 65 


22. Having obtained the required majority, Austria was elected- a Member of 
the Board. 
23. The PRESIDENT declared the elections completed and pointed oui that, 
under Article VI.D of the Statute, the Members just elected would hold office 
on the Board from the end of the ninth regular session of the General 
Conference until the end of the eleventh regular session. He congratulated 
Austria, Colombia, Ghana, the Republic of Korea, Pakistan, Tunisia and 
Yugoslavia on their election and said he felt sure that those Members would 
do their best to serve the interests of the Agency in discharging the 
responsibilities with which they had been entrusted. 
24. Mr. BERG3KUM (Israel) congratulated the States elected to the Board 
and offered them his best wishes for the successful outcome of their work. 
25. He thanked the delegations v/hich had voted for his country. Several 
Member States had urged and encouraged the Israeli Government to present its 
candidature for the Board so that it could exercise its rights under the 
Statute and take a more activo part in the work of the Agency. It was 
unfortunate that his country had been prevented from doing so. 
26. The Israeli delegation could only recommend that its Government note the 
fact and take it into account. 
THS AGMCY'S BUDGET FOR 1965 (GC(IX)/32l) 


27. Mr. TOKO (Tunisia), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee, presented the Committee's report on its consideration of 
agenda item 13s The Agency's budget for 1965 (GC(IX)/32l). The report 
included a draft resolution which the Committee recommended the Conference 
to adopt. 

GC(IX)/OR.99 
page 6 


28„ There wera 51-votes in favour and 7 agai-nst, with 3 abstentions. The 
draft resolution contained in document GC(IX)/?21 was adopted, 


THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1966 (GC(IX)/322) 


29, Mr. TCEKI (Tunisia), Rapporteur of the Programme5 Technical and 
Budget Committeej presented a report by the Committee under item 14 of the 
agenda - The Agency's budget for 1966 (GC(IX)/522). Annexed to the report 
were three draft resolutions which the Committee recommended for adoption. 


30o The draft resolution in Annex I to document GC(IX)/$22 (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1966) was adopted by 47 votes in favour and none against, 
with 11 abstentions, 


31. The draft resolution in Annex II to document GC(IX)/322 (Operational 
Budget allocations for 1966) was adopted, 
32, The draft resolution in Annex III to document GC(IX)/322 ("Use of the 
Working Capital Fund in 1966) was adopted, 


VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1966 (GC(IX)/310/Rev.4) 


33- The PRESIDENT drew attention to document GC(IX)/510/Rev.4> which 
contained a list of the voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 1966 
which Members had pledged by 1 p.m. on 27 September. 


34. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) said that, as in previous years 
and subject to the appropriation of the necessary funds, the United States 
would contribute towards the important work being carried out under the Agency's 
operational programme. The contribution would be made in three parts, 
35. In "the first place, the United States would pay into the General Fund an 
amount equivalent to that portion of the $2 million target which corresponded 
to its assessment under the Regular Budget, up to 40$ of the total unrestricted 
cash contributions. The United States would in any case make an initial 
payment of $400 000. 
36. Secondly, his Government planned to provide fellowships for study at 
United States institutions, to make available the services of experts and 
to donate a small amount of equipment to other States or to the.Agency's 
Laboratoryj those contributions in kind would total about #400 000. 

GC(IX)/OR.99 
page 7 


37• Finally, the United States planned to give additional assistance to the 
Agency in the form of research contracts, gifts of nuclear fuel and 
documentation! in previous years the expenditure involved for such additional 
assistance had heen about $250 000. 


The meeting rose at 5.30 P.m0 



