International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(X)/OR.101 
27 January 1967 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR 
SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE HUNDRED AND FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 21 September 1966, at 11.30 a.m. 


Temporary Resident: Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of tie provisional 
Paragraphs 

Opening of the session 
1 — 5 

Address by the Federal President of Austria 
6 — 12 

Statement by the Representative of the Secretary-General of the. United Nations 13 — 27 

Opening address by the Director General 
28 — 54 

Election of the President 
55 — 63 

*) GC(X)/326. 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 
tenth regular session of the General Conference 
would prove a rewarding and worth-while experience. 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared 
open the tenth regular session of the General Con-4. Although he had not had the good fortune 
ference. to have been closely associated with the Agency 
during the first years of its existence, he was fully 

2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules aware of the excellent work it had done in helping 
of Procedure, he invited the Conference to observe to make available to mankind the multifarious 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or benefits offered by nuclear energy. In the course 
meditation. of the Conference, more knowledgeable participants 
would doubtless discuss the Agency's record of 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. achievement in greater detail and point the way to 
further progress in the future. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT extended a 
warm welcome to all delegates and expressed the 5- Before concluding, he wished to express to 
hope that their participation in the work of the the Federal President of Austria, the Federal 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

Chancellor and the many members of the Austrian 
Government and administration attending the meeting 
the very deep appreciation of the Conference 
for all that Austria, and particularly the city of 
Vienna, had done for the Agency over the past 
nine years. It would be recalled that the-first 
speaker to address the first meeting of the General 
Conference in 1957 had been the Federal President 
of Austria, the late Dr. Scharf. It was particularly 
gratifying to delegates that the present President, 
Mr. Jonas, had kindly agreed to follow in his predecessor's 
footsteps and to address the Conference 
at its present commemorative meeting. 

ADDRESS BY THE FEDERAL PRESIDENT OF 
AUSTRIA 

6. Mr. JONAS (Federal President of Austria) 
welcomed the delegates and recalled that, as Mayor 
of Vienna, he had attended all the regular sessions 
of the General Conference that had been held in 
Austria. 
7. He was glad to be able to draw attention 
to the excellent spirit of collaboration that had 
grown up between the Agency and the Austrian 
authorities. His country had always regarded it 
as a privilege to be able to lend its support to the 
activities of the Agency and hoped that its efforts 
had been of value in contributing to the success 
of the organization's work. 
8. The setting up of the Agency in Vienna 
barely two years after the declaration of Austrian 
neutrality had been interpreted by the Austrian 
people as a first sign of international confidence 
in the Republic. The excellent record of collaboration 
between the Agency and his country showed 
that that confidence had notbeenmisplaced. Because 
of its experience in two world wars and its geographical 
situation between East and West, the 
Austrian people was particularly alive to the urgency 
of the problem of achieving a lasting peace. It was 
perhaps for that reason that the political climate 
of Austria had been found by many delegates and 
members of the staff of the Agency to be particularly 
conducive to international collaboration. 
9. At the present commemorative meeting of 
the General Conference it was legitimate to ask to 
what extent the Agency had justified the hopes 
that had been placed in it. He was not competent 
to express an opinion on the technical achievements 
of the Agency, but he trusted that delegates 
would be able to confirm his hopes that the results 
achieved by the organization had led to a significant 
increase in the use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes and had given rise to more effective coordination 
of the nuclear work being done in 
Member States. In the political sphere the Agency 
had demonstrated that international co-operation 
within the United Nations was perfectly feasible 
provided there was a general will to collaborate. 
As far as nuclear problems were concerned, the 
interests of the large and the small nations were 
identical —all countries stood to gain or lose immeasurably 
from the proper or unwise use of 
nuclear energy. 

10. He was confident that the Agency would 
pursue the excellent work it had begun towards 
that end. The potential benefits of atomic energy 
were so significant that it was to be hoped that 
all nations would afford the Agency their wholehearted 
support in carrying out the tasks ahead. 
11. It was symptomatic of the present age that 
public opinion was far more obsessed by fear of 
the implications of nuclear weapons than it was 
impressed by the striking advances made in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. It was up to all 
countries to correct that situation. The threat of 
nuclear war must be diminished and nuclear energy 
must be harnessed to the task of combating hunger 
and disease throughout the world. 
12. He thanked the Director General for the 
results that had been achieved and expressed the 
hope that the Agency's work in promoting the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy would help to reduce 
international tension and create a world no longer 
dominated by the spectre of nuclear war. His own 
country for its part would continue to do everything 
in its power to further the work of the 
Agency. 
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE 

OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL 

OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

13. Mr. BUNCHE (Representative of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations) said he had 
been asked to convey the best wishes of the 
Secretary-General to the Conference on the occasion 
of the commemoration of the tenth anniversary of 
the approval of the Agency's Statute. 
14. As one who had attended the first General 
Conference, he was particularly gratified that he 
was able to attend the current session and help 
celebrate the present anniversary of the Agency, now 
so firmly established as an international organization. 
15- Over the past years the Agency had made 
a constructive and vigorous start towards its main 
objective, viz. "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world". In so doing it had 
worked in close concert with all the other members 
of the United Nations family, which were equally 
committed to the pursuit of peace and human 


101st PLENARY MEETING

advancement. Much credit for the excellent results 
achieved was due to the present Director General, 
who had a long and distinguished record of international 
service in furthering the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. 

16. Some of the assumptions underlying the original 
plans drawn up for the Agency had proved false 
and unexpected difficulties had been encountered. 
It had been wrongly assumed, for example, that 
uranium supplies would be scarce and demand 
great, and that the Agency would have to act as 
a sort of broker between producers and consumers. 
The speed with which atomic energy would become 
competitive throughout the world had also been 
over-estimated. 
17. In the face of those initial difficulties the 
Agency had concentrated on other ways of implementing 
its statutory objectives. It had done 
valuable work in connection with safeguards, the 
provision of assistance to developing countries, 
desalination and isotope techniques, and had contributed 
to the general effort carried out within 
the United Nations family with a view to improving 
conventional power technology and to utilizing new 
sources of energy. 
18. Some of the Agency's activities could be of 
far-reaching importance. General acceptance of the 
Agency's safeguards system could be of great value 
in connection with the efforts being made in the 
United Nations to prevent the proliferation of atomic 
weapons. The Agency's practical experience in applying 
safeguards could also be extremely useful for 
the future in the wider field of disarmament. 
19. Good relations had been developed between 
the Agency and the United Nations, and credit was 
due to the Director General for the work he had 
done in that connection. Though the working relationship 
between the two organizations had never 
been so close as originally envisaged, it was 
probably as close as could realistically be expected. 
Certainly collaboration had been excellent at the 
Third International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy l) and the Agency could 
be expected to play an even more central role if 
a fourth such conference were held. He should 
also mention that the one United Nations body 
which now dealt directly with atomic energy, 
namely the United Nations Scientific Committee 
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, was continuing 
its vital work and always sought the Agency's helpful 
collaboration. 
20. Like other international bodies and like the 
United Nations itself, the Agency did not operate 
1) Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 

in a vacuum. The realization of its objectives depended 
very largely on the political climate in the 
world and on the solution of the major political 
problems of the time. Unfortunately the stresses 
and strains of the present-day world inevitably 
dominated the actions of international organizations. 
It was, however, precisely because of the threatening 
chaos in international relations and the appalling 
dangers involved that the whole United Nations 
concept of international order had been formulated 
and given tangible expression by the creation of a 
number of inter-related international organizations. 
It was obvious that the problems of thousands 
of years could not be solved in a decade or two 
by the enunciation of a series of principles and 
agreements and by the setting up of new organizations 
to give effect to them. International organizations 
were only at the beginning of a monumental 
task; their main work lay ahead and they should 
not be discouraged if the difficulties appeared at 
times to be almost insurmountable. That was particularly 
true of such major problems as disarmament 
or the efforts being made to narrow the gap 
between rich and poor in the world. Naturally 
efforts to come to grips with such problems were 
inevitably hampered by current conflicts, such as 
the war in Viet-Nam. Only ceaseless and devoted 
efforts, which in some cases might require many 
years, could have a significant impact on such 
problems. 

21. It was salutary to ask from time to time 
what would be the alternative to the efforts being 
made to develop a system of international order. 
In view of the arsenal of destructive weapons 
deployed throughout the world, not to mention 
the problems of famine, disease, pollution, overpopulation 
and economic anarchy, it was obvious 
that there was no acceptable alternative. International 
civil servants should never lose sight of the 
ultimate goal — an effective system of international 
order. The necessity of achieving that goal must 
serve as a stimulus and an inspiration. 
22. It also had to be remembered that the work 
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies 
was complementary and interdependent. The specialized 
agencies could not function properly in an 
atmosphere of political turbulence, nor could the 
United Nations fulfil its primary function of maintaining 
peace without the help of the agencies in 
creating the conditions essential to a stable world. 
23. The atmosphere in the United Nations at 
the present time was extremely gloomy. There was 
foreboding over the continuation and escalation of 
the war in Viet-Nam coupled with concern at the 
statement of the Secretary-General that he would 
not offer himself for a further term. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

24. There were very great dangers in the present 
inability of nations tocommunicate with one another, 
and it was clear that the United Nations was reaping 
the bitter fruit of its failure to attain universality 
of membership. 
25. There were, however, encouraging features in 
the present situation. There was growing realization 
of the futility of war and the suicidal insanity of 
nuclear war. The "cold war" persisted, but with 
diminishing vigour. International programmes were 
continuing unimpeded. A few shifts in national 
policies could open the way to a new area of international 
progress. The striking development of 
international organizations and the increasing confidence 
which Governments reposed in them were 
encouraging signs, though they also imposed an 
ever-increasing responsibility on those who directed 
such organizations to increase efficiency and achieve 
economies wherever possible. The Agency had taken 
commendable steps in that direction by introducing 
biennial programming, but it had not yet managed 
to surmount the statutory obstacles in the way of 
a biennial budget and conference. In view of the 
greatly increased efficiency and economy which could 
be achieved with a biennial budget, it was very 
much to be hoped that the Agency would solve the 
statutory problems involved within a reasonable time. 
26. Before concluding, he wished to pay tribute 
to the late Dr. Homi Bhabha. Dr. Bhabha's knowledge 
and versatility had been of enormous value 
to the United Nations, and later to the Agency, in 
promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He 
had been a great scientist and a unique personality 
and he would be sorely missed in the international 
world. 
27. For the future he trusted that the Agency 
would continue to develop and consolidate its present 
programmes and would also be able to evolve new 
ways of providing its valuable services to the international 
community. 
OPENING ADDRESS 
BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

28. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that, although 
ten years in terms of history or in the life 
of man was but a short space of time, the passage 
of time was measured more by the intensity of 
development than by the number of years gone by. 
In that respect, ten years of development in atomic 
energy represented a significant period; in order to 
appreciate what had been achieved in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, it was merely necessary to 
glance back to the time of the first General Conference, 
in October 1957. 
29. Ten years previously, the first dual-purpose 
nuclear reactor had been inaugurated, leading to an 
increase in nuclear generating capacity, which had 
hitherto been almost nil. Today, nuclear facilities 
were generating 8000 MW of electricity, and that 
total was expected to reach 30 000 MW by 1970 
and possibly over 200 000 MW by 1980. 
30. One year after the Agency's inception, the 
second United Nations International Conference on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 2) (the "second 
Geneva Conference") had been held. About the 
same time, the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development had given financial support 
for the construction of a nuclear power plant and, 
although that was a unique instance, he was optimistic 
as to the Bank's willingess to repeat that 
action in the future. 
31. The highlights in atomic energy development 
since 1957 had included the construction of the 
heavy-water pressure-tube reactor which had started 
operation in 1962, the holding of the third Geneva 
Conference in 1964, the start that same year on 
the construction of the first fast reactor for simultaneous 
production of power and desalting of water, 
and the significant emergence in 1965 of a third 
generation of gas-cooled reactors. By 1965 lightwater 
reactors had become sufficiently established 
to enable manufacturers to bring out price-lists 
for standard versions, and the eminently successful 
results achieved with that type of reactor had 
led to the decision to construct a 2200-MW station 
in a coal-producing area where the price of coal 
was equivalent to only 19 cents per million British 
thermal units. The acceptance of pre-stressed concrete 
as a containment element in reactor construction 
had been a further significant development. 
32. The founders of the Agency had had in 
mind a grand design which the Agency might not 
have fully achieved. It had, however, much to its 
credit, considering that its ability to carry out its 
programme was influenced by the prevailing political 
climate and the availability of funds. The 
Agency's physical growth might be measured by 
the growth in its membership, from 59 in 1957 
to 96 at the present time. 
33. The Agency's Statute had been based on 
what were considered to be the main objectives 
at the time of its founding. The experience gained 
since then suggested the possible need for modifying 
those objectives, which might entail a revision 
of the Statute designed to bring it more into line 
with reality. 
34. An anniversary was an occasion for reviewing 
2) Held at Geneva from 1 to 13 September 1958. 


101st PLENARY MEETING 

past experience with a view to improving future 
performance, particularly with regard to activities 
which were to be continued and probably expanded. 
Obviously, nuclear power technology and economics 
would have to continue to figure prominently in 
the Agency's programme, together with some specialized 
related activities such as desalting of water; 
but an endeavour should be made to keep those 
activities in proper perspective. Isotope applications 
in the physical and life sciences must also 
play a prominent part in the programme, particularly 
in relation to food production, health and 
industrial development. 

35. No survey of past activities would be complete 
if reference was not made to the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, which had 
been successful beyond the most extravagant hopes 
of its sponsors; it would be necessary in the near 
future to consider the establishment of the Centre 
on a more permanent basis. Mention should also be 
made of the work done by the Agency's Laboratory 
of Marine Radioactivity in Monaco on radioactive 
waste disposal into the sea. As a result of die vast 
increase in nuclear power, that laboratory might 
have to be expanded into an international centre 
for waste disposal studies. 
36. The Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope 
Centre for the Arab Countries in Cairo was another 
successful venture of a type complementary to the 
regional training courses that were an established 
and acceptable feature of the Agency's training 
programme. 
37. The Agency's technical assistance activities 
constituted a programme that had the widest appeal 
for developing Member States. Achievements could 
be measured only in relation to available resources, 
and that point should be borne in mind in assessing 
what had be done. Since die Agency's establishment, 
over 900 experts had been sent out to 
serve in 44 countries, 2750 fellowships had been 
awarded, 450 technicians had attended training 
courses and equipment had been provided to the 
value of almost $3 million. Although those figures 
might appear impressive, the yearly average value 
of the assistance the Agency had been able to 
provide, per Member State, would show how inadequate 
its resources had been. 
38. The initial hope that sufficient funds would 
be provided to meet the legitimate needs of 
developing countries had not been fulfilled. The 
value of annual requests for assistance in the form 
of experts and equipment had risen from $700 000 
in 1957 to almost $3 million, whereas the funds 
made available under the budget would meet only 
about one fifth of that total. The programme had 
to be financed from voluntary contributions, which 
had not grown significantly over the past nine years 
despite the fact that programme costs had increased 
by 20 %. The need for assistance continued unabated 
and the future development of the programme 
would be severely jeopardized unless action was 
taken to meet the deficiency in funds. He would 
appeal urgently to the Conference to give serious 
consideration to that problem, for he did not 
believe Member States would be prepared to see 
four out of every five requests for assistance from 
the developing countries go unheeded. 

39. With the present rapid development in nuclear 
power production, the need for international legislation 
concerning nuclear energy took on added 
importance. In order to facilitate the transfer of 
fissile materials between countries, shipping regulations 
and regulations concerning health and safety, 
food irradiation and so on should be international. 
The increase in the potential of Member States 
to produce fissile materials in power reactors should 
be accompanied by a general agreement to register 
all movements of fissile material and important 
components across national boundaries. 
40. Thus far the nuclear industry had fortunately 
been free from major accidents, but preventive 
measures should be taken now to deal with any 
future eventuality. Although progress in the matter 
had been slow, he was still hopeful that agreement 
would ultimately be reached on an emergency assistance 
programme. A nuclear accident, say in a 
nuclear-propelled ship, could have serious consequences, 
and it might be desirable for the Member 
States directly concerned to have an international 
body such as the Agency ready to participate in , 
or supervise rescue operations in accordance with 
emergency procedures agreed upon in advance. 
41. The application of safeguards had always 
been envisaged by its founders as an important 
function of the Agency, but it was only in recent 
years that significant progress had been made. The 
first step had been the adoption in 1961 of the 
Agency's safeguards system 3) t limited at that time 
to reactors below 100 MW(th), but the system 
had not been accepted by all Member States. 
However, the hopes raised by the signing of the 
Moscow test ban treaty in 1963 had been reflected 
in an increasing willingness of Member States to 
accept and participate in the constructive revision 
of the system, which was now being applied to 
54 reactors in 24 countries. Specific procedures 
for safeguarding particular types of facilities were 
being established on the basis of the revised safeguards 
system (1965)4), and the general working 
methods were being constandy studied and improved. 
3) INFCIRC/26. 

4) INFCIRC/66. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

42. With the growing maturity of the system and 
the increasing number of facilities being placed 
under Agency safeguards, the time would come 
when there would need to be periodic consideration 
of the system's effectiveness in application. 
43. The experience gained by the Agency in 
operating truly international safeguards should be 
of relevance to the work of the United Nations 
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, which 
was discussing nuclear disarmament in Geneva. 
44. Its membership of the United Nations family 
not only gave the Agency greater authority, but also 
made available to it the resources of the United 
Nations Development Programme, the world-wide 
chain of United Nations representatives, the expertise 
of other scientific agencies, and an established 
system of administrative standards and procedures. 
Welcome evidence of the United Nations' continuing 
interest in the Agency was provided by the 
presence of the Secretary-General's senior adviser, 
as his representative at the Conference. 
45. The Agency also maintained relationships 
with regional atomic energy organizations, which 
offered special advantages for launching large-scale 
joint enterprises in which a heavy capital investment 
in research or development was shared. He 
would, however, again express reservations as to 
the desirability of such regional organizations intervening 
in regulatory questions, such as safety 
standards, harbour safety requirements for nuclear 
ships, safeguards systems, and so on, which by their 
very nature should be the responsibility of a worldwide 
organization. 
46. In regard to the Agency's role in the future, 
access to cheap power was an essential requirement 
for industrial development and good living standards. 
The growth in nuclear power production would 
inevitably lead to an increased need for facilities 
for the reprocessing of spent fuel situated at a 
reasonable distance from the production point. One 
commercial reprocessing plant had been established, 
as well as national plants in some countries and a 
regional plant in Europe. There would be great 
future advantage in the establishment of such plants 
on a regional basis throughout the world. 
47. Many reactors used enriched fuels which at 
present could be supplied in large quantity only by 
a few countries. The question might therefore arise 
whether a joint production enterprise by a number 
of non-producing countries might not constitute a 
further guarantee toward maintaining the supply of 
enriched materials. 
48. The need for more energy went hand in hand 
with the need for producing enough food to supply 
an ever-increasing population. Accordingly, in the 
years to come, the Agency, in continued co-operation 
with FAO, would be required to pay greater 
attention to the possibilities of using radioisotopes 
and radiation techniques to increasefood production, 
prevent wastage and crop destruction, and facilitate 
food preservation. 

49- The impact of atomic energy on some of the 
major Powers was well known; one of its manifestations 
had been the creation of huge research 
establishments and smaller countries had followed 
that example, so that now many countries had 
research establishments with facilities and equipment 
of a high order. The early informal contacts 
among the scientists working in those establishments 
had led, with the passage of time, to more 
formal relations between the countries, even in 
cases where political contacts were poor, followed 
by the setting up of regional organizations. The 
end-result of that process had been a proliferation 
of formal agreements between organizations and 
Governments for mutual assistance in the development 
of atomic energy. Nevertheless, new problems 
were posed now that nuclear power was becoming 
a commercial proposition. Governments were beginning 
to question whether continued research was 
justified and were pressing for reduced expenditure 
on af>miv centres established in many cases primarily 
Jor developing nuclear power. 

50. During his visits to Member States, he had 
been struck by the excellent standards of laboratories 
established under the impetus of atomic energy 
development, even in countries where the over-all 
scientific standard might understandably not be 
high. The contribution thus made to creating a 
scientific and technical infrastructure in those 
countries could not be over-estimated; indeed that 
contribution might eventually be regarded as one 
of the major benefits derived fron the initial phases 
of the atomic era. 
51. An equally strong impression he had gained, 
however, was that tremendous duplication of work 
was going on in many of those new establishments. 
He would single out two fields only for mention: 
extraction of plutonium from used fuel and subsequent 
re-incorporation of the recovered element, 
and the preparation of fuel elements, including 
canning. Competition in scientific and technical 
fields was certainly oi the utmost value, but it 
should 'be concerned essentially with the frontiers 
of science and technology and should not involve 
repetition or unnecessary duplication. He would 
accordingly appeal to the atomic energy commissions 
in the smaller countries concerned to get 
together in an endeavour to establish genuine coordination 
and thereby achieve savings both in 
scarce scientific manpower and in funds. What he 
had in mind was a thorough analysis of the situa

101st PLENARY MEETING 

tion, leading to an integration of effort by, for 
example, concentrating extraction work in one laboratory, 
powdered metallurgy research in another, 
studies of canning problems in a third, and so on, 
with free exchange of the results obtained between 
the participating bodies. 

5 2. He had mentioned only a few of the problems 
which might have to be faced in the future and in 
connection with which the Agency might be called 
upon to provide assistance. The Agency was already 
well established as a medium for international collaboration 
in atomic energy matters and for the 
exchange of scientific thought and information 
through its programme of conferences, symposia 
and study groups, its nuclear data service and its 
scientific documentation facilities. The scientific 
documentation service had been expanded by putting 
a computer system into use and steps were 
well advanced towards the setting up of an international 
nuclear information service. The mid-point 
of the current long-term programme 5) had been 
reached and the time would soon come when a 
further long-term programme of activities would 
have to be developed. The experience gained over 
the past nine years in adjusting to changing circumstances 
and actively promoting the development 
of new uses of atomic energy would enable the 
Agency to plan for the future with greater confidence. 
For his part, he would continue to do his utmost 
in carrying out his responsibilities but, let it be 
said, the results would depend on the understanding 
and help received from Member States. Theessential 
need for good and friendly working relationships 
between the Secretariat and Member States could 
not be stressed too strongly. The Secretariat looked 
for guidance from the Member States in no less 
degree than the Member States, particularly among 
the developing countries, sought guidance, advice 
and help from the Agency in developing their atomic 
energy activities. Moreover, the Agency depended 
upon its Member States for financial sustenance and 
he would urge all delegations at the Conference to 
lend their support at home in order that the Agency 
might be given resources to meet the programme it 
was required to carry out. 
5 3. He welcomed those countries which had been 
' admitted to 
membership since the previous session 
of the General Conference, namely Jamaica, Jordan, 
Kenya and Panama, and looked forward to their 
active participation in the Agency's work in the 
future. 

54. Lastly, he availed himself of the opportunity 
to thank the Austrian Federal Government and the 
Austrian people for the support they had freely 
5) INFURC/50. 

given, which had served to establish the Agency on 
a firm foundation and enabled it to work smoothly. 
Indeed, the Agency had been very fortunate in finding 
such a generous host country, which was 
sensitive to the needs of an international organization 
and which had provided temporary headquarters 
for the Agency at little or no cost, as 
well as excellent facilities for its meetings. The 
Agency looked forward to continued co-operation, 
to the benefit of both parties and, it was hoped, 
mankind as a whole. 

ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

55. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations foi the office of President. 
56. Mr. TIMBS (Australia) said he had great 
pleasure in proposing Mr. Sarasin (Thailand), whose 
distinguished career as a diplomat and whose experience 
of the United Nations made him especially 
fitted to direct and guide the work of the session. 
57. Mr. SIWABESSY (Indonesia) seconded, and 
Mr. PRADO (Brazil) and Mr. HOGEN (Japan) 
supported, the nomination. 
5 8. Mr. Sarasin ( Thailand) was elected President of the 
General Conference for its tenth regular session by 
acclamation. 
Mr. Sarasin (Thailand) took the Chair. 

59. The PRESIDENT thanked theConferencefor 
the great honour it had done his country and himself 
in electing him President for the tenth session. 
He took the opportunity to convey the most friendly 
greetings of the people and Government of Thailand 
to the Conference, and thanked the Government of 
Austria and the city of Vienna for their generous 
hospitality. He further paid tribute to the outgoing 
President, who had directed the deliberations of 
the ninth session in Tokyo with wisdom and understanding. 
60. Although important political decisions had 
been involved in the establishment of the Agency, 
it was now apparent that from its inception the 
Agency had succeeded in being a purely scientific 
and technical organization, devoting its efforts and 
resources towards the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
for the benefit of mankind. 
61. During the past nine years, the Agency had 
overcome its initial difficulties by successfully adapting 
itself to political and technical realities not foreseen 
at the outset. The growing agreement that had 
developed among the major Powers in the past 
few years in relation to the Agency's work had 
been one of the most gratifying events in international 
co-operation. He sincerely hoped that that 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

spirit would continue to prevail so that the Agency 
might fulfil its objectives as embodied in the Statute. 

62. As was clear from its steadily increasing 
membership, the world was now well aware that 
the Agency was the principal technical instrument 
of the United Nations in regard to the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. As a layman, he had been 
following with keen interest the expanding prospects 
of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind. As 
the Director General had remarked, the growth 
of nuclear power would be more rapid than had 
been foreseen a few years previously. Developing 
countries were becoming more and more interested 
The meeting rose at

in the assistance the Agency could render in utilizing 
atomic energy for the generation of electricity 
or the combined production of electricity and fresh 
water. Undoubtedly, the development of nuclear 
power as a major source of energy would be of 
great importance to the economic progress of the 
world. 

63. The deliberations of the Conference would, 
he was confident, result in decisions that would 
enable the Agency to pursue its immediate objectives. 
For his part he would do his utmost, in 
performing the task entrusted to him, to serve 
the interests of the Conference and the Agency. 
1.10p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(X)/OR.102 
30 January 1967 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 21 September 1966, at 3.25 p.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the provisional 
4a* 

3(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 1 2 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 3-7 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 8-1 1 
6 Applications for membership of the Agency 12 24 


GC(X)/326. 

APPOINTMENT OF THE ELECTION OF VICE-PRESIDENTS 
CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 

3. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 34 
1. The PRESIDENT proposed that, in accord-of the Rules of Procedure, the General Conference 
ance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, a was required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the 
Credentials Committee should be appointed con-election of the Chairman of the two Main Commitsisting 
of the following nine Members: Belgium, tees. He therefore intended to suspend the plenary 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Gabon, Lebanon, New Zealand, meeting for a short time to enable the two Com-
Philippines, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics mittees to elect their chairmen. 
and United States of America. 


The meeting was suspended at 3.35 p.m. and resumed 

2. The proposal was adopted unanimously. 
at 3.45 p.m. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

4. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President of the Conference. 
5. Mr. CHOONHAVAN (Thailand) proposed 
the delegates of the following States: Canada, Ghana, 
Japan, Peru, Switzerland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland. 
6. Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) seconded 
the nominations. 
7. The delegates nominated were declared elected to the 
eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE 
GENERAL COMMITTEE 

8. The PRESIDENT pointed out that under 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure the General 
Conference was required to elect four additional 
members to the General Committee. He invited 
nominations. 
9. Mr. SANTA CRUZ (Chile) nominated the 
delegates of the following States: Australia, France, 
Tunisia and United States of America. 
10. Mr. HOGEN (Japan) seconded the nominations. 
11. The delegates of the States nominated were declared 
elected to the General Committee, which was thus duly 
appointed in compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP 
OF THE AGENCY (GC(X)/327, 339) 

12. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference 
to consider the recommendations of the Board 
of Governors concerning the applications for membership 
of the Agency made by Uganda(GC(X)/327) 
and Singapore (GC(X)/339). The Board had submitted 
a draft resolution in respect of each of these 
applications, but he thought the Conference might 
take the two draft resolutions together. 
13. Sir William PENNEY (United Kingdom ) supported 
the applications, presented as they were by 
two members of the British Commonwealth. 
14. Mr. LARRAGOITI ALONSO (Cuba) and 
Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) also supported the applications 
for membership of the Agency made by 
Singapore and Uganda. 
15. Mr. MASSANGU (Democratic Republic of 
the Congo) hoped the Conference would unanimously 
adopt the two draft resolutions. 
16. The two draft resolutions were adopted unanimously. 
17. The PRESIDENT stated that, in accordance 
with Article XXI. C of the Statute, Uganda and Singapore 
would become Members of the Agency as 
soon as their respective instruments of acceptance of 
the Statute had been deposited with the United 
States Government. 
18. Mr. BASSUDE (Uganda) said he was glad to 
see his country become a Member of the Agency 
and recalled that the first contacts between the 
Agency and Uganda had taken place in 1962, when 
a mission had been sent to evaluate the prospects 
for the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes 
in Uganda. That mission had concluded that the 
country had reached a sufficiently high stage of development 
to permit radioisotopes to be used in 
medicine and agriculture and a training centre in 
the use of radioisotopes to be established at the 
University College. 
19- Since becoming independentin 1962, Uganda 
had benefited from Agency assistance under the 
United Nations Expanded Programme of Technical 
Assistance. An Agency expert had been engaged on 
a research project for cotton growing; in 1964 a 
second expert had set up a radioisotope unit in the 
Physics Department of Makerere University College 
and had conducted a training course, which had 
been attended by about 40 Uganda scientists. A 
third expert was at the moment in Uganda giving 
advice on the use of radioisotopes in the Medical 
School. Uganda had also obtained fellowships from 
the Agency. 

20. The Government of Uganda wished to make 
full use of the existing facilities and hoped to 
receive further assistance in the form of the services 
of experts in connection with the techniques of 
radioisotope utilization in scientific research programmes 
concerned with development. 
21. During the next few years Uganda hoped to 
train more and more scientists, who would gradually 
replace the foreign experts. For that reason, 
Uganda expected that, as a Member of the Agency, 
it would be able to obtain assistance in the form of 
scientific advice. Uganda had the oldest university 
institution in East Africa, and would willingly place 
its training facilities at the disposal of other countries 
in that area. 
22. The Government of Uganda fully approved 
of the Agency's policy of promoting only the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and supported the other 

102nd PLENARY MEETING 

African countries which wanted an entirely denuclearized 
zone to be set up in the area; he urged all 
the Agency's Member States to give their unqualified 
support to that proposal. 

23. In conclusion, he repeated the assurance, 
given by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uganda, 
that his country would scrupulously observe its 
obligations as a Member of the Agency, in accord-
The meeting rose at

ance with the principles of the United Nations 
Charter. 

24. Mr. RAJARTNAM (Singapore) said he was 
deeply aware of the honour done to his country and 
recalled that the Agency and Singapore had already 
been collaborating for several years, since in 1963 
the Agency had sent a mobile radioisotope laboratory 
to Singapore. 
4.15p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(X)/OR.103 
23 February 1967 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 22 September 1966, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the agenda* 
fat agrapbs 

8 Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items for initial discussion 
1 — 2 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1965-66 
3 — 79 

Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 3 — 22 
Argentina 23 - 34 
South Africa 35 — 52 
Poland 53 — 68 
Mexico 69 — 78 
United Arab Republic 79 

GC(X)/343. 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965-66 
DISCUSSION [GC(X)/342J [GC(X)/330, 341] 

The PRESIDENT suggested that the Con-3. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) 
ference accept the recommendations made by the said that on the occasion of the tenth regular ses-
General Committee in regard to the agenda and sion of the General Conference, he would like to 
the allocation of items for initial discussion congratulate all who had contributed to the Agency's 
[GC(X)/342]. success, which was in many respects unparalleled 

among international organizations; he looked for


2. The recommendations of the General Committee ward to even greater achievements in the future. 
were accepted, and the agenda was thereby approved. He particularly welcomed the presence of the 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

Agency's first Director General, Mr. Cole, the Chairman 
of the Preparatory Commission, Mr. Bernardes, 
the Executive Secretary of the Preparatory Commission, 
Dr. Jolles, the President of the first 
General Conference, Ambassador Gruber, and the 
Chairman of the first Board of Governors, 
Mr. Winkler. Those men had played a pioneering 
role in setting up and launching the Agency. 

4. He now wished to read the following message 
to the Conference from the President of the 
United States of America: 
"I welcome this opportunity to speak, 
through Chairman Seaborg, to the delegates 
to the 10th General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. I believe it 
is highly significant that you are participating 
in the 10th annual meeting of this organization, 
which has grown in such a short time to an 
organization of 96 Member States and which 
has contributed so much to the development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

"The IAEA had provided the means 
whereby all of its Members can work together 
and share the scientific developments of 
many nations. Exciting advances in nuclear 
applications have been made in the service 
of mankind. The atom has been unlocked 
and its energy harnessed; the technologies 
of nuclear power and desalting can be joined 
to convert saline water to fresh water, and 
the isotopes that come from nuclear research 
offer unusual applications and promise in 
medicine, and agriculture and industry. This 
work is of the utmost importance to the 
future of mankind and must be continued 
with increasing effort and support. At this 
time let me renew my country's pledge to 
assist the IAEA in the future as we have in 
the past in the full pursuit of its goal and 
enormous potential. 

"I should like to emphasize to you 
my country's dedication to three principles 
which are of particular relevance to this Conference. 
We are deeply committed to the 
pinciple of international co-operationfor peace 
in every field of human endeavour. Webelieve 
strongly in sharing the benefits of scientific 
progress and we have consistently acted on 
this belief. And we have worked, and will 
continue to work, toward the economic development 
of the world's less developed 
countries. 

"If nuclear energy is to play its rightful 
role in contributing to these goals, the Agency 
has a crucial responsibility to see that the vast 
beneficial uses of nuclear energy are not 

diverted for military purposes. I cannot say 
often enough that the prevention of the 
spread of nuclear weapons is one of the 
most important tasks of our times. We look 
on the Agency's safeguards system as one 
of the principal instruments for accomplishing 
this task. The United States Government fully 
supports the Agency system and we will do 
all in our power to support the continued 
growth andtechnicaleffectivenessofthesystem. 
But its success depends on the support of all 
Members —and I urge all Members to foster 
the continued healthy development and widespread 
application of this vital system. 

"On behalf of the people of the United 
States, I send you congratulations for your 
achievements and very best wishes for your 
future undertakings." 

5. From his experience as Chairman of the United 
States Atomic Energy Commission during the past 
five years, he considered that the Agency had made 
a significant contribution to the achievement of the 
objectives mentioned in President Johnson's message. 
It had planned its activities to keep pace with 
and promote technical and economic developments 
with regard to nuclear power and radiation applications 
and their potential uses, particularly in the 
developing countries, while at the same time carefully 
developing a safeguards system to ensure that 
nuclear energy was used for peaceful purposes only. 
Its programme for the next two years reflected the 
same imaginative planning and deservedthesupport 
of all Member States. 
6. Remarkable progress had been made in the 
various uses of nuclear energy since the first General 
Conference in 1957. The number of research reactors 
had risen from about 60 in 18 countries to more 
than 270 in 47 countries, and the electricity generated 
in nuclear power stations had increased from 
about 40 000 kilowatts to about 8 million kilowatts. 
7. One of the Agency's major achievements was 
the development of a safeguards system designed to 
ensure that nuclear energy projects would serve only 
peaceful purposes. That system had been impartially 
administered and had not interfered with the normal 
operation of facilities. Since Member States, if they 
were to accept it, must have confidence in the 
system, he welcomed the Director General's suggestion 
for an external evaluation to ensure it was 
sound. 
8. The recent extension of safeguards procedures 
to reprocessing plants was a further important 
development and the United States was arranging 
for the application of those procedures to the 
Nuclear Fuel Services reprocessing plant in West 
Valley, New York, in connection with the pro

103rd PLENARY MEETING 

cessing of irradiated fuel from the Yankee Nuclear 
Power Station, which was subject to safeguards. 
As a result the Agency could gain experience in 
applying safeguards and training its personnel. He 
urged the Agency to extend its safeguards procedures 
to fuel fabrication and associated recovery 
processing. 

9. It was obvious of course that with the growing 
number of nuclear installations the Agency 
would need more and more qualified inspectors. 
His Government would be glad to assist the Agency 
in connection with the proposed training courses 
in nuclear materials management and other safeguards 
techniques, intended for the employees of 
nuclear energy organizations. 
10. Taking note of the Secretariat's feeling expressed 
in the Programme for 1967-68 that the 
safeguards staff need not be increased in direct 
proportion to the growdi of the operational safeguards 
activities l), he stated his belief that it was 
essential that the Division of Safeguards and Inspection 
be provided with the necessary staff for fulfilling 
its responsibilities at all times. 
11. He welcomed the agreement between the 
Agency and the United Kingom to place the Bradwell 
nuclear power station under safeguards, which 
would promote the establishment of widely accepted 
international safeguards with uniform standards and 
methods of inspection, and hoped other countries 
would take similar steps. It was gratifying that the 
number of reactors under safeguards or containing 
safeguarded material was now 54 and that agreements 
had been signed whereby the administration 
of safeguards under thirteen bilateral agreements 
between the United States and other countries had 
been transferred to the Agency. His Government 
also registered with the Agency all international 
transfers of nuclear material, on a semi-annual 
basis, and he hoped other Governments would do 
likewise. 
12. The development in the use of nuclear energy 
for power purposes had been amply demonstrated 
by the rapidly increasing number of power reactors 
being constructed or planned. It had been foreseen 
in 1962 that the United States would have a nuclear 
generating capacity of 5 million kilowatts by 1970 
and 40 million kilowatts by 1980; it was expected 
that by the turn of the century 'all new generating 
capacity would be nuclear in origin. In view of the 
increased availability of power from nuclear plants 
at costs competitive with conventionally fuelled 
systems, it was now foreseen, however, that by 
1) GC(X)/332, para. 260. 

1970-71 thegeneratingcapacity would exceed 10 million 
kilowatts and by 1980 would be between 80 million 
and 110 million kilowatts. The Agency could 
continue to make a considerable contribution to the 
development of nuclear power in matters such as 
reactor siting, health and safety, the evaluation of 
nuclear power needs and the dissemination of the 
latest technical and economic information on various 
reactor types. 

13. Theshortage offresh water presented a serious 
problem. In the United States, for example, there 
had been a nine-fold increase in water consumption 
during the past 65 years, and it was expected that 
the total supply of water at present available would 
be required to meet the demand in 1980. Thus it 
was necessary to supplement the water supply, and 
one of the most promising methods was desalting 
— a unique method which, when coupled with 
nuclear power, would make it possible to take 
advantage of the almost limitless resources of nuclear 
energy and the favourable economics of large-sized 
desalting plants. 
14. Agreement had recently been reached in the 
United States to construct the largest nuclear-fuelled 
desalting and electric-power plant ever built, which 
would produce 150 million gallons of fresh water 
per day together with 1800 megawatts of electric 
power. The fresh water produced would be more 
than double that now produced by all the desalting 
plants in the world and would supply a city of 
750 000 inhabitants; the average cost of delivered 
water was expected to be 27 cents per thousand 
gallons. The Agency had been provided with the 
technical and economic feasibility reports concerning 
the plant. The Agency had taken several constructive 
steps to assist Member States in assessing 
possible uses of such dual-purpose plants. Its panel 
meetings on nuclear desalting were extremely useful 
and the United States intended to participate in the 
Panel on Nuclear Reactors for Desalination Applications 
to be held in November. The Agency had 
also provided the Chairman and Secretary of the 
joint Mexico-United States-Agency study group on 
the technical and economic feasibility of a large 
dual-purpose plant to meet water and power needs 
in Mexico and the United States, and a similar 
study with a view to meeting such needs after 1970 
in the Athens area was now being carried out by 
Greek and United States specialists, the results of 
which would be sent to the Agency. The Agency 
had also taken part in the joint Israel-Unites States 
power and desalting project study. He was glad to 
note that the Agency planned further surveys on 
nuclear desalting in its 1967-68 programme. He 
hoped the Agency would participate in the International 
Water for Peace Conference to be held in 
Washington in May 1967 and welcomed the Agency's 
proposal to hold a symposium on nuclear desalting 
in 1968, perhaps in the United States. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

15. He suggested that the Agency should also 
consider holding a symposium on nuclear ship 
propulsion in 1968. 
16. During the past ten years there had been a 
dramatic increase in the use of radioisotopes and 
radiation sources in medicine, agriculture, food 
irradiation, insect-pest control, water - resource 
studies and industry, and further exciting developments 
were expected in the future. In that respect 
it was gratifying that the Agency and the Joint 
FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture 
planned to carry out constructive work 
during the next two years. 
17. Worth-while work was being done at the 
Agency's Laboratory in Seibersdorf, the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, the Laboratory 
of Marine Radioactivity in Monaco, the Middle 
Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab 
Countries in Cairo and the centre in Manila. The 
Trieste centre, which had been started as an 
experiment, had surpassed all expectations. Its 
work had been acclaimed by theoretical physicists 
and it had provided scientists from developing 
countries with training and opportunities to carry 
out research. More than 110 physicists from over 
42 countries had worked there so far. Highly successful 
seminars on plasma physics and high-energy 
physics had been conducted and it was planned to 
hold a seminar in 1967 covering the whole spectrum 
of theoretical physics. In June 1966 a research 
project in which an outstanding plasma physicist 
from the Soviet Union and one from the United 
States had been engaged had been successfully 
completed. 
18. He commended the Agency's work in disseminating 
information and facilitating the international 
exchange of nuclear and reactor-physics 
data and welcomed its efforts to devise an International 
Information System. It would also be 
useful if it co-ordinated the activities of various 
national or regional centres which were to be 
established. He was pleased that the Agencysponsored 
Symposium on Neutron Thermalization 
and Reactor Spectra was to be held at the University 
of Michigan in July 1967. 
19. He appreciated, in particular, the Agency's 
extensive technical assistance activities and welcomed 
the efforts to co-ordinate all types of assistance that 
were useful in a specific project, and to relate each 
project to national and regional nuclear energy 
activities and to overall economic development. 
Such integrated programming was difficult, but it 
was worth-while in view of the Agency's limited 
resources. 
20. He approved the budget and hoped that the 
Agency would be able to carry out all its activities 
with the funds requested. He was pleased to renew 
for 1967 the United States offer to donate up to 
$50 000 worth of special nuclear material for use 
in Agency projects in research and medical therapy. 
The United States would continue to make available 
on a cost-free basis the services of experts, 
training opportunities and certain items of equipment. 
It would continue to contribute to the 
Library copies of all scientific and technical reports 
published during the year by the United States 
Atomic Energy Commission concerning the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, together with prints of the 
Commission's technical films. 

21. His Government assured the Director General 
and the Secretariat of its continued support and 
would continue to nominate outstanding people 
for Agency appointments. 
22. It was obvious that the Agency's capabilities 
had already greatly increased, but it was called upon 
to discharge a formidable task in meeting the growing 
demands of Member States. He hoped thereforethat 
Member States would make a special effort to mark 
the present anniversary year by increased co-operation 
and thus encourage the Agency in its work in the 
years to come. 
23. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) recalled that 
just ten years had passed since the Statute creating 
the Agency had been approved at the Headquarters 
of the United Nations; with that the historic proposal 
of President Eisenhower, first put forward 
three years earlier in the General Assembly, had 
taken definite shape. The occasion had a special 
personal significance for him (Mr. Quihillalt), for 
he had been privileged to participate from the very 
beginning in the work which led to the Agency's 
creation, and it had been his honour to share the 
ideals which had prompted its establishment. 
24. The finest expression of those ideals was to 
be found, perhaps, in the introduction to the report 
of the Preparatory Commission 2) , where it was 
said: 
"Atomic energy has been, in theyears 
since the Second World War, the object and 
the symbol both of the highest hopes and of 
the deepest fears of mankind. After the initial 
shock of the realization of its destructive 
powers, the world is awakening to the expectation 
of the great benefits which it can also 
bestow. But as the veils of secrecy and 
mystery are gradually put aside, ithas become 
increasingly clear that the development of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes demands 
a high degree of international co-operation. 

2) Document GC.l/l. 


103rd PLENARY MEETING 

"Nor must the broadening of the peaceful 
applications of atomic energy carry the 
danger of increasing the military potential. 
The creation of a reliable system of safeguards 
against diversion of fissionable material to 
military use is therefore an equally important 
part of the foundation of confidence upon 
which alone the Agency can build an effective 
programme in the future. It is in this way 
that the Agency can contribute, not only to 
prosperity, but also to world peace." 

25. The ideals outlined by the Preparatory Commission 
had found expression in the Agency's basic 
objectives — "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world". 
26. The tenth session of the General Conference 
offered an excellent opportunity to assess the work 
that had been accomplished, to compare hopes and 
ideals already realized, and, in sum, to see how far 
the Agency's objectives had actually been achieved. 
He wished to state quite categorically that Argentina 
was satisfied with the Agency's work, and to express 
the hope that the organization would go on to 
fulfil all the ideals set out in the Statute. 
27. The first positive result of the Agency's 
establishment had been the immediate response of 
scientists, technicians, students and men of goodwill 
throughout the world, who had shown their determination 
to collaborate in an enterprise which 
brought them, for the first time, both an international 
forum where they could express their fears 
and an opportunity to apply, on a world-wide scale, 
their knowledge and special abilities. That international 
forum has subsequently served as a catalyst, 
promoting an active exchange of opinions and 
information about theoretical and experimental work 
among scientists and technologists throughout the 
world. The task had been accomplished by means 
of countless seminars; by exchanges of scientists; 
by the co-operation of experts; by the granting of 
fellowships; by training courses and the dissemination 
of information; and by the establishment 
of laboratories and international centres such as 
the one in Trieste. 
28. Those accomplishments alone would have 
been sufficient to justify the Agency's ten years of 
work; but it had also provided important assistance 
for the less-developed countries, by sending experts 
and technical assistance missions, by supplying 
instruments and equipment and, not least, simply 
by adding the weight of its authority to national 
projects. 
29. Argentina was discharging a debt of gratitude 
by publicly testifying to the value it attached to 
assistance received from the Agency; and it should 
not be forgotten that Argentina's geographical 
position might have militated against progress in 
nuclear science. The happy circumstances of belonging 
to an organization such as the Agency had 
enabled his country to overcome that disavantage. 
Argentina had thus found an active role for itself 
in atomic energy work, had become a member of 
a community of nations with nuclear programmes 
and problems, and was kept informed of the 
progress made in those countries. 

30. Recently a study of the feasibility of installing 
the first nuclear power station in Argentina had 
yielded positive results. Useful advice - had been 
received from the Agency, but he thought the 
Secretariat would do well to give more attention 
to that type of activity in future. No doubt the 
past decade had seen the establishment of fewer 
power stations than originally foreseen in the 
Agency's plans, and as a consequence one of its 
important functions — that of serving as a centre 
for the distribution of special fissionable materials— 
had not grown as the Preparatory Commission had 
imagined it would. In the decade to come the 
situation would undoubtedly change radically, and 
the Agency would have to take the necessary steps 
to see that its responsibilities in that connection 
were efficiently discharged; it must be in a position 
to promote, on a global scale, the increasing use 
of nuclear power. 
31. The Agency had established, in accordance 
with the terms of its Statute, a system of safeguards 
designed to prevent the facilities and materials 
supplied by it from being used for military purposes; 
and the intention had been that safeguards should 
also be extended, at the request of the parties 
concerned, to any bilateral or multilateral arrangement. 
The Agency had developed its safeguards 
system by establishing a regulatory code and by 
training a competent team of inspectors. Argentina 
had accepted the application of safeguards within 
its own territory without reservation, and had in 
fact been the first country in Latin America and one 
of the first in the world to try the system. In doing 
so his country firmly belived that it was not only 
contributing to world peace, but also helping the 
Agency— helping it, among other things, to increase 
the assistance which it could provide for the 
developing areas of the world. Argentina believed 
that the Agency had fully discharged its responsibility 
with regard to the planning and establishment of 
an adequate safeguards system; the next step was 
up to the Governments of the world. Unanimity 
of action was important in that connection. His 
Government did not believe in a safeguards system 
under which controls would be applied exclusively 
to developing countries while more advanced 
countries remained free to do as they wished. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

32. A treaty under which Latin America would be 
declared a denuclearized zone was under discussion, 
and Argentina had taken an active part in all the 
meetings of the commission charged with its preparation. 
The Agency should play a role in the 
institution to which the treaty might eventually give 
rise, but should probably refrain from intervening 
during the preparatory stages as so many political 
problems were at issue. It would be up to the 
Governments concerned to decide what part the 
Agency should play once the treaty was signed. At 
present two alternative versions of the treaty were 
being considered, and it would be unwise for the 
Agency to seem to declare itself either for or against 
the initiative of any one group of Governments 
— worse still, to urge the adoption of any measures 
of a political nature. His Government therefore 
believed that it would be premature for the Agency 
to intervene at all until complete agreement had 
been reached between the parties concerned. 
33. One of the most serious problems at present 
facing the Agency was the low level of its Operational 
Budget, based in the main on voluntary contributions 
; in fact, the sums available were diminishing 
each year rather than increasing. Argentina had 
inviariably paid its full quota in voluntary contributions 
; failure to pay caused the Agency enormous 
damage, and he therefore urged all States to make 
their appropriate voluntary contribution. 
34. In conclusion, he wished to emphasize that 
Argentina believed implicitly in the aims of the 
Agency and in the ideals which had prompted its 
establishment] It had complete confidence in the 
Agency at present, and faith in its future. That 
implied, of course, an expression of gratitude to 
all who had been responsible for guiding the 
Agency's affairs, and in particular to its present 
Director General. 
35. Mr. SOLE(SouthAfrica)saidthattheAgency's 
tenth anniversary was an appropriate occasion to 
pause and reflect on its record since 1957. Its 
fundamental aim had been expressed in President 
Eisenhower's "Atoms for Peace" proposal that "the 
high purpose of the International Atomic Energy 
is to make atomic energy for peaceful purposes 
available to all nations", a concept which was 
embodied in Article II of the Agency's Statute. 
36. There was still a long way to go before those 
ideals would be realized, butfor developing countries 
the record of training and technical assistance provided 
by the Agency had been commendable. For 
developed countries, the Agency had played an 
invaluable role in the co-ordination and development 
of regulatory standards in the field of safeguards, 
health and safety and radiation protection, and as 
an information clearing-house, through conferences, 
symposia and study groups. 
37. It had not so far fulfilled the role originally 
allotted to it, of acting as a broker in international 
transfers of nuclear material and equipment and 
the provision of services. That limitation of the 
Agency's activities had resulted in a lack of revenue, 
but had not detracted from the Agency's usefulness. 
38. Generally speaking, there was cause for much 
satisfaction, but no room for complacency, since new 
and important challenges were emerging, to which 
reference would undoubtedly be made in the course 
of the Conference. 
39- South Africa had been associated with the 
Agency since the first eight-Power talks and subsequent 
pre-Statute discussions in Washington in 
1955 and 1956 and had since served on the Preparatory 
Commission and on the Board of Governors 
without interruption. It had consistently pleaded for 
the establishment and maintenance of sound administrative 
and budgetary practices and the streamlining 
of Conference and Board proceedings and of 
the Secretariat. It was on its proposal that the 
United Nations Advisory Committee on Administrative 
and Budgetary Questions had been asked to 
make an annual review of the Agency's budget and 
programme. It had sponsored the resolution adopted 
by the General Conference in 1961 urging States to 
make voluntary contributions to the General Fund 
in amounts related to their assessed contributions 
to the Regular Budget 3). It had also played a 
major role in formulating the Agency's system of 
long-term planning and biennial programming. 

40. His country had also co-sponsored a resolution 
at the fourth General Conference to provide 
for more equitable African representation on the 
Board of Governors 4). The amendment to the 
Statute, providing for increased African representation, 
had been based on a South African draft. 
41. South African spokesmen had always 
emphasized the importance of concentrating attention 
on the technical problems facing the Agency. They 
had always sought to reconcile political views irrespective 
of where they had originated and, in doing 
so, had pursued an entirely independent line. 
42. In the field of safeguards, the South African 
delegation's efforts had been directed to ensuring 
that the system was politically acceptable to the 
countries likely to be subject to safeguards and did 
not stifle atomic energy progress in the developing 
countries. Its views on the subject were exactly 
reflected in a statement by Sir Solly Zuckerman to 
the International Assembly on Nuclear Weapons 
3) GC(V)/RES/100. 
4) GC(IV)/ RES/85 


103td PLENARY MEETING 

at Scarborough in Ontario, Canada, when he had 
said: 

"In all these developments it is 
important that safeguards should be framed 
flexibly, and that they should be reviewed and 
modified as we learn more about the operation 
and monitoring of nuclear facilities.Otherwise, 
the IAEA system would be quickly discredited 
by a failure to apply practical, economic and 
minimal, but at the same time effective controls 
at the key points in the chain of acquisition 
and usage of nuclear materials. These 
would include power production and research 
reactors, chemical separation plants where 
fissile material originates, and isotope preparation 
plants in the case of uranium 235, as 
well as fuel fabrication and handling 
facilities . . . ". 

43. Source materials constituted a most interesting 
omission from Sir Solly Zuckerman's list of key 
points. South Africa had always reserved its position 
regarding the application of safeguards to source 
materials, considering such application unrealistic 
if one was seeking to establish a balance between 
the technical effectiveness and political acceptability 
of the Agency's system. It was not only the safeguards 
system itself which•• should be adjusted to 
political realities, but also its practical implementation. 
44. The tortuous system of transfer and execution 
agreements which had hitherto been concluded or suggested 
when Agency Safeguards were to be applied 
at the request of parties to bilateral or multilateral 
arrangements, or on the conclusion of sales transactions, 
was not calculated to attract potential clients. 
That procedure would have to be simplified if it was 
to cope effectively with future developments in the 
nuclear industry. Otherwise, the whole concept of 
safeguards might come to be regarded as an irritating 
impediment to lawaful commerce in nuclear 
commodities. His country has suggested that the 
procedure could be simplified by replacing the 
existing Safeguards Transfer Agreements by a series 
of bilateral agreements to each of which the only 
parties would be the Agency and one State in the 
capacity of Receiving or Purchasing State. Each 
bilateral agreement would contain a provision whereby 
it could be invoked by any State which supplied 
nuclear material or equipment to the Receiving 
State concerned. Such Invocation would automatically 
attract Agency safeguards to the items supplied and 
would be effected by the very simple process of 
notifying the Agency of the details of the transaction. 
45. South Africa was in the process of consulting 
with the Division of Safeguards and Inspection of 
the Secretariat on the form of such a bilateral 
agreement. The first draft was already in preparation 
and was expected to be ready for discussion by the 
Board in 1967. 

46. There had been continued improvement in 
South Africa's role as one of the three major 
suppliers of uranium in the Western world. Its 
estimated reserves of $8/lb uranium had risen from 
147 000 to 180 000 tons of concentrates, thus 
placing South Africa second only to Canada in terms 
of exploitable uranium resources. Recent investigations 
had revealed that at the current price of gold, 
South Africa's uranium reserves in the price categories 
of $10, $15 and $20/lb uranium amounted to 
approximately 190 000, 225 000 and 265 000 tons 
respectively. 
47. South Africa was acutely conscious of its 
special responsibility, as a major uranium producer, 
to do nothing which might conceivably add to the 
number of Powers possessing nuclear weapons. 
48. It considered that little useful purpose would 
be served by the General Conference debating the 
political problems inherent in any discussion of the 
dangers of proliferation, but did consider it right 
and proper that the Conference should pledge itself 
to making the Agency's resources available if and 
when discussions in the United Nations or amongst 
the atomic Powers reached a stage where it would 
become practicable to use the services of the Agency 
as a contribution towards solving the problems 
involved in the control and policing of nuclear 
armaments. 
49. Sir Solly Zuckerman had also stated that: 
"The negotiations for a non-proliferation 
treaty, for an extension of the test ban, 
for any measure of disarmament, are longand 
arduous. So too are the technical efforts to 
build up an effective and acceptable IAEA 
scheme of monitoring. But both enterprises 
are vital, as indeed they are parallel. The 
smallest step forward in either field means 
progress. The politician can rest assured that 
the scientists will not fail him in his part 
of the work." 

50. It was vital for the future of the Agency that 
the role of the scientist and of the politician in the 
field of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation 
remain parallel until the politicians had solved 
their problems and the issues involved had ceased 
to be a source of international controversy. Pressure 
on the Agency to become involved in political 
debate should be resisted until it was opportune for 
the Agency to make its own contribution, which did 
not mean that the Agency should not continue to 
develop its safeguards procedures for the role it 
might one day be expected to play. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

51. At the first General Conference in 195 7, he 
had urged that the Agency adopt as its watchwords: 
"patience, moderation and goodwill". Patience, 
because it would inevitably be some time before the 
Agency could realize all the brave hopes which 
attended its birth; moderation, because the Agency 
was so susceptible to political exploitation; and 
goodwill, because, without it, the Agency would 
never be anything more than an empty husk. He 
sincerely believed that those watchwords were still 
applicable and that the Agency would eventually 
be able to pride itself on having fulfilled the high 
purpose referred to by President Eisenhower, of 
making atomic energy for peaceful purposes available 
to all nations. 
52. In conclusion, he paid tribute to the 
Secretariat, whose calibre was shown by the high 
ranking which the Agency enjoyed in the family of 
United Nations organizations. 
53. Mr. BILLIG (Poland) said that the Agency 
was beginning the tenth year of its activity and had 
proved that it could be an effective instrument for 
international co-operation. The participation in its 
work of scientists, administrators and diplomats 
had made it possible to find a common language in 
solving complicated questions, a clear example being 
the problem of safeguards, a decision on which had 
been unanimously taken at the General Conference 
in Tokyo. Unfortunately, the last year had passed 
in an atmosphere of increasing tension. The armed 
intervention in the internal affairs of Viet-Nam had 
stirred the conscience of millions of people throughout 
the world. The victim of the escalation of the 
war was the peaceful population of the towns and 
villages. All that caused great, ever-increasingconcern 
in his country, too. 
54. In that connection, the importance of 
strengthening the Agency's role in preventing the 
spread of atomic weapons was becoming ever more 
acute. The task was to ensure that nuclear States 
did not transfer nuclear weapons to other States, 
and that States hitherto not possessing nuclear 
weapons did not manufacture them, try to obtain 
access to them or endeavour to gain a say in 
deciding upon their use. The nuclear claims of the 
Federal Republic of Germany were a basic obstacle 
to concluding an agreement on the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
55. Poland adhered to the view that the Agency 
and its system of safeguards might in certain circumstances 
be used as a means of ensuring compliance 
widi treaties aimed at the non-proliferation 
of atomic weapons. 
56. Recalling that Poland had put forward such 
plans for collateral measures in the sphere of atomic 
disarmamant as the Rapacki plan providing for the 
establishment of a denuclearized zone in Central 
Europe and the Gomulka plan for a "freeze" of 
nuclear armamants in that area, he declared that, 
in view of the Agency's role and opportunities in 
that field, Poland would be prepared to place its 
own atomic installations under Agency safeguards if 
the Federal Republic of Germany did the same. 
He believed that a number of other European 
States would also adopt a similar course. 

57. Referring to certain aspects of the Agency's 
activity, he said that under its auspices the cooperation 
in reactor physics between Norway, Poland 
and Yugoslavia — the NPY project — was already 
in its fourth year. All participants in the project 
had proposed to the Agency that the project should 
be extended and the work continued on its former 
basis. Specific conditions were also being laid down 
for a new project of co-operation under the Agency's 
auspices —between Poland, India and the United 
Arab Republic— devoted tp research into solidstate 
physics, using nuclear methods. 
5 8. An important role was played by the scientific 
conferences, seminars, symposia and summer schools 
organized by the Agency. Poland particularly welcomed 
the international symposium on magnetohydrodynamic 
electrical power generation and plasma 
physics held in July 1966 in Salzburg. Poland was 
showing great interest in research in that field and 
was also experimenting in magnetohydrodynamics 
jointly with France, with which its co-operation in 
the sphere of peaceful uses of atomic energy had 
already been successfully developing over a number 
of years. His delegation would welcome the convening 
of the next symposium on magnetohydrodynamics 
and plasma physics in Poland. 
59. Noting the significance of the Symposium on 
Radioisotope Instruments in Industry and Geophysics 
held in October 1965 in Warsaw, he pointed 
out that the advantages which Poland obtained in 
that sphere far outweighed the State's expenditure 
on all atomic research. Poland was exchanging 
information in that field and co-operating with a 
number of other countries. The Polish-Belgian 
seminar on the use of the labelled-atom method to 
improve technology in various branches of industry 
would soon be held in Warsaw. In order to expand 
research and the use of isotopes, it was planned 
to set up a special institute in Cracow. Poland was 
counting on the Agency's assistance in that venture 
and was willing for its part to grant the Agency 
facilities for making use of the institute's services. 
60. Poland was taking an active part in fulfilling 
the Agency's research contracts and would support 
the development of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste. 

103id PLENARY MEETING 

61. He noted with satisfaction the progress in 
making available technical assistance, but pointed 
out that there were still difficulties in regard to 
deliveries of equipment, although frequently such a 
form of assistance was the most effective. The 
technical assistance provided by the Agency was 
still too modest, and new sources and new forms of 
such assistance should be sought. 
62. Poland, jointly with Bulgaria, had completed 
preparations for making available the assistance 
which it had agreed to give in fulfilling the socialist 
countries' programme for providing, within the 
framework of technical assistance supplied through 
the Agency, a complete set of equipment for a 
medical diagnostics laboratory together with the 
experts and training fellowships needed to launch 
the laboratory. When the Board of Governors took 
a decision on that project, the programme of 
assistance which the socialist countries had in 1963 
agreed to give by supplying eight medical laboratories 
to developing countries would be fully completed. 
63. Poland declared its willingness to contribute 
to the Agency's technical assistance programme the 
sum of 100 000 zlotys in national currency, which 
the Agency could use at its discretion, and as before 
offered the Agency five annual fellowships. In that 
connection he wished to note that his country 
continued to attach great importance to the Agency's 
fellowships for Polish scientific workers. Poland 
would continue to place its experts at the Agency's 
disposal. 
64. The Agency should devote more attention and 
effort to solving the problem of nuclear power. 
Although, in view of the existence of considerable 
reserves of natural fuel resources, Poland did not 
plan to construct its first atomic power stations 
until after 1972, it was already making intensive 
preparations for the construction of power reactors 
and was counting on co-operation with the Agency. 
65- The Polish delegation considered that the 
optimum level had already been reached with regard 
to the Agency's budget and staff for the period of 
the next few years. Growth in the effectiveness of 
the Agency's work ought not to be achieved by 
increasing its personnel, and the increase in its 
budget should not exceed the limit which many 
considered to be the maximum — 4-5 % a year. The 
Agency's funds to cover its operational activities 
could be increased through economies, the use of 
internal reserves and the elimination ofbureaucracy. 

66. He thought that the number of permanent 
contracts exceeded the minimum referred to in the 
Statute, and there were also too many officials 
whose contracts were extended for over five years. 
He estimated that approximately 60% of the 
administrative posts were occupied by people on 
permanent contracts. That led to a considerable 
reduction in the posts in the Secretariat intended, 
under the Statute, for distribution on the geographical 
principle. 

67. In conclusion, he recalled that 1967 was the 
hundredth anniversary of the birth of Marie 
Sklodowska-Curie, whose epoch-making discoveries, 
made together with Pierre Curie, formed the foundation 
of the whole development of nuclear science. 
UNESCO and other international organizations had 
decided to mark the anniversary by exhibitions, 
special publications, scientific conferences, papers, 
radio and television programmes and so forth. He 
believed that the Agency, too, should take an active 
part in such ventures, and he would be extremely 
grateful to the Conference if it made the appropriate 
recommendations to the Director General and the 
Board of Governors. 
68. On the occasion of the Agency's tenth General 
Conference, he congratulated the Secretariat and the 
Director General on their achievements and wished 
them further success in the future. 
69. Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) said 
that the construction of Mexico's Nuclear Centre had 
begun in July 1964. In its first stage of operation, 
the Centre would have a Triga Model III reactor 
and a 12-MeV Van de Graaff tandem accelerator. 
The first building, which housed the accelerator and 
its maintenance workship, had been taken over in 
January 1966. The building for the attached laboratories 
was on the point of completion, while the 
administration building, also containing a library 
and a lecture room, was being built. Work had 
been commenced on installing the accelerator and 
the system of magnets, deflectors and selectors for 
the particle beam. The main aim of the group 
performing that work, apart from training personnel, 
was to study the physical characteristics of nuclei 
from the experimental point of view. 
70. The buildings for the reactor and its auxiliary 
laboratories were farther from completion than those 
for the accelerator. The aluminium tank had already 
been installed for the reactor, which would have a 
power output of 1 MW(th) in continuous operation 
and 3000 MW in pulsed operation. The reactor 
group consisted of 34 members, who were working 
full-time in the departments of research, services, 
operation and administration, and were carrying out 
investigations of statistical mechanics and transport 
theory, as well as building aMossbauer spectrometer, 
a hybrid computer for radioisotope calculations, 
etc. It was hoped that the reactor would go critical 
in August 1967. 

71. With its 6 1/2 million inhabitants and its 
vigorous industrial development, Mexico City constituted 
a considerable market for fresh water and 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

electric power. At present geological and soil 
mechanics studies were being carried out in the 
Texcoco region in order to investigate the possibility 
of solving the problems of Mexico City by 
means of a dual-purpose reactor which would generate 
electricity and desalt the water of the Texcoco 
basin. On 7 October 1965 the Agency and the 
Governments of Mexico and the United States of 
America had signed an agreement to set up a study 
group to investigate the technical and economic 
possibilities of a nuclear plant to desalt sea-water 
with a view to providing fresh water for irrigation in 
the States of Sonora and Baja California in Mexico 
and Arizona and California in the United States. 
That group consisted of North American and 
Mexican experts. The Agency had appointed Professor 
Pierre Balligand as Chairman and Dr. Jorge 
Spitalnik as secretary. 

72. The study group had met twice. The arid 
zone which was to benefit from fresh water had 
already been, decided upon. Since the sources of 
irrigation water at present available in the region 
were insufficient for agricultural requirements, the 
level of the phreatic water on both sides of the 
border was falling rapidly. The present net loss 
was estimated as some 10 m^ per second. 
73. Any plant using conventional methods could 
only make up a fraction of that deficit. The region 
offered unique opportunities for large scale reactors 
which would produce nuclear power very cheaply. 
Sites for the installation of a nuclear plant had been 
studied, and work was being commenced on a study 
of geological faults and the seismic characteristics 
of those sites. 
74. His delegation felt that it would be appropriate 
to mention the project for establishing a permanent 
denuclearized zone in Latin America, to which it 
attached the greatest importance. The Conference was 
already aware of the efforts being made by the Latin 
American countries to attain that objective; the 
Preparatory Commission for the Denuclearization 
of Latin America set up at the end of 1964 had 
attempted to draw up an international instrument 
based on the agreement of all its members not to 
produce nuclear weapons or to acquire them under 
any title. The reasons underlying that noble idea 
were known to all; basically, it was a collateral 
measure of complete and general disarmament by 
which the geographic region in question would be 
freed from the dangers of possible nuclear war, and 
which prevented any possibility of involvement in a 
sterile arms race which would involve, at the very 
least, an absolute waste of the limited resources 
available to Latin America for its vital economic and 
social development. The Latin American countries 
could not achieve their objective, however, without 
the wholehearted and resolute co-operation of the 
international community as a whole. If it was agreed 
that the establishment of denuclearized zones, as an 
essential factor in reducing present or future areas 
of international tension, would pave the way for 
general and complete disarmament under international 
control, the establishment of the necessary 
control — ensuring, of course, its international 
character— must also be considered with regard 
to the denuclearization of Latin America. The Preparatory 
Commission, which had met at the beginning 
of 1966 in Mexico City, had approved the 
"Proposals for drawing up a Treaty on the Denuclearization 
of Latin America", which set out, apart 
from the obligations to be assumed by the States 
party to the treaty, all the necessary measures to 
ensure that those obligations were fulfilled. The 
measures included, as an indispensable element 
for the effective fulfilment of the obligations, provision 
for participation by the Agency. The Agency's 
safeguards system, which in accordance with 
Article III.A.5 of the Statute could be applied "at 
the request of the parties, to any bilateral or multilateral 
arrangement, or at the request of a State, to 
any of that State's activities in the field of atomic 
energy", would be applied as part of the control 
system provided for by the future Latin-American 
denuclearization treaty in line with the principle 
enshrined in Article III.B.l of the Statute, which 
laid down that the Agency, in carrying out its functions, 
should "conduct its activities in accordance 
with the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations to promote peace and international cooperation, 
and in conformity with policies of the 
United Nations furthering the establishment of 
safeguarded world-wide disarmament and in conformity 
with any international agreements entered into 
pursuant to such policies. 

75. The Preparatory Commission for the Denuclearization 
of Latin America would meet again in 
January 1967, and its members intended, if possible, 
to reach final agreement on the denuclearization 
treaty. It must therefore be plain to the Governments 
represented at the Conference that it was 
important for the Agency to envisage without further 
delay the form in which it would have to co-operate 
with the Latin American Governments in executing 
the treaty. His delegation accordingly felt that it 
was not too soon to give the matter serious consideration, 
so that the Board of Governors at its 
firstmeeting in 1967wouldhavedefiniteconclusions 
before it; as soon as the treaty on the denuclearization 
of Latin America came into force, the Agency 
would then be able to draw up the agreements for 
co-operation in the application of its safeguards 
system under that treaty. 
76. The Government of Mexico confirmed its 
intention to Contribute to the financing of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste in 
order to ensure that the Centre would continue to 

103id PLENARY MEETING 

exist in the future. The amount of the contribution 
had not yet been decided, but it could be fixed as 
soon as the necessary data were available. 

77. The Mexican Nuclear Energy Commission had 
always benefited from the various forms of technical 
assistance provided by the Agency, such as the 
provision of experts in the most diverse subjects 
and the award of fellowships, as a means of training 
scientists. That collaboration had produced most 
satisfactory results, and had materially contributed 
to the fact that more than 200 qualified scientists 
were now available. 
78. He warmly congratulated the Agency on the 
tenth session of its General Conference, and was 
confident that it would make a large contribution 
to extending the benefits of nuclear energy to the 
whole world. 
79. Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) made 
the following statement 5): 
(1) "Mr. President, I congratulate you 
heartily and warmly as we in the Orient greet and 
welcome our esteemed family members. On behalf 
of my delegation I wish you all success and I also 
wish that our Tenth General Conference will be 
the start of a new, productive and beneficial decade 
in the history of our Agency. We wish the Agency 
success in fulfilling its role and in providing the 
services we hope to get from it, so that it may 
serve our generation through its contribution to 
the build-up of a new landmark in our civilization, 
no doubt the most outstanding one, namely the 
use and control of the atom solely to promote 
prosperity and peace. 
(2) "The United Arab Republic Atomic 
Energy Establishment is already in a phase which 
could be described as an overall development in 
most of the fields of atomic energy which are of 
direct or long-term interest in the peaceful utilization 
of the atom scientifically and economically, and 
is of special interest in those fields connected with 
the future prosperity of our nation, in particular 
the fields of power generation, desalination and 
advanced and applied science. 
(3) "The United Arab Republic Government 
is aware of the Agency's activities in controlling 
the packaging and transportation of radionuclides. 
Our authorities, guided by the Agency's 
recommendations on safe transport, are making 
every possible effort in order to facilitate the passage 
of nuclear cargo ships in such a manner as to 
5) This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speakers's 
request under Rule 92(b) of the Conference's Rules of Procedure. 


ensure safe navigation through the Suez Canal as 
well as the safety of our territories and property. 

(4) "One of our main interests and obligations 
in relation to our area is to continue assisting 
the Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for 
the Arab Countries, in co-operation with the Agency, 
to perform and implement the Centre's programmes 
in order to serve the Member States participating in 
the Centre. Being the host State to the Centre, we 
express our satisfaction and gratitude to the Director 
General of the Agency for deciding to extend the 
Agency's participation in the Centre for two more 
years, ending in 1968. This arrangement is permitted 
by the Agreement previously concluded with the 
Agency. However, we hope that the Agency will 
not refrain from continuing its co-operation with 
the Centre or even other similar centres in the 
world. We encourage and invite the Agency to 
continue to co-operate with the Centre, as it is 
the intention to widen the scope of its activities 
to serve the needs of the area, particularly 
in important research and in the solution of the 
Member States' problems either on their territory 
or in that of the host State, thus promoting the 
role of the Centre as a permanent research centre 
for Member States. 
(5) "The collaborators from the Agency 
together with us have recognized in the past period 
the vital activities of the Centre in applied research 
and training and its major contribution in solving 
the main problems in Middle Eastern countries, 
which could easily be spotted in the Centre's Annual 
Report. The Centre has already trained 120 scientists, 
all from developing countries, some of whom came 
from Nigeria and Ghana: 36 in the field of agriculture, 
32 in medicine and 52 in industry and 
general applications of radioisotopes. 
(6 ) "My Government will continue to effect 
its contribution of 35 000 Egyptian pounds per year 
to the Centre and will maintain its contribution to 
the Voluntary Fund of the Agency for 1967 at the 
same level as its contribution in 1966, i.e. 
5000 Egyptian pounds. 
(7) "Mr. President, it should be useful for 
all of us, after a decade has passed in the history of 
the Agency's performance of its vital duties, not 
only to praise its achievements or successes but also 
to review its structure and capabilities, and we 
should try, all of us, to set the Agency a higher 
goal and to contribute, all of us, to the replanning 
of its programmes and duties to enable it to meet 
the needs of the coming ten years, those needs 
which we hope and believe it should be able to 
fulfil. We believe three matters must be considered 
in order to reach those goals: first, the internal 
structure of the Agency; secondly, the scope of the 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

Agency's activities, crystallized in its future advanced 
programme for the coming ten years, together with 
the Agency's relations and competition — if we may 
say so — with the other specialized agencies which 
are members of the United Nations family; thirdly, 
its financial means and resources. 

(8) "In reviewing the internal structure of 
the Agency, we have a few remarks to make and I 
hope that the Director General of the Agency, 
Dr. Eklund, will give us his comments on those 
thoughts. A general review of the distribution of 
functions in the different Divisions of the Agency, 
according to its existing Charter, shows that it is 
important and appropriate to reorganize its structure 
in order to use the Secretariat's existing personnel 
to cover all the needs of the Agency now and for a 
coming period of time without the need of appointing 
new personnel and, at the same time, to satisfy 
the actual needs of new Divisions by internal shirtings 
and the amalgamation of some units performing 
similar or related services. 
(9) "One of the most important new Divisions 
of the Agency is that concerned with safeguards 
and inspection. For the sake of the satisfactory 
and efficient performance of its executive 
duties under its very special circumstances, involving 
the staffs appearance and functioning within 
the territories of integral States — for its success — 
the Safeguards Division should receive the utmost 
care in its build-up, bearing in mind the following 
three main principles : 
(a) The exact qualifications that its members 
should possess; 
(b) The defining of its programme as closely 
as possible according to the correct estimates 
of its forthcoming duties with special regard 
to the duration of service of its members in 
order to acquire experience and the use of 
that experience, together with the special 
nature of their duties; 
(c) The very careful choice of its members 
coming from Member States or areas, 
with particular regard to ensuring the possibility 
of using their efforts in areas or 
countries of different political nature. 
(10) "The existing distribution of the 
Agency's Professional staff recruited from the Member 
States of the Agency shows for example that 
the three continents of Africa, Asia and Latin 
America, which represent the total number of developing 
countries, are represented only by 16% of the 
total number of the Professional posts in the 
Secretariat, while Western Europe occupies over 
40%. We cannot accept the pretext of the nonavailability 
of qualified professionals from those 
continents simply because, in other cases, the scientists 
from these continents have been most appreciated 
and accepted. Another example: the number 
of Professionals recruited from the two continents 
of Africa and Asia are simply equivalent to the 
Professionals recruited only from the United Kingdom. 
This argument has been taken up on several 
previous occasions, and particularly each time the 
Director General asked for new nominations to fill 
vacancies, but we never fot a satisfacory and acceptable 
reply. We want to see that the equitable distribution 
in the Agency's Secretariat will give all 
Member States of the Agency their chances to 
contribute to the efforts of the Agency. 

(11) "It might be necessary to reconsider 
the general structure of the Agency's Secretariat 
to enable it to fulfil its wider scope of activities 
in the coming ten years. 
(12) "Speaking about the scope of the 
Agency's activity and programme, we must admit 
that there has been in the past few years quite an 
evolution in the Agency's programme which we 
consider was good enough for the past period. 
How far have the advanced countries reached in 
their technology and use of the atom? I should 
simply say: they have gone as far as the moon 
and maybe beyond. On the other hand, how far 
behind are the developing countries and the countries 
which have not yet the chance to step into 
the field of atomic energy ? In between, the Agency 
stands with its responsibilities, which are to "allocate 
its resources in such a manner as to secure 
efficient utilization and the greatest possible general 
benefit in all areas of the world, bearing in mind 
the special needs of the under-developed areas of 
the world". 
(13) "In the past ten years, the Agency 
succeeded in demonstrating the importance of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy to the world. It 
extended its useful services in the shape of training, 
pieces of equipment, holding symposia and panels, 
sometimes publishing valuable information and 
books, and holding ten General Conferences, and 
I imagine that the main object of our gathering here 
at the Conference is to review the Agency's activities 
and to guide it towards its renewed responsibilities 
and functions. Gentlemen, I feel particularly at this 
Tenth General Conference that it is out collective 
duty to assist the Director General of the Agency, 
to direct the Agency's capabilities to a programme 
which suits our ambitions, and to see that the 
Agency is a highly-efficient technical body in serving 
us in such a manner as to accomplish a really highlevel 
goal in the coming ten years. We would like 
to see the Agency capable of assuming the following 
technical and scientific responsibilities towards the 
nations and areas which most need those services. 

103rd PLENARY MEETING 

(14) "The Agency should have avast dynamic 
programme to support and encourage the fundamental 
and applied sciences and research and 
should have its wider programmes to contribute in 
helping developing countries to acquire the knowledge 
of new atomic sciences in those nations and 
thus assist us in developing our science and techniques 
for the welfare of our people. 
(15) "The Agency should have a more progressive 
and advanced plan to introduce, or channel, 
on a large scale to the developing countries the 
new sciences and technologies already in use in the 
field of atomic energy in the advanced countries, 
so that the developing countries could use them 
in developing their existing technologies. 
(16) "In the areas where the production of 
power does not meet consumers needs the Agency 
should have a programme to introduce atomic 
power plant projects to those countries which need 
to produce such electric power economically in order 
to develop their knowledge and economy, and thus 
introduce this new science in the form of a practical 
project which could be carried out in those areas 
as the fastest way towards economic and power 
development. The Agency would be rendering a 
really vital service to both the producers of power 
from the atom and to those who need power from 
the atom. It is the quickest way for those areas 
to benefit from atomic power stations. The experience 
gained by trainees of the Agency could never 
present to those areas such clear-cut or tailormade 
projects. Such atomic power stations would 
at the same time serve as regional, demonstrational 
and practical training centres for these areas. 
(17) "Related to the previous point is the 
wish to see the Agency more capable of creating 
new highly-technical levels of scientists, capable of 
developing their own national programmes towards 
the practical uses of atomic power in the promotion 
of their own economy. The regional atomic power 
stations or reactors with attached regional centres 
could be ideal for promoting atomic science and 
technology in those areas as a step towards the 
implementation of such complete projects in every 
state. I would like to call this project a "reactor 
training regional centre compound". In those centres 
research on agriculture, hydrology, desalination and 
all the area's problems could be handled collectively. 
We strongly believe that the development of 
atomic sciences and uses in individual countries 
would be greatly served primarily by such continental 
or regional projects, particularly in the continents 
of Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
(18) "We suggest that such centres be 
brought into being either voluntarily if a State in 
the area agreed to divert any of the existing reactors 
to become a regional centre, or through inviting the 
big powers in consultation with any country of a 
given area to construct such a reactor centre under 
the auspices of the Agency — and why should the 
advanced countries not build their experimental 
power reactors in such areas instead of on their own 
territory ? 

(19) "The Agency should develop its programme 
to assist its Member States in using the 
advanced countries' technology and experiences, 
gained in many fields, which mainly a feet the production, 
preservation and increase of foodstuffs, 
biology, the use of isotopes in plantation, the 
economic use of existing water resources, pest 
eradication, the uses of isotopes on a wider scale 
in diagnostic and therapeutic applications, hydrology, 
nuclear energy, power surveys and many other 
vital fields to mankind which I am sure that the 
Agency's scientists are aware of. Off the record I 
mention one of those examples which exist in my 
country, namely the cotton worm which, for over 
150 years, has eaten every year cotton crops worth 
30-40 million Egyptian pounds. I would welcome 
suggestions by the Agency or any of the Member 
States regarding the organization of study and 
research which might lead to the saving of such a 
lot of money, which is simply "eaten up" by this 
kind of worm. 
(20) "It might be useful if the Agency 
could envisage in the future contributing to a desalination 
institute in an attempt to solve water 
problems all over the semi-arid and arid areas of 
the world. A similar idea was taken up by the 
Director General in his opening speech and we 
look forward to his efforts in this field. 
(21) "These are only the main features of 
a possible development of the Agency's future programme 
and services to Member States. 
(22) "In conclusion of this point, it is natural 
to think of the third problem, which is the financing 
of the Agency's proposed programme. Looking 
around for such resources, we invite the attention 
of the Agency to the possibility of acquiring what 
we need from the United Nations Development 
Programme. We know that other specialized agencies 
have financed a great deal of their projects 
from this programme, and the Secretariat would be 
in a better position to present to the General Conference 
such information in order to enlighten us 
on how far the Agency could rely on this financial 
source in the coming four or five years within the 
world plan for development, and the importance 
of taking such a step. To my knowledge it might 
be possible for the Agency to get as much as 
100 million dollars within five years if it had programmes 
and projects which could be co-ordinated 
with the United Nations Advisory Committee on 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

the Application of Science and Technology to 
Development. 

(23) "However, these are not the only 
financial resources available to the Agency. We feel 
the Director General, with his esteemed international 
personality, can contribute much to the efforts in 
finding out the possibilities of obtaining new 
financial resources for the Agency, particularly from 
the United Nations milieu and the International 
Bank. He could also encourage, through his good 
offices, Member States of the Agency to effect the 
payment of their voluntary contributions and increase 
them if possible. We are confident that all his 
efforts in this direction will be appreciated, noted 
and welcomed by all the Member States. 
(24) "Mr. President, the Agency is moving 
gradually towards exercising its international responsibility 
with the increasing support of its Member 
States since they have confirmed their desire to 
allow it to apply its revised safeguards system, in 
addition to approving the extension of this system 
to reprocessing plants, as approved by the Board 
of Governors in June 1966. My country will 
continue to help the Agency to become an international, 
effective instrument to safeguard the world 
against nuclear hazards. The Agency might become 
one day the means of ensuring peace in sensitive 
areas of the world; it might become even more 
important than the United Nations peace-keeping 
forces. I invite the attention of my distinguished 
colleagues at this Conference to the importance of 
realizing the neccesity of using the Agency as a 
means of detecting and controlling the growing 
danger of the production and piling up of fissile 
materials in our area — the Middle East. The world 
conscience should not permit the diversion of such 
materials or allow its uses except for peace. To our 
knowledge, no plutonium up until now could be 
used in any quantity for peaceful purposes in a 
small nation. 

(25) "We are obliged to mention that another 
subject of vital importance to international cooperation 
is taking the attention of the Board of 
Governors and its committees. That is the deliberations 
concerning the conclusion of a form of 
agreement on international co-operation for 
emergency assistance in cases of nuclear radiation 
accidents. Since Resolution GC(VIII)/RES/177 was 
submitted to the Eighth General Conference, quite 
a respectable effort has been made by the Board of 
Governors and its committees, and we are quite 
satisfied by the resolution adopted by the Board 
of Governors at its last meeting whereby it has 
decided to complete the deliberations on this subject 
as soon as practicable and in any case before 
the Eleventh General Conference. We are deeply 
concerned with these international arrangements 
in cases of nuclear radiation accidents. We feel it 
is important for all of us, and we feel that it is 
one of the fields where the Agency would re-confirm 
its important and vital role in international cooperation. 
(26) "Mr. President, those are our views 
concerning the Agency, which we would like to 
see prosperous, energetic like an atom and as 
highly esteemed as we can ever hope to see." 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


international Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(X)/OR.104 
24 February 1967 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 22 September 1966, at 3.5 p.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the agenda* 
Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1965-66 (continued) 1—126 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Czechoslovakia 1— 16 
Philippines 17— 28 
Australia 29— 42 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 85— 91 
Norway 85— 91 
Yugoslavia 92—100 
Belgium 

101—114 
Federal Republic of Germany 115—120 
Sweden 121—126 

Closing date of the session 
127—129 

* GC(X)/343. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE programme which had been approved at the se-
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965 -66 venth General Conference l). The Czechoslovak 
(GC(X)/330, 341) (continued) Socialist Republic was one of those Member States 
which welcomed the fact that in the past four 
years the Agency had increased the amount of 

1. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) said that, work devoted to that application of atomic energy 
like previous speakers who had reviewed the for peaceful purposes where progress was greatest, 
Agency's activity during its period of existence, namely nuclear power. The Agency's work with 
he wished to refer only to certain aspects of that regard to the use of radioisotopes and radiation 
activity. He did not intend in his brief statement sources in science, technology, industry, agriculture 
to go into detail on individual activities, but would etc. was also very useful, as was its work on the 
limit himself to a number of observations. processing and disposal of radioactive wastes, safe 
handling of radioactive materials and health and 

2. In 1963 the Agency had set about planning 
its future activity and had developed the long-term 1) INFCIRC/50. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

safety. A number of scientific symposia and meetings 
organized by the Agency on those subjects 
had been of especially high quality, and their recommendations 
were of great importance to individual 
Member States. The co-ordination of research and 
the preparation of textbooks and regulations on 
various aspects of atomic energy, especially nuclear 
safety, were also very important. There was no need 
to emphasize the importance of the International 
Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
held at Geneva. The Agency's work in the field of 
scientific and technical information was also valuable. 
Hi's delegation approved the Agency's efforts 
to co-ordinate its activity with other international 
organizations in sectors involving problems which 
were the Agency's concern. The training of personnel 
and the provision of equipment were also of great 
importance to the Member States, especially the 
developing countries. 

3. In some branches of the peaceful use of 
atomic energy, Czechoslovak scientists and engineers 
had attained considerable success. Delegates 
were no doubt aware that Czechoslovakia was planning 
a second atomic power station. His country 
intended, in the future as in the past, to employ 
heavy-water converters. 
4. It was also proposed to study in greater 
detail problems of the complex fuel cycle. Noteworthy 
results had also been obtained in radioactive 
waste disposal. 
5. Czechoslovakia was paying great attention 
to training young personnel, principally in its own 
educational institutions and by means of,international 
co-operation. 
6. The further development of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy in Czechoslovakia definitely required 
more extensive international co-operation. 
Czechoslovakia, as one of the Member States of 
the Agency, had always striven to ensure that the 
Agency, as a world centre in the peaceful use of 
atomic energy, should work in a spirit of collaboration 
between nations, without which it was 
impossible to lay the other foundations of peace. 
It was that constructive attitude which determined 
the views of his delegation on the activity of the 
Agency and its organs. 
7. Czechoslovak scientists played an active part 
in the Agency's symposia and meetings. Czechoslovakia 
had already organized a number of meetings 
and training courses for the Agency. It also 
took part in promoting the exchange of scientific 
and technical information, and provided the Agency 
with information, material, films, reports of research, 
documentation, etc. 
8. Czechoslovakia placed its experts and instructors 
at the Agency's disposal for work in the 
developing countries, and provided annually five 
long-term fellowships for study in Czechoslovak 
educational institutes and four fellowships for study 
and practical work in the research departments of 
the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. Czechoslovak 
research institutes played an active part in 
the Agency's programme of research contracts. On 
the other hand, his delegation was deeply grateful 
for the Agency's assistance in training young scientific 
workers. Czechoslovak research institutes made 
considerable use of the Agency's Library and filmloan 
service. 

9. His Government would continue to play an 
active part in the Agency's work. For 1967 it again 
proposed diat a scientific conference or symposium, 
or a training course, should be held in Czechoslovakia, 
again offered five long-term and four shortterm 
fellowships, and if necessary would provide 
experts and inspectors for work in the developing 
countries. It would make a voluntary contribution 
of 100 000 crowns towards the implementation of 
the Agency's technical assistance programme for 
1967. 
10. Czechoslovakia had had considerable success 
in developing and producing steel tanks for atomic 
power stations. In October 1966 a meeting to 
discuss the inspection of reactor tanks was to be 
held in Pilsen. The subject was a very important 
one which could not be decided upon by one State, 
and it would therefore be of great assistance to 
Member States if the Agency were to co-ordinate 
further research. There was in Pilsen special equipment, 
including a model reactor tank and a tensile 
testing machine of 8000 tons capacity, which could 
be used to test large samples of material. Czechoslovakia 
was prepared to discuss the various possibilities 
and forms of co-operation in that regard, 
and the possibility of the Agency and its Member 
States using the equipment concerned. 
11. Needless to say, the Agency's activities and 
functions also had important political aspects; its 
purpose was to help promote international security. 
However, it could not successfully fulfil that mission 
at a time when international tension was increasing, 
in particular as a result of the growing aggression 
against the Vietnamese people and its threatened 
consequences. Successful action by the Agency to 
promote international security would help to prevent 
certain States not possessing atomic weapons, above 
all the Federal Republic of Germany, from obtaining, 
either directly or indirectly, access to nuclear 
arms. 
12. Every year the Agency welcomed new Members 
from among the newly independent, developing 
countries; however, he could not understand why, 
up to the present, membership of the Agency had 

104th PLENARY MEETING 

been refused to a number of States, such as, for 
example, the German Democratic Republic, whose 
high level of development in nuclear science and 
technology was generally acknowledged. The nonparticipation 
in the United Nations and the Agency 
of the People's Republic of China, which was a 
nuclear Power, meant that any idea of international 
control of nuclear weapons must be illusory. 

13. Czechoslovakia was aware of the responsibility 
of a Member of the Agency for the fulfilment of 
the organization's tasks, and therefore made every 
effort to further peaceful co-existence between 
nations, and supported all proposals for thecreation 
of denuclearized zones and for the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons; it accordingly gave its full 
support to the proposal made by the delegate 
from the Polish People's Republic 2). 
14. His Government wished to facilitate a solution 
of the important problem facing the Agency of 
creating a safeguards system which would make it 
impossible to use atomic energy for military purposes, 
and was prepared to place its atomic plants, 
including nuclear power stations, under Agency 
safeguards. However, it had to take into account 
its own safety, and could therefore only make such 
an offer on condition that the Federal Republic of 
Germany also submitted its nuclear facilities to 
safeguards. 
15. In that connection, he wished to draw the 
attention of the General Conference to the fact 
that the Government of the German Democratic 
Republic had addressed to the President of the 
Conference a statement on matters relating to the 
Agency's activities; and he hoped that the President 
would find it possible to make the contents of that 
declaration known to the delegates. 
16. In conclusion, he assured the General Conference 
that Czechoslovakia regarded the Agency 
as an international organization whose importance 
in the world was increasing; his Government would 
continue to support its activities, as far as lay within 
its power, in the interests of peaceful scientific, 
economic and social development throughout the 
world. 
17. Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) said he would 
first like to convey to the Conference, on the 
memorable occasion of its tenth anniversary, the 
warm greetings of the President, Government and 
people of the Philippines. His country shared the 
deep satisfaction of other delegations with the 
proud record of the Agency since its establishment 
and, as a mark of appreciation for the many benefits 
it had received, its President had included in the 
2) GC(X)/OR.103, para 56. 

Philippine delegation, Mrs. Marcos, his mother, in 
order that he might be present at least in spirit. 

18. His delegation would like to welcome the 
new States whose membership of the Agency had 
just been approved. The continuing growth in the 
Agency's membership bore witness to the important 
role it was playing in fostering the development of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, which, in many 
developing countries like his own, kindled hopes 
for the betterment of their people. 
19. The Director General and the Secretariat 
were to be commended on the progress achieved 
in some areas of work during the past year. Despite 
substantial efforts, however, there was much more 
that should be done, particularly with regard to 
the expansion of the technical assistance programme 
and the extension to all Member States, great and 
small alike, of the control and safeguards system 
developed by the Agency to ensure the use of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes only. To the 
developing Member States, technical assistance in 
the form of expert advice, fellowships and equipment 
might well be the deciding factor for pursuing or 
abandoning a worth-while project, in view of the 
fierce competition among scientific and technological 
projects for the scarce capital resources available. 
20. The Agency was of course handicapped in 
its work by insufficiency of funds. Requests for 
technical assistance were growing year by year, 
whereas the resources to meet those needs were 
tending to get less. Accordingly, the major problem 
facing the Conference was to find ways of providing 
the Agency with adequate means for its technical 
assistance work. His delegation was prepared to 
support any measure that would stabilize or increase 
the funds for that purpose. It would appeal to the 
advanced and richer nations to increase their voluntary 
contributions to the Operational Budget, if 
possible at least to the level of their assessments 
under the Regular Budget. The end-result would 
be beneficial to all parties, for there could be no 
sustained progress or tranquility in the world so 
long as millions of people continued to be underprivileged, 
and hence prone to discontent and rebellion. 
The Philippines Government would make a 
voluntary contribution to the Agency's General 
Fund for 1966 in the full amount of its assessment 
under the Regular Budget. 
21. The pre-investment study of nuclear power 
in the Philippines — a United Nations Special Fund 
project for which the Agency was the executing 
agency— had been satisfactorily completed. The 
project was one that should be of importance to 
the world economy in general and thanks were due 
to the Agency itself and the many experts and 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

engineers, coming from many countries, that had 
taken part in the work. 

22. As a result of the study, the case for nuclear 
power in the Philippines appeared to be clearly 
established, particularly in the case of Luzon Island. 
The optimum power expansion programme that had 
emerged called for the construction of three nuclear 
plants in the years ahead to give a total capacity 
of 1000 MW during the five-year period 1971-75. 
The estimated capital expenditure was about 
$183 million, an amount that was 20% higher 
than the cost of the alternative conventional power 
programme. On the other hand, the extra initial 
investment was expected to be recovered out of 
annual fuel savings by 1978-79, and thereafter net 
operating savings of $14 million per year were 
anticipated. 
23. The completed study, by demonstrating the 
economic feasibility of nuclear power, had opened 
up the possibility of introducing nuclear power, 
particularly in the smaller countries. The higher 
economic planning bodies and utility services in 
his country were at the moment engaged in examining 
the findings of the study with a view to implementing 
the recommendations. It was hoped that 
at the appropriate time the Agency would provide 
further technical assistance to translate the recommendations 
into reality. The report on the study 
would be made available to any interested country; 
in fact, an opportunity would be given for detailed 
discussion and exchange of views on it at the 
study group meeting on nuclear power for developing 
countries that was scheduled to be held in 
Manila in October 1966. 
24. On previous occasions, his Government had 
commended the establishment of the Joint FAO/ 
IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Agriculture. 
That Division was putting forward a proposal to 
the United Nations Development Programme for 
a five-year advanced regional project on the use 
of isotopes and radiation in research for increasing 
rice productivity, and the Philippines was joining 
with Pakistan, Thailand and Ceylon in supporting 
that proposal. 
25. Scientific and technological efforts to increase 
productivity in food crops were undoubtedly tremendous 
in scope, but the resultant increase in 
yields would have to be at least higher than the 
rate of population growth in regions where the 
diet was primarily grain-based. Undoubtedly there 
was enough technical capacity available to fulfil 
the hope many countries held that an increase in 
production sufficient to meet the growing demands 
for food could be obtained. At same time, all 
known methods would have to be made use of, 
including those designed to promote a more enlightened 
approach to farming. 
26. The Philippines Government was also acting 
as host in November 1966 to the FAO/IAEA 
inter-regional training course on the use of radioisotopes 
in soil and plant investigation. He availed 
himself of the opportunity to extend a most cordial 
welcome to the scientific workers who would be 
taking part. 
27. The joint training and.research programme 
based on the use of a neutron crystal spectrometer 
in conjunction with the Philippines research reactor, 
which was being undertaken under the trilateral 
agreement between the Agency, India and the Philippines 
3), had completed its first year of work and 
had already produced specific results, not only as a 
scientific undertaking but in fostering closer relations 
and active co-operation among the scientists 
of the region. A neutron spectrometer, designed 
and built under the expert advice of the Indian 
scientists assigned to the project, had been put 
into use in January 1966. The completion of its 
electronic components and its fuller utilization in 
local research work would be assisted as a result 
of a research contract recently awarded by the 
Agency for the study of the dynamic structure of 
solids by neutron spectrometry. His country was 
also grateful to the Agency for its help in securing 
supplies of fuel for its No. 1 research reactor; 
the United States had generously donated the fuel, 
which ensured the continuation of the Philippines 
research programme, at any rate to the end of 
1967. 

28. He hoped the Agency would continue to 
understand the needs of the region and support 
activities for strengthening regional collaboration. 
At the same time, he would appeal for more 
generous financial support for the Agency's work, 
and urge that every endeavour be made to safeguard 
the Agency from involvement in international 
disputes arising out of different political, economic 
and social systems. It would be a tragedy if mutual 
suspicions and rivalries were allowed to impair the 
magnificent edifice the Agency had built up to serve 
mankind. The Philippines would continue to cooperate 
with the Agency to the fullest extent possible. 
29. Mr. TIMBS (Australia) said he would first 
like to congratulate Singapore and Uganda on their 
admission to membership of the Agency. 
30. Australia had been the venue in 1966 for 
the highly successful Agency study group meeting 
on research reactor utilization; the participants had 
appreciated the opportunity to discuss problems of 
mutual interest with other scientists from the region. 
During the past year, Australian experts had taken 
3) INFCIRC/56. 


104th PLENARY MEETING 

part in a number of the Agency's expert panels. 
Much useful work was being done by the Agency 
in that respect in setting standards and disseminating 
new techniques; Australia fully supported the 
activities in question. 

31. The Agency deserved special commendation 
for establishing the International Nuclear Data Committee. 
Improved access to nuclear data and comparison 
of the fundamental work being done in various 
countries would greatly facilitate the work in reactor 
calculations and the determination of reactor dynamics 
for a wide range of possible reactor situations. 
It was hoped that co-operation in that field would 
expand and lead to greater progress in reactor 
physics in all Member States. 
32. Australia was keenly interested in the potentially 
very useful work that was being done on the 
use of radiation for food preservation and grain 
disinfestation. It was itself engaged in such research, 
and looked forward to comparing results with those 
coming from Agency projects. Australia had been 
glad to participate in the joint FAO/IAEA symposium 
on food irradiation held at Karlsruhe in June 
1966. 
33. The various safety standards established by 
the Agency had been a most useful guide and, in 
the case of the Regulations for the Safe Transport 
of Radioactive Materials 4), a most significant aid 
to the movement of such materials. There was 
some evidence that, happily, the obstacles to transport 
of radioactive materials, such as unreasonably 
high freight rates, unrealistic insurance opportunities, 
and restriction on movements within ports, were 
being reduced. The United Arab Republic had 
given an enlightened lead in the matter in respect 
of transport through the Suez Canal. 
34. In the past the Agency had tended to be 
somewhat ambitious in its programmes of technical 
assistance. Now that the use of nuclear power 
was growing enormously, the need for technical 
assistance would expand correspondingly. Despite 
many pleas, voluntary contributions to the Agency's 
General Fund had never met the target set by the 
General Conference; indeed, as the figures showed, 
the Agency had been faced with a succession of 
falling contributions. 
35. In his opinion, that response was not unrelated 
to the Agency's approach to the problem of technical 
assistance. It should not attempt more than it 
could afford, and only programmes with a reasonable 
chance of early completion within the means 
available to the Agency should be undertaken. A 
definite limit should be set, both in time and in 
4) STI/PUB/97, Safety Series No. 6. 

financial support, to any commitment to international 
or regional centres or projects. With regard 
to regional centres, the Agency's role should be 
limited normally to helping in their establishment 
and encouraging their operation, except in the 
case of facilities established in less-developed countries. 
Any large permanent commitment to an individual 
centre should be avoided, particularly when 
it was established in an advanced country, since 
that might lead to the reduction of assistance in 
the form of fellowships or the abandonment of 
more worth-while technical assistance projects. Once 
the Agency accepted that point of view, most countries 
would, he believed, look more sympathetically 
on appeals for increased coluntary contributions. 

36. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste had justified most of the hopes 
placed in it. The staff, he understood, was thoroughly 
competent and good work was being done. 
The Centre was providing valuable help for a few 
experts operating in a narrow field of theoretical 
and plasma physics, but its maintenance costs would 
be increasingly burdensome. In his delegation's 
view, a time-limit should be set beyond which the 
Agency should provide assistance to the Centre 
only through the allocation of fellowships and the 
sponsorship of seminars, with no direct contribution 
towards capital and operating expenditure. 
The emphasis on plasma physics seemed to have 
little bearing on the real needs of the countries 
concerned and the funds being expended on the 
Centre might better be applied in providing fellowships 
in other equally important branches of atomic 
energy for study at national institutes already in 
existence. In that way the Agency would broaden 
its field of training. Those considerations did not 
apply to the Laboratory at Seibersdorf, although 
any temptation towards expansion there should be 
resisted. 
37. He would commend to the Conference's 
attention the Plowshare Program of the United 
States Atomic Energy Commission, whereby techniques 
for the use of nuclear explosives for peaceful 
purposes were being developed and made 
generally available. The success of that programme 
held great promise for the undertaking of immense 
civil engineering and other projects of major economic 
value to Member States. It was to be hoped 
that the current moves towards an agreement for 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons would not 
further inhibit the use of those techniques. In that 
context, the United States representative had 
suggested in the United Nations Eighteen-Nation 
Committee on Disarmament that States possessing 
nuclear weapons should make available to other 
States nuclear-explosive services for peaceful applications 
and that the detonations in question should 
be performed under appropriate international supervision, 
with the nuclear device remaining in the 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

custody and under the control of the State performing 
the service. In the same Committee, the United 
Kingdom representative had taken the stand that, 
in the process of preventing the spread of nuclear 
weapons, care should be taken to avoid the danger 
of depriving anyone of the benefits that might 
become available through the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, including the use of nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes^ Australia believed that 
the difficulties in the way of applying those new 
techniques were largely technical and could with 
effort be overcome so that the world might enjoy 
the benefits to be derived therefrom. 

38. Earlier in the year, Australia had reserved 
its position on the extension of the Agency's safeguards 
system to fuel processing plants on the 
ground that approval by the Board of Governors 
of that step had been given with undue haste. The 
opportunity to examine the matter in detail had 
led to a change of attitude and Australia no longer 
objected to the extension in question. At present 
the safeguards system enjoyed minimal application; 
its ultimate success could be ensured only by willing 
acceptance and co-operation on the part of all 
States, and that objective would not be helped by 
hasty consideration of proposals, however worthy 
in themselves. 
39. Australia had joined with the United States 
in inviting the Agency to administer the safeguards 
provisions of their joint agreement for co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and hoped 
that that action would contribute towards developing 
further the framework within which the Agency's 
safeguards system might expand. 
40. The most significant development at present 
in the Australian atomic energy programme was 
the shift of emphasis towards a study of power 
reactor systems using natural uranium as fuel and 
heavy water as moderator. Interest was still being 
maintained, however, in high-temperature gas-cooled 
reactors, on which a considerable amount of research 
had been done. Australia continued to produce a 
wide variety of radioisotopes as well as cobalt of 
high specific activity, for radiotherapy and other 
uses. The isotopes were being used to an increasing 
extent for medical, industrial and agricultural purposes 
within Australia and throughout the Asian 
and Pacific region. 
41. An increasing number of scientists and technologists 
from Asian nations had been attending 
the regular courses given by the Australian School 
of Nuclear Technology. The experience of working 
with colleagues from many different countries would 
help to promote harmony and development in the 
region. 
42. In conclusion, he would like to say how 
much Australia had appreciated the support and 
assistance given by the Director General and his 
staff during the past year. For its part, Australia 
had done its best to further the work of the Agency. 
His delegation supported the adoption of the annual 
report of the Board of Governors to the General 
Conference for 1965-66 [GC(X)/330 and 341]. 

4 3. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) read the following message from the 
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics to the tenth (anniversary) 
session of the Agency's General Conference: 
" On behalf of the Soviet Government 
I extend my greetings and best wishes for 
the success of the tenth regular session of the 
General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. 

" The International Atomic Energy 
Agency, which was established ten years ago, 
is called upon, under the terms of its Statute. 
to ' . . . . seek to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world. ' 

" The Soviet Government attaches great 
importance to international co-operation in 
the field of the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy, believing that such co-operation contributes 
to the acceleration of economic and 
scientific development for the benefit of all 
mankind. The Soviet Union, the first country 
to embark upon the use of the energy of 
the atomic nucleus for constructive purposes, 
continues to pay great attention to achieving 
the fullest development of this important 
branch of the national economy. The Soviet 
Government is likewise making every effort 
to extend co-operation with other countries 
in the peaceful utilization of atomic energy 
for the progress of mankind. 

"It is our belief that the International 
Atomic Energy can play a substantial role in 
the developmentt of such co-operation. It is 
important only that this co-operation bebased 
on the principle of equality of rights and 
regard for the interests of all countries wishing 
to participate therein. 

"In stressing the importance of the 
utilization of the atom in the interests of 
peace and human prosperity, one cannot 
ignore the fact that this is being hampered 
to a considerable extent by the fact that 
gigantic resources are still being expended on 
using this great achievement of the human 
intellect not for creative purposes but for 
destruction and annihilation. 


104th PLENARY MEETING 

"The Soviet Government strongly advocates 
the prohibition of nuclear weapons 
and the destruction of all stockpiles of such 
weapons. The power of the atom must be 
used exclusively for peaceful purposes. The 
problem of achieving prohibition of nuclear 
weapons is a particularly vital one at present, 
when the American militarists are extending 
their aggressive war in Viet-Nam and when 
peace is seriously endangered by the aggressive 
forces of the United States of America. 

"The problem of preventing the further 
spread of nuclear weapons is also now becoming 
extremely acute. It is essential that those 
who are striving to obtain nuclear weapons 
and are openly demanding the revision of the 
frontiers that have been established in Europe 
should be denied access to such weapons. 
The achievement of agreement on the banning 
of underground testing of nuclear weapons 
would also be of great significance. There is 
no doubt that the fulfilment of these noble 
tasks might open up new possibilities for an 
even wider development of international cooperation 
in the field of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 

" In conclusion, permit me again to wish 
those taking part in the tenth regular session 
of die General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency every success in solving 
die important problems which theAgency 
has to face." 

44. The Soviet Union had been the first to come 
out in favour of prohibiting without reserve the 
military uses of atomic energy and directing its 
development exclusively along peaceful paths. At 
the time of the Agency's establishment, die Soviet 
Union had urged that the new organization should 
be given, first and foremost, the task of promoting 
a broad use of atomic energy in the interests of 
peace, health and prosperity; it had believed that 
international co-operation in the harnessing of the 
peaceful atom must aim not only at putting the 
enormous energy reserves of the atomic nucleus at 
the disposal of mankind, but also at helping the 
young developing countries of Asia, Africa and 
Latin America to acquire the experience of die 
more advanced countries, and to .secure appropriate 
training for their own scientists. 
45. Such co-operation had to be based on equality 
of rights and respect for the interests of all 
States wishing to take part. It was inadmissible 
that only a few countries should enjoy the benefits 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy while others 
were deprived of them simply because the age-long 
domination of colonial Powers had held up their 
economic development. 
46. The growth in die Agency's membership, 
particularly among the developing countries, was 
something to be welcomed. The fact that the Agency 
had nearly doubled its membership by admitting 
newcomers from among the young States of Asia, 
Africa and Latin America suggested that its international 
authority was growing. 
47. The Agency had achieved certain definite 
results by paving the way for international cooperation 
and promoting the development of nuclear 
power and nuclear science in individual countries; 
but more could have been done. Efforts were in 
fact being made to hinder effective international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and to impose upon the Agency, in violation of 
its Statute, a type of activity that had nothing to 
do with the aims and tasks set forth in the Statute. 
48. The Agency had not yet become a universal 
organization. Some States were being discriminated 
against, in violation of the Statute, and denied an 
opportunity to take part in the Agency's work. An 
example of what he meant could be seen in the 
fact that the Federal Republic of Germany was a 
Member of die Agency whereas the German Democratic 
Republic — an independent and sovereign 
State — was not. 

49. It was fair to point out that the Agency did 
not exist in a vacuum, and that the course of international 
affairs could not but affect its activities. 
The incessant interference of imperialist and colonialist 
Powers in the internal affairs of States and 
peoples was at present the main source of growing 
international tension; and that tension paralysed 
the normal evolution of co-operation in all spheres 
of international relations, including the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy. 
50. The most obvious case in point was the 
cynical and growing aggression of the United States 
of America against the people of Viet-Nam, which 
was bound to cause profound alarm throughout 
the world. That was why the Soviet Union, along 
with many odier countries, urged and would continue 
to urge an immediate cessation of the aggressive 
activities of the American militarists in Southeast 
Asia, the withdrawal of all American troops 
from that region, and a setdement of the Viet-Nam 
dispute on die basis of die Geneva agreements 
concluded in 1954, as had been proposed by the 
Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-
Nam. 
51. No one could fail to see that die aggression 
in South-east Asia must inevitably intensify the 
armaments race and thereby foster the production 
and perfection of the tools of nuclear destruction. 
It constituted a serious obstacle to any intense, 
widespread use of atomic energy for peaceful pur

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

poses. Clearly, then, it was important to solve the 
problem of nuclear disarmament and prevent any 
further spread of nuclear weapons to ensure that 
atomic energy would be used only for peaceful 
purposes. If that goal was to be achieved, the 
production and use of nuclear weapons would have 
to be prohibited and all accumulated stocks destroyed. 

Countries where aggressive, revanchist tendencies 
prevailed — and he had in mind particularly the 
Federal Republic of Germany — must be given no 
access to nuclear arms, for otherwise the world 
might be plunged into another world war. 

52. The Soviet Union would continue to do 
everything in its power to settle the question of 
disarmament and strengthen peace. A tangible 
example of the Soviet Union's peaceful policies 
could be seen in its enormous programme for the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy, and in the 
importance it attached to the benefits which atomic 
energy could bring to the national economy. 
53. The most important application of atomic 
energy was in electric power generation. The world's 
first industrial-type nuclear power station had already 
been in regular operation for twelve years, and the 
Soviet Union at present had a large programme 
under way aimed at developing new and more 
economic nuclear power stations. 
54. Work under that programme included, for 
example, the start-up of the first unit of the Beloyarsk 
Atomic Power Station, incorporating nuclear 
steam superheating, with a power rating of 100 MW. 
The finishing touches were being put on a second 
unit belonging to the same station, also incorporating 
nuclear steam superheating, with a rating of 
200 MW. High steam parameters made it possible 
to achieve increased thermodynamic efficiency in 
the first Rankine cycle. Thus the problem of steam 
superheating — one of the most important from 
the standpoint of economic efficiency — was receiving 
serious attention in the Soviet Union. 
5 5. Another important development affecting the 
economics of nuclear power stations was the enlargement 
of reactors, i.e. the installation of greater 
power in individual units. The power rating of the 
first unit of the Voronezh Power Station, which 
had begun operation in 1964, was 210 MW, while a 
second unit at present under construction was designed 
to produce 400 MW. A very substantial reduction 
in the prime cost of electric power was expected 
from such reactors, viz. a. cost per kilowatt-hour 
close to that obtainable with coal-fired power stations 
in the same part of the country. 
56. Even so, the structural and technological 
possibilities of increasing the electrical output per 
single unit were still far from exhausted. At present, 
design studies were being carried out on 
reactors that would produce between 600 and 
1000 MW per unit. 

57. However, a broad nuclear power programme 
could not be based exclusively on the simplest 
thermal reactors, which used only a small proportion 
of the uranium ( 3 5 U) produced. 
58. For that reason more advanced reactors, using 
fast-neutron fission, would be built in the years to 
come. The Soviet Union was already known as an 
enthusiastic proponent of fast reactors. The largest 
fast reactor designed so far, with a power output 
of 350 MW from a single unit, was under construction 
in the Soviet Union. It was intended that that 
reactor, apart from providing the answer to the 
present desalination problem, should also serve 
as the starting-point for a large fast-reactor construction 
programme. 
59. New large atomic power stations would be 
built in the Soviet Union during the years to come. 
The aggregate output of the plants already in operation 
amounted to about 1000MW, and it was 
expected that in the next few years the figure 
would increase substantially. 
60. Among other important problems there was, 
for example, the use of atomic energy as a tool 
for opening up the universe. Research work carried 
out in the Soviet Union, for example the experiments 
performed with the " Romashka" laboratory 
installation (incorporating a fast reactor and providing 
direct conversion of nuclear to electrical 
energy), had revealed the great potential of nuclear 
equipment for such work. The installation in question 
had been operated in a sealed chamber for 
more than 14 000 hours at a stretch. 
61. There were good prospects for the use of 
atomic energy in large transport units. The Soviet 
icebreaker "Lenin" was the first of a series of nuclear 
ships to be used for peaceful purposes. The 
Soviet Union planned the construction of still other 
nuclear-powered icebreakers which would be of 
large capacity and highly economical. 
62. Year by year the use of radioactive isotopes 
and radiation was being extended in industry, medicine, 
agriculture and research. Consequendy, ways 
of using isotopes, organizing their supply and arriving 
at relevant international standards and regulations 
should be worked out by all Members of 
the Agency to their mutual advantage. 
63. The basis for all achievements in the uses 
of atomic energy for peaceful purposes was fundamental 
theoretical and experimental research in 
nuclear physics and atomic energy. 

104th PLENARY MEETING 

64. At present the Soviet Union was constructing 
a vast 70-GeV proton accelerator, which would 
enable scientists to delve yet deeper into the structure 
of the atomic nucleus. It was expected that 
scientists from many countries in the world would 
take part in the work on the accelerator. 
65. The Soviet Union had earlier called for international 
co-operation in research on controlled 
thermonuclear fusion with a view to making thermonuclear 
energy available for peaceful purposes. The 
Soviet Union intended to extend its activities in 
that field. Data on the results obtained were being 
widely disseminated, notably in the journal Nuclear 
Fusion published by the Agency. 
66. In 1966 work had finished on a new, 104element 
periodic table. Extension of the periodic 
table to cover additional heavy elements was a 
worthy contribution by scientists from the socialist 
countries to man's knowledge of matter. 
67. Co-operation between the Soviet Union and 
other countries and joint activity among the socialist 
countries which were members of the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON), were 
developing successfully in matters relating to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
68. COMECON's standing committee on the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy had prepared a longterm 
plan for the co-ordination of research during 
the period 1966-1970, in accordance with which 
each country would deal with subjects which would 
supplement the plans of other countries and exclude 
duplication as far as practicable. In addition to the 
use of atomic energy for the generation of electric 
and thermal power, the joint activity of the socialist 
countries in the next few years would be aimed 
also at further development of work on the use 
of isotopes and nuclear radiation in the national 
economy. For that work a broad exchange of scientific 
and economic information was anticipated. 
69. The growth of nuclear power and the increasingly 
extensive use of radioisotopes in all spheres 
of the national economies of countries which were 
members of COMECON would bring about aconsiderable 
increase in radioactive waste. Therefore, in 
the next few years, great attention would be paid 
to solving problems concerning the disposal and 
reliable storage of such waste and the inter-related 
co-ordination of scientific and technical research 
in that field. 
70. Co-operation between the Soviet Union and 
other countries was expanding. In October 1965 
a co-operation agreement had been concluded with 
Italy. On the basis of agreements concluded with 
the United Kingdom, France and other countries 
an extensive programme was now under way for 
exchange visits by delegations of experts and also 
for the exchange, for longer periods (3-12 months), 
of individual scientists concerned with nuclear physics, 
high-energy physics and controlled thermonuclear 
reactions. An extensive exchange of scientific 
literature and information was also being carried 
out with those countries. 

71. The Soviet Union was actively concerned with 
the provision of technical assistance to developing 
countries through the Agency. For example, the 
Board of Governors had decided to transfer Soviet 
equipment to Pakistan and Burma to establish 
radiological centres in those countries. The Soviet 
Union and Pakistan were at present completing 
negotations on deliveries of the equipment. 
72. Quite recently a group of experts from developing 
countries, accompanied by two Agency 
officials, had made a month's tour of the Soviet 
Union to study the use of radioisotopes in industry. 
73. The Soviet Union, attaching importance to 
the provision of technical assistance through the 
Agency, had now decided to make a voluntary 
contribution of 100 000 roubles in its national 
currency to the Agency's Operational Budget for 
technical assistance purposes. That money could 
be used for placing orders in the Soviet Union for 
the supply of equipment, instruments and materials 
to meet requirements of developing Member 
States in connection with projects under the technical 
assistance programme. In addition, the Soviet 
Union had provided 20 fellowships to train scientific 
workers from developing countries in fields 
in which the Agency specialized. 
74. The Soviet Union was taking part in virtually 
all of the Agency's activities. Recently the Agency 
had held a number of big international conferences 
on topical questions relating to atomic science 
and technology, in which Soviet scientists had played 
an active part. Eminent Soviet scientists had travelled 
to Trieste to give lectures and do research. 
A large amount of scientific data on nuclear 
constants had been sent from Soviet institutes and 
laboratories to the International Nuclear Data Committee. 
In 1966 two Agency panels had been organized 
in the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union would 
continue to afford hospitality to scientists and specialists 
from Member States of the Agency and to 
make facilities available for implementing Agency 
activities in the Soviet Union. It was agreeable to 
holding one or two Agency symposia there in 1967. 
75. The Agency's Programme for 1967-68 5), 
which had been submitted to the General Conference, 
reflected the wide range of the Agency's tasks. 
5) GC(X)/332. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

On the whole, that programme was sufficiently 
comprehensive, and the Soviet Union was prepared 
to support it. 

7 6. Each year the Agency was increasingly occupied 
with questions of safeguards. The basic document 
on the subject had been reviewed, and work had 
been done on expanding the existing system of 
safeguards and extending its provisions to fuel 
reprocessing plants. The Soviet Union supported 
that decision since it was absolutely logical that 
safeguards, as the need arose, should embrace the 
whole fuel cycle. In so doing, the Soviet Union 
proceeded on the assumption that the system of 
safeguards could to some extent make the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons more difficult. 
77. However, the capacity of safeguards to prevent 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons should not 
be over-estimated. The Agency's safeguards could 
not by themselves block all access to nuclear 
weapons. That aim could be achieved by concluding 
a treaty which would bar access- to nuclear weapons 
both directly and indirectly. Thus, the Agency's 
control functions played an important but generally 
auxiliary role in ensuring broad co-operation 
in all questions concerning the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy with which theAgency was concerned. 
78. As shown by the Board's annual report to 
the General Conference, the Agency's Safeguards 
System (1965) 6) applied, or would apply in the 
near future, to 54 reactors in 23 countries, and 
the total capacity of reactor installations under 
safeguards was 2485 MW(th). 
79. At the same time, it was an absolutely abnormal 
situation that so-called regional systems of 
safeguards should in actual fact, as in the case of 
the European Atomic Energy Community (EURA-
TOM), be contributing to the creation of nuclear 
weapons in West Germany. 
80. The Soviet Union welcomed the action of 
the Polish People's Republic and the Czechoslovak 
Socialist Republic?)which had expressed readiness 
to place their nuclear installations under Agency 
safeguards. As an act of reciprocity, the Western 
Powers should of course place under Agency safeguards 
nuclear installations in non-nuclear countries 
belonging to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, 
particularly the Federal Republic of Germany. 
Such an approach could introduce an essentially 
new element into the Agency's work relating to 
safeguards. The statement which the socialist States 
had made that day demonstrated their goodwill 
and their sincere desire that the Agency's safe6) 
INFCIRC/66. 

7) See para. 14 above. 

guards system, by extending to a wider circle of 
non-nuclear States, should help prevent the use of 
atomic energy for military purposes. The placing 
of appropriate installations in the Federal Republic 
of Germany under Agency safeguards could be a 
definite obstacle to that country's using its atomic 
industrial potential for manufacturing nuclear 
weapons. 

81. Hi's delegation had been informed that the 
Government of the German Democratic Republic 
had that day adressed an important message on 
Agency safeguards to the President of the General 
Conference. He associated himself with the request 
of the Czechoslovak delegation that the President 
should inform the General Conference of the 
contents of that statement. 
82. In connection with safeguards, it should be 
noted, however, that the functioning of the Agency's 
control machinery could not be considered satisfactory. 
In recent years the Soviet Union 
had repeatedly drawn attention to the fact that 
when the Agency's staff of inspectors had been 
used to carry out control inspections, there had 
been some discrimination in regard to inspectors 
who were citizens of socialist countries. 
83. There were also important shortcomings in 
the Agency's staffing policy. 
84. The growing volume of demands upon the 
Agency resulting from expanding international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
made it imperative to perfect the Agency's mode 
of operation, so that it could resolve the new problems 
with which the development of science and 
technology was constantly confronting it. The 
Agency would not be fulfilling its duty towards 
nations if it did not use every opportunity to ensure 
that atomic energy served man's peaceful needs. 
For its part, the Soviet delegation would exert 
every effort to achieve that lofty goal. 
85. Mr. RANDERS (Norway) said that since the 
Agency had been created to deal with problems 
of the atomic power age, and only recently had 
nuclear energy become a competitive power source, 
it might be argued that the Agency had been set 
up ten years too soon. However, he did not 
believe that to be the case; for example, much of 
the Agency's work in the regulatory field of health 
and safety had been so useful precisely because 
it had been performed before the problem became 
urgent. 
86. A still more convincing example was that 
of the Agency's safeguards system. Although in the 
past ten years there had been litde need for it, it 
was difficult to imagine the process of mutual information, 
correction and finally understanding which 

104th PLENARY MEETING 

had led to the adoption of the system at the ninth 
General Conference being compressed into a shorter 
time. The system was still not perfect, but it 
would serve as a basis for further development 
in a period when safeguards were likely to increase 
in importance. 

87. However, the time required to arrive at agreed 
principles on how to ensure the system's general 
application would also no doubt be long; his 
Government therefore felt that the time might have 
come to review the field of application of the system. 
Article III.A.5 of the Agency's Statute provided 
that safeguards could be applied to Agency-assisted 
facilities, to facilities assisted by a foreign State 
and to any of a State's activities in the field of 
atomic energy which that State unilaterally submitted 
to control. He felt that it was now time 
to start encouraging States to implement the third 
provision. Especially as the number of cases in 
which the administration of safeguards in relation 
to bilateral arrangements was transferred to the 
Agency increased, it would probably be simpler 
for each State to place all its present and future 
peaceful atomic energy activities under safeguards 
unilaterally, rather than by virtue of different agreements 
with different supplier countries, dating from 
different periods and possibly even applying different 
systems to the same installation. 
88. His Government agreed in principle with 
the proposal of the delegate of South Africa that 
existing safeguards transfer agreements should be 
replaced by a series of bilateral agreements between 
the Agency and the various receiving States 8). 
However, it would prefer to see those agreements 
cover all peaceful activities of the States concerned, 
irrespective of whether or not assistance was given 
from outside. It was for the Member States themselves 
to decide whether they wished to pursue 
such a course; the inducement to do so must 
basically stem from the desire of all nations not 
producing atomic weapons to assure other such 
nations of the exclusively peaceful aims of their 
nuclear activities, and to be so assured in return. 
He agreed that finding the right means to 
strengthen that natural inducement might prove 
a difficult political problem, perhaps better suited 
to the General Assembly of the United Nations 
than to the Agency's General Conference. His 
Government intended to explore that possibility. 
However, it felt that the Agency's achievement in 
devising a safeguards system indicated that useful 
advice and comment might be obtained from its 
Member States. 
89. General, voluntary submission to safeguards 
of all peaceful nuclear activities would, of course, 
8) GC(X)/OR.103, para. 44. 

not solve the problem of the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. However, the assurance that such activities 
would not be abused might well be of importance 
in the context of proliferation. If other delegations 
shared his views, the General Conference 
might perhaps consider transmitting to the United 
Nations a recommendation inviting its Member 
States to place those activities under safeguards. 
His Government was for its part considering whether 
it would be appropriate to conclude an agreement 
to that end with the Agency. 

90. He wished also to stress the importance of 
the Agency's activities in the regulatory field. The 
present, early stage of development of atomic energy 
was precisely the time when an international body 
could assist in drawing up rules governing such 
matters as health and safety, transport, international 
trade, liability, etc. with a view to obtaining a large 
measure of uniformity as between the various 
countries. Hi's delegation shared the Director 
General's hope that the provisions on emergency 
assistance in the event of nuclear radiation accidents 
would soon be completed and adopted. 
91. He also wished to refer to the two international 
projects in reactor physics, the NORA 
project, which was being carried out in Norway, 
and the NPY project in Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia. 
Initiated in 1961, they were the first international 
research efforts sponsored by the Agency, 
and had proved successful both because of the 
results achieved and through the possibility afforded 
for scientists from a number of countries to cooperate 
on an advanced level in that important 
field. As part of the NPY project, a two-week 
advanced course in reactor physics had been held 
in Norway in August 1966. It had attracted nearly 
100 experienced reactor physicists from more than 
30 countries, who had obtained up-to-date information 
on current developments. His delegation 
hoped that such efforts might continue, and would 
make every effort to enable them to do so. He 
was pleased to note the great number of speakers 
who had supported the Agency's safeguards system 
and said his Government would do its utmost 
to support all efforts to convert into reality the 
clearly expressed wishes of nearly all nations that 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy might develop 
in an atmosphere of trust and confidence. 
92. Mr. GUZINA (Yugoslavia) congratulated 
Uganda and Singapore on their admission to 
membership of the Agency. 
93. The Director General had said that the 
Agency's activity during the past nine years had 
been affected by two basic factors, the political 
climate of the world and the Agency's limited financial 
resources. He agreed that the first factor was 
crucial; if the political situation were more favour

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

able the Agency's problems would also be more 
easily solved. 

94. In spite of recent advances towards peaceful 
co-existence, there were still serious reasons for 
dissatisfaction. For example, external intervention 
to prevent the unification of the Vietnamese people 
represented a serious threat to world peace and 
hindered the implementation of a programme 
directed towards the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
95. In the circumstances, the Agency had achieved 
valuable results, although its activities had developed 
rather slowly. Elimination of the present disproportion 
between the needs of its Member States, especially 
the developing countries, and the Agency's 
own limited financial resources would greatly assist 
the Agency in implementing its tasks. Its usefulness 
in providing technical assistance, disseminating 
scientific and technical information, harmonizing and 
codifying regulations and standards, establishing 
and applying the safeguards system and generally 
stimulating research had been limited by financial 
restrictions, which made rigorous selection and 
rational definition of its various activities necessary. 
He congratulated the Director General and the 
Secretariat on their efforts to achieve a rational 
organization of the various Divisions within the 
Agency, and felt that the present Secretariat would, 
as a result of its experience, be capable of further 
increasing its activity if it had adequate resources 
at its disposal. He therefore felt it was unnecessary 
at the present stage to increase the number of 
personnel employed by the Agency. 
96. The Agency was now confronted with the 
fact that the development of nuclear power had 
accelerated rapidly, with the result that national 
scientific centres in the more advanced countries 
were required to develop more advanced equipment. 
However, a large number of countries still lagged 
behind with scientific and technological development, 
and the Agency could play an important 
part in providing assistance and advice and in 
promoting co-operation between those countries 
in designing, constructing and operating nuclear 
power plants. He therefore welcomed the steps 
taken by the Agency with regard to nuclear power, 
as reflected in its biennial programme. 
97. He did not under-estimate the Agency's activities 
in other fields, such as radioisotope applications, 
radiation treatment, legislative work, the 
stimulation of research and the organization of 
meetings, and especially the application of safeguards. 
The scope of activity in each of those 
cases must be determined by the requirements of 
Member States. In implementing its biennial programme, 
the Agency would be able to make use 
of national material and man-power resources in 
comprehensive projects, and would be able to avail 
itself of the services of national laboratories in 
Member States. 

98. His delegation had always supported the 
Agency's efforts to establish and apply an efficient 
and rational safeguards system. It was important 
to gain experience in inspection and control methods 
in order to estimate the need for further extension 
of the system. 
99. Co-operation between the Agency and Yugoslavia 
had always been fruitful. Its most important 
results in 1966 included the construction of the 
Institute for the Applications of Nuclear Energy 
in Agriculture, Forestry and Veterinary Medicine 
at Zemun, which had been financially assisted by 
contributions from the United Nations Special Fund, 
while the Agency had been responsible for implementing 
the project. He was grateful to both organizations 
for their valuable contribution, and wished 
to invite Member States to participate in the work 
of the Institute. The TRIGA Mark II research 
reactor at the Jozef Stefan Institute in Ljubljana 
had also gone into operation in 1966. Its fuel was 
supplied through the Agency and was subject to 
Agency safeguards. The Agency had sponsored a 
number of international conferences and courses 
held in Yugoslavia, including the Conference on 
"Science and Society" held in June and the interregional 
training course in radiobiology, and had 
sent a group of experts from Sweden to study the 
problems of constructing a nuclear power plant 
in Yugoslavia; he believed that the work of that 
group could be taken as a model for similar studies 
in other countries. The successful co-operation with 
Norway and Poland under the NPY project fully 
justified the Agency's continued sponsorship. 
100. In nine years the Agency had proved itself 
to be an important international organization, which 
in future would be called upon to play a still greater 
part in stimulating co-operation and in promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout 
the world, and he wished it success in its task. 
101. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) considered that, on 
the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the General 
Conference, it would be useful to review the 
Agency's past activities and consider the tasks it 
should undertake in future. The establishment of 
the Agency in 1956 had been an expression of the 
dual wish of its promoters to ensure that atomic 
energy was used for exclusively peaceful purposes, 
and to disseminate throughout the world a knowledge 
of the new techniques inherent in its development. 
102. After ten years of activity, what were the 
results which had been achieved? There was no 
doubt that the Agency had substantially contributed 
to spreading throughout the world the knowledge 

104th PLENARY MEETING 

which was essential for introducing nuclear techniques, 
whether in fundamental research or in the 
medical, agricultural and industrial applications of 
radioisotopes. The Agency had likewise laid the 
foundations of a system of control over the peaceful 
use of the atom. 

103. TheAgency's conferences,symposiaandseminars 
had provided scientists and technicians from 
Member States with the opportunity of establishing 
numerous contacts and effecting valuable exchanges, 
and had often been the starting point of further 
useful collaboration. Similarly, the financial support 
granted on a short-term basis to certain regional 
activities had proved fruitful. 
104. Through its regulatory activities, which had 
the purpose of protecting the general public, workers 
in nuclear industries, and property, the Agency 
had done particularly useful work. 
105. Although there was still no single system possessing 
universal legal force, a number of countries 
had introduced into their legislation or their internal 
regulations the Agency's recommendations concerning, 
inter alia, the safe transport of radioactive materials. 
Two international conventions, the Brussels 
Convention on the Liability of Operators of Nuclear 
Ships and the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability 
for Nuclear Damage, had been signed in 1962 and 
1963 respectively, although they had not yet come 
into force. Furthermore, numerous handbooks in 
the Safety Series published by the Agency were 
highly appreciated in the circles concerned. 
106. The trail having thus been blazed, and the 
Agency having had the opportunity of promoting 
the numerous uses of radioisotopes in various 
branches of medicine, agriculture and industry, it 
now appeared that the Agency should subject to 
a closer scrutiny those undertakings and activities 
which might more logically be entrusted to other 
bodies, whether international or regional. 
107. One had indeed the impression that the 
Agency, in its quite legitimate desire to promote 
to the maximum the use of nuclear methods, was> 
not confining itself to publicizing or recommending 
the use of those methods but was sometimes duplicating 
the functions of other organizations whose 
general field of competence included similar activities. 
108. In that connection he wished to draw particular 
attention to a problem of great concern to 
him: the cost of running the Agency and the proportion 
of the budget which, in the last resort, 
was used for pursuing the objectives assigned to 
the Agency under its Statute. The Agency was and 
should remain a service of world-wide utility, and 
that being so it had a duty to spend the resources 
placed at its disposal in such a manner as to secure 
the maximum yield; therefore, studies and research 
that normally came within the purview of other 
organizations, such as WHO, FAO or UNESCO, 
which incidentally had large budgetary allocations 
for those purposes, should be excluded from the 
Agency's programmes. 

109. For several years past the Belgian delegation 
had been recommending a close study of the 
Agency's technical activities and of the financing 
of the Agency's Laboratory. The extremely concise 
report of the Administrative and Budgetary Committee 
on the subject showed that the study to 
determine the desirable future development of the 
Laboratory had been postponed from 1965 to 1966, 
since the Laboratory's work had already been examined 
by a group of experts in 1964. However, 
the group of experts in question — a highly competent 
one incidentally — had considered the matter 
from a scientific viewpoint, without reference to the 
budgetary and general policy questions raised by 
the Laboratory in the context of the Agency's objectives, 
yet it was precisely those questions which 
determined the Laboratory's role in the work of 
the Agency as laid down in the Statute. 
110. He therefore considered it appropriate again 
to propose the establishment of a committee parallel 
to the Scientific Advisory Committe (SAC) which 
would be responsible for examining from an industrial, 
budgetary and general policy point of view 
the matters which SAC dealt with in their scientifc 
connotation. Such co-ordination of activities under 
the Agency's programme would have the advantage 
of increasing its effectiveness within the limits of 
the funds available. 
111. Moreover, before new staff was engaged an 
effort should be made to assign to other functions 
officials whose original work had been completed 
before expiry of their contracts, subject to the need 
for maximum observance of the principle of equitable 
geographical distribution of posts. 
112. Steps should also be taken to keep the 
number of symposia and seminars within reasonable 
limits. That would not only secure some reduction 
in the Agency's expenses but would also permit 
Member States to avail themselves, to a greater 
extent, of the services of their experts, a number 
of whom were ending up by becoming itinerant 
scientists, passing almost as much time abroad as 
at home. The financial resources available to States 
were not inexhaustible and there was a limit to 
the increase in expenditure they could afford, and 
hence to the contributions they could make to 
various national and international organizations. 
113. That was a problem with which all countries 
were familiar. He was therefore convinced that his 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

concern at the size of the Agency's budget, at the 
way in which it was allocated, and at its repercussions 
on the implementation of a dynamic, coherent 
and economic programme was shared by a 
majority of Member States, and that it would be 
understood that his comments had been made in 
the interests of the Agency itself. 

114. With reference to the data contained in the 
Annexes to the report of the Board of Governors, 
he wished to point out that it would be desirable 
to state, after the offers of equipment made by 
Member States, the offers of Type II fellowships 
which were available, indicating the countries making 
the offers. It appeared that some countries were 
unaware of the facilities available to them for sending 
their nationals to study in one or other of the 
countries offering the fellowships in question. 
115. Mr.PRETSCH (FederalRepublicofGermany) 
recalled the hope that the late Secretary-General of 
the United Nations, Mr. Hammarskjold, had expressed 
when opening the Conference on the Agency's 
Statute, to the effect that atomic energy could be 
used for peaceful purposes in such a way as to 
help create economic and social conditions which 
would eliminate many of the present reasons for 
tension and conflict. The past ten years had shown 
that there were indeed good grounds for hoping 
that the discovery of atomic energy would finally 
prove a blessing to mankind, and the Agency, under 
the energetic and imaginative guidance of Mr. Cole 
and Dr. Eklund, had played an essential part in 
the steps that had been taken towards bringing 
that goal nearer. 
116. As was clear from the report of the Board 
of Governors, the Agency had continued its activities 
successfully during the past year. His delegation 
supported in particular the programme of 
scientific meetings, and the Federal Republic was 
glad to have been the host to the very successful 
and important symposium on food irradiation held 
at Karlsruhe in June. His country also supported 
the Agency's health and safety work and welcomed 
its efforts to draw up an effective safeguards system 
to ensure that nuclear material was used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes. 
117. The Federal Republic of Germany had expressly 
renounced the production of atomic weapons as 
early as 1954; it had also made all nuclear fuels 
and plants in the Federal Republic subject to the 
safeguards procedures of EURATOM. Together 
those measures constituted a guarantee that nuclear 
energy in the Federal Republic was used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes. In addition, his Government 
had declared its readiness to include in all its contracts 
for the supply of nuclear materials and equipment 
to countries outside the EURATOM area a 
clause requiring safeguards to be applied by the 
Agency, provided other supplying countries were 
willing to impose the same condition. It hoped that 
an increasing number of nations would be prepared 
to accept no less comprehensive international safeguards 
procedures than those it had accepted itself. 
The statements made by the delegations of Poland 
and Czechoslovakia expressing their countries' 
acceptance in principle of the Agency's safeguards 
represented a first step in that direction. 

118. During the past ten years the utilization of 
nuclear energy had made good progress in the 
Federal Republic, as regards both research (e.g. 
on fundamental particles and plasma physics) and 
reactor construction. There were now 34 reactors 
in operation or under construction, including three 
experimental reactors of advanced design, and the 
German reactor-building industry was now able to 
make competitive offers in the world market. With 
a view to disposing of the increasing quantities of 
radioactive waste from reactors, his country was 
experimenting with storage in salt mines. From 1968 
on his country's nuclear programme would concentrate 
on fundamental research and breeder reactors, 
and he was gratified to note that an Agency 
symposium on fast-breeder reactors would be held 
there in 1967. 
119. International co-operation in the use of nuclear 
energy was of the utmost importance. Not only 
did his country co-operate actively within the framework 
of the Agency, in which connection it had 
been very pleased to receive scientists from a 
number of East European countries as visitors to 
its nuclear research centres; it also maintained 
close bilateral relations with a number of States 
Members of the Agency and took part in a multitude 
of international research and development 
projects as a member of EURATOM, the European 
Nuclear Energy Agency and the European Organization 
for Nuclear Research (CERN). 
120. Looking ahead, he supported the Programme 
for 1967-68 and Budget for 1967. German scientists 
were particularly interested in the Agency's work 
in the fields of radiation protection, radiobiology, 
nuclear medicine and waste disposal. The Federal 
Republic would give full support to the Agency's 
efforts to ensure the provision of international 
emergency assistance in the event of nuclear radiation 
accidents, though it would itself be prepared 
to render such assistance even before any formal 
agreement was concluded. The increase in the Regular 
Budget seemed justified, the more so since the 
percentage increase was less than for 1966. He 
hoped Member States would make larger voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund. The Federal 
Republic intended to increase its contribution by 
10%, and also to present a mass spectrometer as 

104th PLENARY MEETING 

a contribution to the Agency's ground-water research 
programme. 

121. Mr. BRYNIELSSON (Sweden) said that there 
had been a great change in the general outlook 
for nuclear energy over the past ten years. The 
world was not now facing any scarcity of power 
resources, at least not for a generation. Nuclear 
power had now advanced, however, to the point 
where it was competitive, even in areas where fossil 
fuels were very cheap; and Sweden for example 
planned to establish twice as many nuclear installations 
during the next ten years as it had three 
or four years previously. 
122. There remained the question whether nuclear 
energy would be able to make a major long-term 
contribution to the world's power supplies. In his 
view, the Agency could fulfil an important function 
in studying the raw material resources on a worldwide 
basis. The increased importance of the commercial 
aspects might mean that the hitherto rather 
free exchange of technical information would be 
somewhat restricted, in particular in regard to established 
reactor types. Considerable scope would, however, 
remain for government action and international 
co-operation in the development of advanced reactor 
systems such as fast-breeder reactors and thorium 
reactors. 
123. The fact that in many countries nuclear energy 
programmes were now subjected to careful scrutiny 
and their priority weighed against other needs of 
scientific and technical development lent point to 
what the Director General had said regarding the 
need for increased regional and international collaboration 
to avoid duplication of effort. As far as 
the Agency's own programme was concerned, SAC 
might profitably aim at achieving a greater degree 
of concentration. 
124. In view of the rapid increase in industrial 
activity and international trade, it was essential 
that the Agency should continue its efforts to develop 
regulations and codes of practice. Its most important 
function in that respect was of course in the field of 
safeguards. The Swedish delegation welcomed the 
application of the Agency's safeguards system to all 
facilities involved in the fuel cycle and sincerely 
hoped it would be universally accepted and that the 
Agency would be used for carrying out the safeguards 
required in relation to bilateral and other 
arrangements. 

125. Sweden attached special importance to the 
Agency's technical assistance programme and was 
disappointed that the funds available for the purpose 
were diminishing, though the Secretariat was to be 
congratulated on its efforts to make the best possible 
use of the limited funds. As before, Sweden 
would contribute its share of the target figure for 
voluntary contributions, and was also offering two 
new Type II fellowships. 
126. In conclusion, he suggested that now that 
the general trend of the Agency's work was wellestablished 
and generally agreed, and that a lesser 
degree of parental supervision on the part of Governments 
seemed necessary, the Board should 
again study the question of administrative reforms 
that could be carried out without revision of the 
Statute. For example the General Conference could 
meet in full session every second year only and the 
number of Board meetings could also be further 
reduced, the resulting savings being used for the 
greater benefit of Member States, for example in 
providing technical assistance. 
Further statements under item 10 were deferred to 
the next meeting. 

CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

127. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure the General Conference 
had to fix a closing date for the session, on the 
recommendation of the General Committee. 
128. The General Committee had considered the 
question the day before and had authorized him 
to recommend on its behalf that Tuesday, 27 September, 
be provisionally fixed as the closing date, 
subject to all business having been disposed of 
by then. 
129. The General Committee's recommendation 
was accepted. 
The meeting rose at 5.50p.m. 


GC(X)/OR.105 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

2 March 1967 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 23 September 1966, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda * 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1965-66 {continued): -87 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Israel 


1 — 12 
France 13 — 30 
Japan 31 — 43 

Pakistan 44 — 59 
Uruguay 60— 63 
India 64 — 75 
Iran 

76— 87 


GC(X)/343. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE he was sure, would make a useful contribution to 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965-66 the Conference's work. 
[GC(X)/330, 341] (continued) i) 

3. Commenting on some national activities in 
atomic energy that deserved mention, either because 
1. Mr. DOSTROVSKY (Israel) said his dele-of their scientific and technical interest or because 
gation would like to pay a tribute to the Director they illustrated what could be done with modest 
General, his predecessor and the Agency staff, equipment and facilities, he pointed out first that 
past and present, who had seen the Agency through Israel was a small country with limited resources 
its first critical years to the present tenth anniversary and great development problems, but that its proof 
the General Conference. gramme covered a wide spectrum of activity in 
basic and applied nuclear sciences. 

2. He also wished to congratulate Singapore 
and Uganda on joiningthe Agency; their delegations, 4. Israeli physicists had recently perfected techniques 
for observing resonance scattering of gamma1) 
GC(X)/OR.104, paras. 1 to 126. rays from neutron capture, thus making it possible 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3



TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

to study nuclear energy levels in a region hitherto 
inaccessible. For instance, by such techniques nuclear 
energy levels of a few hundred electron volts could 
be scanned with a resolution of 1 eV, making it 
possible to study bound and unbound nuclear levels 
in the region 6-9 MeV above ground. 

5. The mechanism of fission, the basic process 
on which all atomic energy activity depended, was 
still not fully understood, and much effort was 
being devoted in Israel to study of that process. 
For instance, two experiments of the scattering 
chamber type, involving the use of multiple coincidences 
and multi-parameter analysis, were in progress. 
The first was designed to study correlations 
between parameters such as mass, energy, angle 
of fission fragments and neutrons, and the alpha, 
gamma or X-rays accompanying the process. The 
correlations observed were compared with predictions 
of various models of neutron fission. The 
second experiment was for study of very shortlived 
fission fragments located at the edges of the 
charge distribution curve; observations were being 
made by means of rapid separations of fission 
products from a source located in a special gas 
loop in the reactor. Work was going on at the 
moment, too, on the design and construction of 
an on-line mass separator which would make it 
possible to separate individual nuclides and provide 
a steady source of even the shortest-lived isotopes. 
6. In regard to the uses of radiation for various 
purposes, a number of groups were carrying out 
basic research in radiation chemistry and radiobiology. 
From that work it was hoped to derive 
possible new methods for the synthetic production 
of certain chemicals, and new products of polymerization 
reactions, e.g. in plastics and modified wood. 
Irradiation of agricultural products was also under 
study in the hope of finding ways to prolong the 
storage or shipping life of a range of local products. 
Successful results in those pilot experiments could 
have a considerable impact on his country's economy. 
7. The work being done in activation analysis 
and isotope production was already well known 
and had reached the status of a routine service 
available to all. 
8. The absence of water in sufficient quantities 
was a major problem in Israel so that research 
and development work in hydrology and desalination 
had been started early. The potentialities of isotope 
techniques in hydrology had been quickly recognized 
by chemists and physicists but accepted with hesitation 
by hydrological engineers. His delegation 
accordingly welcomed the steps being taken by 
the Agency to promote acceptance of those methods. 
Techniques based on the analysis of naturallyoccurring 
isotopes and on the use of artificiallyinjected 
isotopes had been developed and used in 
his country. The Agency had taken a prominent 
part in the global mapping of deuterium, tritium 
and oxygen-18 in precipitation and rivers, for which 
work it was to be commended. 

9. Nevertheless, more work was necessary on 
the fundamental aspects of isotope kinetics and 
distribution in well-defined transport stages of the 
hydrological cycle; and it was essential that the 
interpretation of isotopic data be made within a 
wider context. His delegation would therefore recommend 
thattheAgency's programmebe broadened 
by extending the theoretical basis of the present 
work with the aim of arriving at quantitative interpretations 
of hydrological systems; and by greater 
integration of hydrologicalstudieswithgeochemistry, 
geophysics, atmospheric chemistry and meteorology. 
10. The main desalination processes studied had 
been freezing, electrodialysis and distillation, and 
sizeable experimental plants based on each of those 
methods were now in operation in Israel. The 
report on the joint study undertaken in conjunction 
with the United States Government - copies of 
which were freely available - indicated the technical 
feasibility of nuclear desalination bymeans of a dualpurpose 
plant providing one hundred million tons 
of water per year and 200 MW of electricity. However, 
such a plant would be economic for Israel 
only if financing arrangements could be made at 
very low interest rates. Plants of the kind would, 
in his opinion, be in very limited demand for at 
least ten years to come, since the need of the 
developing countries was for facilities on a smaller 
scale, to produce water for local requirements only, 
in the absence of extensive distribution networks. 
It would be useful if the Agency arranged for a 
more intensive study of that problem in its programme 
of symposia and seminars. 
11. Israel supported the programme of work 
before the Conference, in particular the technical 
assistance activities outlined. It was to be hoped 
that that work would not be curtailed by lack of 
funds. Israel would maintain its contribution to 
the General Fund and continue its support of 
the training programme, as in past years, by the 
award of Type II fellowships. 
12. In conclusion, he expressed his delegation's 
fervent hope that scientific objectivity and a spirit 
of equity would pervade the deliberations and decisions 
of the Conference and mark the work of the 
Agency in its second decade and thereafter. 
13. Mr. HlRSCH (France) expressed his Government's 
gratitude to the Austrian Government for 
the hospitality which had always been so generously 
extended to the Agency and to the delegations 
of Member States. 

105th PLENARY MEETING 

14. In the general context of the development 
of atomic energy in the world, it was appropriate 
to take stock of the Agency's achievements and 
to attempt to define the policies which would provide 
the best return on the resources of an organization 
whose growth rate should rougly parallel 
the average rate of increase of the budgets of its 
Member States. 
15. On the one hand, the Agency had not yet 
reached a position where it was able effectively 
to fulfil one of the essential tasks which had initially 
been allotted to it, that of a broker in nuclear 
materials and an intermediary in international transactions 
involving power reactors. On the other 
hand, the development of the political situation 
had not yet allowed it to assume the technical role 
it could play in controlling genuine world nuclear 
disarmament which, it was to be hoped, would 
be speedily achieved. 
16. That situation, which restricted the Agency's 
field of activity, had caused it to develop primarily 
in the direction of the provision of technical assistance 
and the dissemination of knowledge. At 
the same time it had been necessary to apply to 
the Agency's budget a kind of stabilization plan 
in order to ensure that the development of national 
and of international organizations did not get out 
of line. It was from that standpoint that the French 
delegation approved the Budget for 19672) and 
the outlines of the Programme for 1967-68 3), 
which should allow the Agency to consolidate its 
position in the rapid development of nuclear power 
applications. 
17. The tendencies first noted two years previously 
had been confirmed, and the expansion of nuclear 
power generation was now proceeding at a rate 
which should impress the most sceptical observer. 
The average tempo at which new nuclear power 
stations were now being commissioned throughout 
the world represented every month an installed 
capacity of more than 1000 MW(e), or more than 
the total installed capacity in about one third of 
the countries of the world. When all the nuclear 
power stations at present in existence and those 
under construction were in operation, in four or 
five years' time, the installed nuclear capacity in 
the world would exceed 30 000 MW(e). 
18. In France the Fifth Development Plan specified 
a rate of construction of nuclear power stations 
which was double that provided for under the preceding 
Plan and thus involved the installation of 
a capacity of 500-1000 MW(e) per year. The third 
nuclear power station of Electricite deFrance, EDF-3, 
2) GC(X)/333. 
3) GC(X)/332. 

had gone into operation in March 19<56 and would 
soon achieve its full power of 480 MW(e); for about 
a year it would be the most powerful electricitygenerating 
reactor in the world. 

19. The industrial breakthrough of nuclear power 
was of course due not only to the technical success 
of a few reactor types whose reliability of operation 
was now established. It had also been essential 
that economic considerations should justify the 
choice of nuclear power in open competition with 
the various alternative power sources available; those 
considerations entailed high unit power levels and 
thehighest possible utilization factors, which in turn 
facilitated the adoption of nuclear power in the 
most highly industrialized countries and restricted 
its economic justification in most of the developing 
countries, for whom the Agency should be able 
to play a useful r61e as an impartial adviser. 
20. His delegation hoped that the Agency would 
pursue and expand its studies on the possible introduction 
of nuclear power into the less industrialized 
countries, and France was prepared to continue 
to supply experts to participate in that work. It 
was also in favour of carrying out general economic 
studies, in particular those which might lead to 
the establishment of a set of methods which could 
be generally applied, in view of the extent to which 
economic comparisons were rendered uncertain and 
problematical by the absence of clearly defined basic 
data and by the introduction of doubtful assumptions. 
21. The industrial success of proven reactor types 
should not retard scientific and technical endeavours 
to develop new types and to discover new applications; 
the Agency must of course follow and participate 
in such activities. He was thinking in particular 
of fast-neutron breeders and the use of the 
heat produced by reactors to desalt water. The 
latter task was a long-term one, but the inevitable 
increase in fresh water requirements justified the 
efforts being made, and it was highly desirable 
for the Agency to pay close attention to the studies 
and activities undertaken at both national and international 
level, for it was above all the developing 
countries which would first have to solve the 
problem of desalination. 
22. On the other hand, it seemed that the prospects 
for the nuclear applications of thorium were 
still distant, since most experts no longer expected 
a serious shortage of uranium in the coming years. 
While his delegation was not opposed to the Agency 
engaging in studies on thorium, it felt that the 
effort devoted thereto should be limited, and that 
resources should be concentrated on subjects of 
more immediate interest. 
23. There was a natural link between reactor 
operation and plutonium production; the quantities 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

produced annually would shortly be reckoned in 
tons. His Government was too aware of the risks 
presented by such stocks not be interested in discussions 
on ensuring the exclusively peaceful uses 
of fissile materials. It had approved the document 
extending the application of Agency safeguards 
to reprocessing plants. However the fact was, as 
emerged from the section on safeguards in the 
annual report of the Board of Governors for 196566 
[GC(X)/330 and 341],that the power reactors 
in respect of which agreements subjecting them to 
Agency safeguards had come into force belonged 
to countries which also had substantial military 
atomic programmes. Furthermore, a large part of 
the world remained completely free from the Agency's 
control. It was therefore to be hoped that the 
experience acquired in that difficult field would 
one day be put to really good use within the framework 
of general nuclear disarmament. Finally, he 
recalled that Prance was agreeing only temporarily 
that the application of safeguards by the Agency 
should be financed from the Regular Budget. 

24. Technical assistance would for the near future 
continue to account for the bulk of the Agency's 
activities. His Government approved the recent emphasis 
on relatively large regional projects and the 
efforts made to co-ordinate the grant of fellowships, 
missions undertaken by experts, gifts of equipment 
and the allocation of research contracts in such a 
way that those various forms of assistance were 
made to contribute to the success of a project. 
Such a concept of technical assistance necessarily 
entailed considerably greater effort on the part of 
the Secretariat and assumed a great deal of understanding 
and goodwill on the part of the receiving 
countries, but the results obtained would be beneficial 
for all, and would in the last analysis ensure 
a fairer distribution of the limited resources available. 
Too often in the past the assistance provided to 
Member States had not been linked by any simple 
criterion to the industrial development, the foreseeable 
needs or the nuclear effort of the receiving 
countries; one could only hope that it had at least 
been a measure of those countries' devotion to the 
ideal of international co-operation. France, at all 
events, would continue to accept fellows from the 
Agency (30 during the past year) and to place 
experts at the disposal of the Secretariat. 
25. His Government hoped that the Agency's 
financial contribution to the running of international 
centres would decrease in the future; that contribution 
should be confined to the establishment of 
institutions, whose subsequent financial independence 
would be the mark of their success. 
26. At the same time, while stressing the importance 
of rigorous budgeting, his delegation congratulated 
the Agency on the scientific success of 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste. 

27. The various international regulatory activities 
concerned with health and safety constituted 
one of the Agency's undeniable successes. France 
would continue to place experts at the Secretariat's 
disposal for the further pursuit of those activities. 
28. The Agency's laboratories were continuing 
to perform a useful function, and his delegation 
was in favour of a reasonable expansion in their 
work. The French Government had decided to 
donate to the Agency's Laboratory a coincidence 
counting unit worth 170 000 francs ($34 000), intended 
for the accurate measurement ofbeta-gamma 
emitters; the unit included an automatic samplefeeding 
device and a computer coupled with a 
print-out device. 
29. The Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity at 
Monaco was now providing interesting results on 
the development of radioactivity in the sea. A reasonable 
extension of the laboratory, whose work 
certainly lay within the framework of the Agency's 
activities, should be provided for. 
30. Since its establishment, the Agency had been 
fortunate enough to have, at the various levels 
of the Secretariat, a competent and loyal staff which 
in a very short time had established a sound reputation 
for efficiency. France had supported the candidature 
of Mr. Eklund for the post of Director 
General in 1961, and in 1965 had approved the 
renewal of his term of office. The French Government 
was satisfied with his management of the 
Agency and thought that the efficacy of his work 
would further increase if, without neglecting the 
important aspect of contact with Member States, 
he could devote more time to his essential role 
at the head of the Secretariat. It was through the 
quality of its staff and the support now given to 
it by all Member States that the Agency would 
succeed in playing an ever-increasing part in the 
development of atomic energy at international level. 
31. Mr. ASAKAI (Japan) said he would avail 
himself of the opportunity to extend a warm welcome 
to the delegates of Jamaica, Jordan and Panama, 
which had recently been admitted to membership 
of the Agency. 
32. At that significant juncture in the Agency's 
history, it was a matter for gratification to note the 
steady progress that had been made, both in building 
up its membership and in the parallel steadfast 
development of activities. At the time of the 
Agency's creation, great hopes had been placed in 
the future role of atomic energy for economic development. 
After the initial period of enthusiasm, 
however, the Agency had been faced with various 

105th PLENARY MEETING 

difficulties of technical and economic nature which 
had necessitated the careful selection of activities 
and the adoption of programmes of a somewhat 
unambitious nature. 

33. It was true that the Agency had assisted 
developing countries in the preliminary evaluation 
of nuclear energy requirements, the construction 
and safety evaluation of reactors, pre-investment 
studies, evaluation of tenders for nuclear stations, 
and other important matters. Its activities in power 
production, however, had been affected by the 
slow-down in nuclear development caused by the 
difficulty of achieving economic nuclear generation 
of power. Consequently more emphasis had been 
placed on the various uses of radioisotopes and 
on related technical assistance and training. The 
utilization of radioisotopes in fertilization, mutation 
breeding and disinfestation had contributed to the 
solution of the food problem, and the diagnostic 
applications of radiation sources had served to 
improve health. The Agency had done significant 
work, too, in formulating safety standards for radiation 
protection and preparing technical manuals. 
34. There had also been steady development 
in the Agency's activities to ensure that atomic 
energy was used for peaceful purposes only. Despite 
the limitation of the Agency's authority and 
functions, the safeguards system had been steadily 
reinforced by the adoption of the revised safeguards 
document4) at the previous General Conference 
and the provisional approval in June 1966 of special 
procedures for application to reprocessing plants. 
Agency safeguards as at 30 June 1966 were being 
applied to 54 reactors in 23 countries - an indication 
that its role in the sphere had been more 
widely recognized. 
35. Thesteady but somewhat unspectacular work 
of the past nine years offered a ray of hope for the 
future. In that connection, he would express his 
country's concern about the way in which the Agency 
was formulating its programme. There had been 
talk recently regarding the need for keeping the 
Agency's budget under strict control. Certainly it 
was essential to keep the budget to the necessary 
minimum but that did not mean that the Agency 
should be discouraged from embarking on important 
and useful programmes for the future. The use 
of atomic energy was developing fast and the Agency 
could have no promising future if the courage to 
initiate effective projects was lacking. It was a matter 
for regret that some of the advanced countries had 
not as yet contributed towards the Agency's technical 
assistance activities in the last fiscal year. Technical 
assistance was one of the Agency's major functions 
and he would strongly urge the Member States 
concerned to make voluntary contributions to the 
4) INFCIRC/66. 

General Fund in amounts that were at least the 
same percentages of the target as were their assessed 
contributions to the Regular Budget. 

36. His Government had from the outset actively 
co-operated with the Agency. In 1959 it had set 
the precedent for utilizing the Agency as a "clearinghouse" 
for the supply of nuclear materials; in 1963 
it had been the first to transfer to the Agency the 
administration of safeguards in relation to its bilateral 
agreement with the United States, and in June 1966 
had made a similar transfer in respect of its agreement 
with Canada. At present, ten reactors and 
seven critical assemblies in Japan were subject to 
Agency safeguards. Those actions demonstrated the 
trust placed by his Government in the Agency, 
as well as the earnest hope of the Japanese people 
that safeguarded world-wide disarmament would 
thereby be brought nearer to the realm of feasibility. 
37. Commenting briefly on recent developments 
in Japan, he said that the announcement at the 
Third International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy5) that nuclear power had 
developed to the stage of economic feasibility had 
encouraged his country, together with many others, 
to revise its long-term programme, with a view 
to introducing private ownership of special nuclear 
materials and to developing power reactors suited 
to future demands. The prospect now as that the 
generation of nuclear power in Japan would reach 
a capacity of 1500 MW(e) by 1970 and more than 
12 000 MW(e) by 1980. 
38. Needless to say, the Agency should play a 
more active part in the current stage of full-scale 
development of atomic energy, and to that end 
its two main functions of promoting peaceful uses 
and ensuring that atomic energy would be used 
for peaceful purposes only should be strengthened. 
It was noteworthy that in the United Nations Disarmament 
Commission and elsewhere the use of 
Agency safeguards had been advocated with a view 
to preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
With the increasing possibility that more countries 
would eventually acquire nuclear weapons, it would 
become appropriate for the Agency to study what 
role it could play with regard to the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. In that connection, the 
statement made by the delegate of Norway6) was 
highly interesting and deserved serious consideration. 
39. In the course of the appeal it had made to 
Member States at the last session of the Conference, 
to co-operate with the Agency to ensure universal 
application of its safeguards, the Japanese delegation 
had suggested that the safeguards system should 
5) Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 
6) GC(X)/OR.104, paras. 88 and 89. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

be extended to cover reprocessing plants 7). It 
was gratifying that that suggestion had been followed 
up. The procedures established for that purpose 
together with those for reactors, should be reviewed 
in future in the light of actual experience and, 
to provide the basis for that experience, it was to 
be hoped that other countries would follow the 
United States example by also placing reprocessing 
plants under Agency safeguards. 

40. A second suggestion made at the same time, 
that a system for registering the international transfer 
of all nuclear materials be instituted 8), had evoked 
favourable reactions; his Government fully believed 
that such a system would contribute - at the very 
least - to preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
41. The rapid developments in recent years in 
regard to nuclear energy had brought problems 
in their train, and it was to be hoped the Agency 
would make greater efforts to help countries in 
that sphere by facilitating the exchange of information, 
convening panels and so on. Further work 
would be needed too on radioactivity in the sea, 
a problem that would take on added importance 
with the greater use of nuclear energy, and it was 
desirable that the Agency should serve as a clearinghouse 
in solving that problem. 
42. The future growth in the use of nuclear 
power raised the serious problem of securing nuclear 
fuels in sufficient quantities. The Agency should 
expand the study of world uranium and thorium 
resources which it was conducting in co-operation 
with the European Nuclear Eenergy Agency. While 
at present there was an over-production of plutonium 
as a result of the increase in nuclear power generation, 
the development of fast-breeder reactors would 
also increase the future demand for plutonium; 
such a situation would cause, at least temporarily, 
a dislocation in supply and demand in the case 
of plutonium, and it was therefore desirable that 
the Agency should look into the matter of the 
future supply of, and demand for, that element 
as well. 
43. His Government would continue to cooperate 
to the greatest possible extent with the 
Agency in its work for the further betterment of 
mankind. 
44. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan) said that since embarking 
upon its nuclear energyprogrammeinl960, 
Pakistan had established a broad base of some 
500 scientists and engineers, and set up a number 
of laboratories in different parts of the country. 
7) GC(IX)/OR. 94, para. 11. 
8) Ibid., para. 10. 

45. Pakistan's first research reactor had gone 
critical in December 1965 and had been operating 
at full power since June of the current year. An 
agricultural research centre had been established 
and two more were in the planning stage. Almost 
all the major teaching hospitals had radioisotope 
centres for diagnosis and treatment, and further 
centres were under construction. 
46. The results of the country's modest programme 
had been encouraging. Pakistan scientists 
had been sent as visiting professors to universities 
abroad, had published research papers in journals 
of international repute, and had obtained a number 
of research contracts. Above all, the country's atomic 
energy programme had stimulated scientific activity 
and awareness in Pakistan. 
47. In certain fields, such as the disinfestation 
of stored food grains and the sterilization of medical 
supplies, Pakistan planned tobegin pilot-scale operation, 
with subsequent transition to commercial operation. 
48. Pakistan's first power reactor (a heavy-water 
reactor of 137-MW capacity) would be in operation 
by 1970, and a 140-MW nuclear power station 
would go into service a year or two later. The 
country's long-term nuclear power generation plan 
would be ready within a year, and would include 
a study of the potentialities of nuclear reactors for 
power generation and desalination in West Pakistan. 
49- Many other developing countries could achieve 
what Pakistan had achieved in the past six years, 
and the country's facilities were open to all who 
wished to collaborate in promoting the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 

50. He thanked the Agency and several of the 
Member States for the assistance they had provided. 
He hoped that their support would continue and 
increase, so that one day Pakistan would be able 
to repay its debt of gratitude. 
51. Turning to the Agency's activities, he considered 
that there was a lack of balance in the 
geographical distribution of the Agency's staff. The 
developing countries were now able to provide qualified 
persons, for whom more key Professional posts 
should be reserved during the next decade, in order 
to ensure that the staff was more representative 
of the Agency's membership. 
52. A greater proportion of Agency seminars 
and symposia should be held in developing countries. 
Similarly, the work of the Laboratory at Seibersdorf 
and other Agency research establishments should 
be examined with a view to moving them to parts 
of the world where they would be of more benefit 
to the developing countries. 

105th PLENARY MEETING 

5 3. The International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste, which could not have come into 
existence without the support of the developing 
countries, should also extend its activities to other 
parts of the world whenever host countries could 
be found. In addition, the Centre should be placed 
on a permanent footing with more generous financial 
support from the Agency. 
54. In the field of nuclear power, a survey by 
the Agency of the small- and medium-power reactor 
requirements of developing countries would stimulate 
the development of such reactors for sale. 
The Agency could also perform a useful role by 
arranging with producing countries for the supply 
of fuel for such reactors at subsidized prices and 
by obtaining financial support for projects approved 
by the Agency from the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development and similar organizations. 
Such actions by the Agency would induce 
countries to turn to it for assistance and thereby 
ensure that its safeguards were widely applied. 
55. The Agency had been ineffective in preventing 
the spread of nuclear weapons: the number of 
countries possessing such weapons had increased, 
while some of the major Powers had by-passed 
the Agency and made available nuclear "know-how", 
materials and equipment without suitable safeguards. 
The result was that countries could now be devided 
into four categories: the "Nuclear Club", highly 
industrialized countries that had established their 
own nuclear facilities, countries that had received 
nuclear "know-how", materials and equipment under 
bilateral agreements, and countries that were likely 
to acquire such "know-how" within the next ten 
years. 
56. If the countries belonging to the second category 
did not subject their nuclear facilities to 
Agency safegaurds, why should less-developed countries 
be expected to do so? Why should, for example, 
the members of the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) advocate the Agency's 
safeguards for others while claiming that the 
EURATOM system of safeguards was adequate 
for themselves? Such double standards should be 
eliminated. 
57. Countries falling into the third category should 
be induced by moral and economic pressures to 
subject their nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards. 
If such an approach were unsuccessful, regional 
arrangements on the lines^of EURATOM should 
be set up to enable the inspection of one country's 
facilities by another. Pakistan would adhere to any 
international or regional safeguards system provided 
that there was no discrimination in its application. 
58. The Agency could assist countries belonging 
to the fourth category by drafting a standard bilateral 
agreement which all supplying and receiving 
countries would be expected to follow as far as 
possible. 

59. One way in which the Agency could help 
in reducing international tension would be to invite 
those Member States which did not belong to the 
"Nuclear Club" to sign an undertaking not to use 
nuclear energy for military purposes, thereby demonstrating 
their good faith. 
60. Mr. FRANGELLA (Uruguay), recalling that 
it was the fourth time he was representing his 
country at the General Conference, affirmed that 
the Agency, by the generous exchange of knowledge 
it made possible, without political or racial discrimination, 
and also by the assistance it provided 
to developing countries, constituted one of the 
supreme achievements in the history of mankind. 
The immense benefits resulting from the judicious 
and equitable manner in which the Director General 
and the Board of Governors had performed their 
task had enabled developing countries to make 
rapid advances in the use of atomic energy. 
61. As in former years, he would give a brief 
account, first of the benefits received by his country 
during the past year, then of the work done: 
(a) During the last session of the General 
Conference, held in Tokyo, a trilateral agreement 
had been signed by the Agency, the 
United States Atomic Energy Commission 
and Uruguay for the supply of fuel for a 
research reactor; 
(b) Early in the present year, two Agency 
experts had come to Montevideo to provide 
information on safeguards; 
(c) In March, a mission sent to Chile and 
Peru had been invited by his country's Atomic 
Energy Commission to give lectures in Montevideo; 
(d) Three fellowships had been awarded: 
one for training in electronics and nuclear 
science in France; one for histophysiological 
research in Italy; and one in theoretical physics 
(quantum mechanics) in the International 
Centre in Trieste; 
(e) A young Uruguayan expert was attending 
a course in radiotherapy physics in 
London and another was attending a regional 
course in radioisotope application in Bogota; 
(f) Two experts had been provided, one 
of whom specialized in uranium prospecting 
and the other in the use of radioisotopes 
in medicine; 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

(g) Under the technical assistance programme, 
a project on the use of radioisotopes 
in hydrology would soon be started by the 
Engineering Faculty and under a research 
contract between the Agency and the Faculty 
of Medicine in Montevideo work was being 
done in the Nuclear Centre on the use of 
radioisotopes in the study of hydatidosis; 
(h) For the year 1966 assistance had been 
requested for the following four projects: 
the establishment of a radiochemistry laboratory; 
the radiosterilization of meat and meat 
products, fish, eggs, fowl, etc.; the eradication 
of aphthous fever in Uruguay by means of 
radioactivity; and the absorption of 32Plabelled 
phosphoric acid and its alkaline salts 
by sugar cane and the use of radioisotopes 
in agriculture; 
(i) Turbanite and carnotite samples had 
been requested, and provided," for use in 
research. 
The main work done during the year included 
following: 

(a) Technicians from the National Administration 
of Fuels, Alcohol and Cement 
had continued to prospect for thorium ore 
in black sand on a beach on the Atlantic 
coast, which also contained titanium; 
(b) Prospecting for uranium had started, 
with an Agency expert, and 7000 kilometres 
of road, together with the adjoining strips 
of ground, had been covered, using car-borne 
recording instruments; according to the expert's 
report, the result was encouraging. 
By agreement between the French and 
Uruguayan Atomic Energy Commissions, 
three French experts had spent three months 
organizing, with Urugayan experts, field teams 
for scintillometric prospecting, geochemical 
analysis, and surveying with a staff of 22 technicians. 
He paid tribute to the generous cooperation 
accorded in that connection by the 
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission and 
the goodwill shown by the Brazilian Atomic 
Energy Commission; 
(c) A nuclear energy centre had been set 
up in the Faculty of Medicine in the Maciel 
Hospital in Montevideo for radioisotope research 
and treatment. Thus Uruguay had two 
State nuclear medicine centres and one private 
one; 
(d) The Society for Nuclear Biology and 
Medicine had been set up; almost all the 
Uruguayan expertsworkingwithradioisotopes 
in biology and medicine were members; 

(e) The Institute of Oncology of theMinistry 
of Public Health, which had had an 
18-MeV betatron for the past three years, 
had begun to make known the results obtained. 
It was also planned to purchase a 
40-MeV betatron, which could penetrate to 
malignant tumours at any depth; 
(f) A 100-kW research reactor had been 
obtained, which was similar to that in Bogota; 
since there was no power reactor, it would 
have to be used to train experts as well as 
for research and the preparation of shortlived 
radioisotopes; 
(g) The State National Council was considering 
the purchase of a cobalt-60 plant 
for the preservation of potatoes, onions and 
carrots; 
(h) Finally, Uruguay had signed a bilateral 
agreement for co-operation with Israel and 
agreements with other countries were being 
considered. Participants had been sent to the 
study group on research reactors in Caracas 
and the Pan-American meeting of the Inter-
American Nuclear Energy Commission. 
63. Havingthus summarized theworkdone during 
the past year, he expressed gratitude on behalf 
of his Government and the Uruguayan Atomic 
Energy Commission for the co-operation they had 
received and assured the Conference that the commitments 
they had entered into would be carried 
out and that his country would be pleased to cooperate 
with other Member States. 
64. Mr. SARABHAI (India) considered it a great 
privilege to lead his country's delegation for the 
first time to the Agency's General Conference. It 
had been deeply touched by the many messages 
of sympathy received on the occasion of the tragic 
death of his predecessor, Dr. Homi Bhabha, who 
had contributed so much to the Agency's work 
and whose loss had been keenly felt by India and 
the entire scientific world. He was particularly grateful 
for the tribute paid to Dr. Bhabha by the Representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations. He was glad the Agency's revised safeguards 
system had taken into account the interests of 
developing countries, whose cause had been championed 
by Dr. Bhabha. 
65. He welcomed the new Members of the Agency 
and said his delegation lookedforward toco-operating 
with them in promoting its work. 
66. He congratulated the Agency on thesuccessful 

105th PLENARY MEETING 

way it had performed its task in spite of the difficult 
political issues involved. The dissemination of scientific 
knowledge was extremely important since it 
could help to close the gap in economic and social 
development between the developing countries and 
those more advanced, provided all Member States 
devoted themselves unselfishly to the cause of peace. 

67. He welcomed the special financial contributions 
made by several States, since he considered 
that the Agency's activities should be largely financed 
from voluntary contributions. India had once again 
offered a voluntary contribution of $35 000;because 
of its difficult foreign currency situation that contribution 
must, unfortunately, be made in local currency, 
but it could be used to supply services and equipment 
produced in India. Since the increased voluntary 
contributions which countries could afford would, 
however, hardly enable the Agency to meet the 
growing needs, it was necessary to establish priorities, 
examine the cost effectiveness of activities 
and reduce administrative costs. The establishment 
of regional offices, for example, was likely to increase 
administrative costs rather than promote scientific 
work. The Agency should therefore concentrate 
on the following four major long-term activities: 
the dissemination of knowledge through scientific 
meetings and seminars; the provision offellowships, 
particularly to nationals of developing countries 
to enable them to be trained outside their own 
countries; provision of support on a non-continuing 
basis to promote international co-operation; and 
the administration of safeguards, on request, in 
relation to bilateral and multilateral agreements. 
68. He agreed with the comments made regarding 
theinadequate number of appropriate posts allocated 
to nationals of countries in Asia, Africa and Latin 
America. 
69. He stressed the importance of making increasing 
use of experts and facilities provided by 
developing countries for training purposes, since 
such experts had wide experience in improvisation 
in overcoming difficulties, and trainees were more 
likely to return to their home countries and would 
be better equipped to continue tiieir work than 
those trained in the more advanced countries. That 
had been amply demonstrated by the joint neutronspectrometer 
project in which India had collaborated 
with the Philippines. 
70. The construction of India's first atomicpower 
station with a capacity of 400 MW(e) at Tarapur 
had passed the half-way stage and the station was 
expected to be fully operating by October 1968. 
It would operate in inter-connection with two power 
grids having both conventional thermal and hydro 
capacity. An environmental survey laboratory had 
been operating for the last two years, and meteorological 
studies were also being carried out. At a 
later stage India would be happy to offer full 
training facilities for scientists and engineers at 
Tarapur. 

71. The Radiation Medicine Centre at Trombay 
was engaged in the diagnosis and therapy of various 
human diseases and would provide advanced training 
in nuclear medicine to people from Asian countries. 
72. The Board's decision to extend safeguards 
to reprocessing plants had been unduly hasty and 
had not allowed Member States sufficient time to 
study the matter in detail. It should be borne 
in mind in that connection that it was not the 
plants or equipment but the nuclear material contained 
therein which would be placed under safeguards, 
provided it was subject to safeguards under 
the revised system; furthermore, the Agency should 
seek technical advice since very little experience 
was available. He suggested that the Agency should 
also consider in the near future the application 
of safeguards to isotope-separation plants used to 
produce uranium-235. 
73. Considerations of national security and political 
prestige tended to impede the wide acceptance 
of the Agency's safeguards system, and the prospect 
of reaching agreement on the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons would be seriously reduced if die 
Agency's safeguards system was used for political 
ends. The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
could best be achieved by an extension of the 
Moscow test ban treaty and by agreement by the 
Eighteeen-Nation Committee on Disarmament in 
Geneva on the lines of the resolution of die General 
Assembly of the United Nations which emphasized 
the need for an acceptable balance of 
mutual responsibilities and obligations on the part 
of the nuclear and non-nuclear Powers. In that 
connection he thought the proposal to establish 
a nuclear-free zone in Latin America merited the 
Agency's support. India had established, in cooperation 
with the United Kingdom, a seismic 
detection station and the data obtained were freely 
available to all countries. 

74. One of the most important uses of atomic 
energy, from the point of view of developing countries, 
was in food production and preservation. 
New strains of rice and ground-nuts had been 
developed in India which appeared likely to increase 
crop-yields, and the experience gained was 
available to any country interested. In co-operation 
with Canada, a facility was also being set up at 
Trombay to carry out extensive tests in food preservation, 
which should be of great interest to 
developing countries. 
75. In conclusion, he pledged his country's 
whole-hearted support for the aims and objectives 
of the Agency. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

76. Mr. HESSABI (Iran) remarked that the current 
session, being the tenth, was a memorable 
landmark in the Agency's history and gave occasion 
for an assessment of the work done in early years. 
His delegation wished to express appreciation of 
the activities carried out by the Agency in that 
period. 
77. One point to which attention should be 
drawn was that the Board of Governors was no 
longer truly representative of the Agency's membership, 
which had greatly expanded since 1957; the 
distribution of seats among the developed and the 
developing countries was inequitable. The same 
was true of the administrative and executive staff, 
in which many of the geographical areas were not 
adequately represented. 
7 8. The Agency's major function under the Statute 
was to work for the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, and one of the main objects 
of its creation had been to provide assistance in 
that sphere tothedevelopingcountries. Thesituation 
in that regard was now such as to make the smaller 
countries feel that their main purpose in joining the 
Agency had not received adequate attention; the 
Director General in his statement at the 101st 
meeting had made the position plain. 
79. The usefulness for mankind in general of 
the Agency's scientific research work was of course 
recognized; but the same work was being done 
on a much larger scale by well-equipped national 
laboratories - which would, he was sure, be willing 
to undertake research on any specific problem the 
Agency cared to refer to them - so that the Agency's 
purpose would be better served if it acted as a 
clearing-house for the exchange of information on 
the results of the national research that was being 
done. 
80. The symposia and scientific panels which 
were being convened by the Agency in increasing 
number were of benefit mostly to the advanced 
countries that were engaged in research on the 
subjects studied. Meetings on practical subjects, 
of which they had inadequate knowledge, would 
be of greater benefit and more immediate interest 
to the majority of Member States. 
81. The inescapable conclusion was that the distribution 
of funds among die various activities 
should be revised, to give more adequate emphasis 
to sectors from which the majority of Member 
States might benefit. Such sectors included: water 
desalination and hydrology, food preservation, soil 
fertility, insect eradication, pesticide residues, plant 
breeding and genetics, animal production, nuclear 
medicine, health and safety and waste management, 
together with the preparation and dissemination 
of information, the standardization programme, and 
the programme for education and training in nuclear 
science and technology. The Agency should also 
give a fillip to research work in the developing 
countries, by providing more guidance and material 
assistance for that purpose. 

82. It would be appropriate at that juncture 
for the Conference to make an appraisal of the 
results obtained over the first years of the Agency's 
existence; an assessment of that kind would help 
in determining future goals and plans and better 
ways of achieving the desired aims. His delegation, 
after consultation with the otherAfro-AsianMembers, 
was submitting a joint draft resolution to that end 
in the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee 
9). 
83. The need for more equitable representation 
of the developing countries in the Agency's administration 
had already been brought to the Director 
General's attention and certain groups of Member 
States had the matter under consideration with a 
view to having appropriate steps taken. 
84. All MemberStates,inendeavouringtoincrease 
their potential for harnessing atomic energy for 
the greater welfare of their peoples, were seeking 
assistance from the Agency, in greater or smaller 
measure according to the level of technical development 
obtaining. Apart from financial aid, guidance 
in the preparation and execution of programmes 
would in many instances be most helpful. 
85. During the past year, work on various aspects 
of atomic energy had been actively pursued in 
Iran. The 5-MW research reactor under construction 
was due to be completed in 1967. A number of 
courses on radioisotope applications had been organized 
- the 150 trainees taking part were now 
employed in various organizations - and postgraduate 
courses in nuclear science were available. 
The electronics laboratory had designed and built 
radiation measuring equipment; and a film-badge 
service to cover the whole country had been established, 
as well as a documentation centre. 
86. Radioactive sources for medical applications 
had been installed in various hospitals throughout 
die country; cancer research was being conducted 
in Teheran, where a radiodiagnostic centre had 
also been established. In addition, research had 
been started on agricultural problems and in hydrology. 
In the latter connection, Iran would welcome 
more speedy and effective technical assistance from 
the Agency for drawing up and executing appropriate 
projects, using radiation techniques. 
87. In conclusion, he expressed his country's 
best wishes for the greater success of the Agency 
in the future. 
9) GC(X)/COM.l/101/Rev.1. 

The meeting rose at 12.35p.m. 


GC(X)/OR.106 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

6 March 1967 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Monday, 26 September 1966, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda * 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1965-66 {continued): 
127 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Austria 1 — 14 
Hungary 

15 — 33 
Thailand 34-38 
Canada 39 — 51 
Republic of Korea 52 — 59 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 60 — 84 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 85 — 97 
Bulgaria 98 — 114 
Spain 115 — 127 

GC(X)/343. 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE Vienna had been chosen to become the centre for 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965-66 the efforts of mankind to co-ordinate the use of 
[GC(X(/330, 341] (continued) nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In that, its 
appointed field, the Agency had achieved substantial 

1. Mr. HAYMERLE (Austria) first extended a 
results. The generation of electricity with the help 
hearty welcome to the delegations of Panama, Jordan of the atom, the use of nuclear power to desalt 
and Jamaica, which were attending the Conference sea-water, and the application of isotopes in various 
for the first time, and observed that the member-branches of industry, medicine and agriculture — 
ship of Uganda, Singapore and Sierra Leone, which which had all been considered rather Utopian a 
was being approved at the present session, would few years previously — had now become everyday 
further enhance the universal character of the 

events. The reduction in the cost of nuclear power, 
which had been pointed out at the Third Inter-

Agency. 
national Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy 1) , had led to an increase in the number 

2. 
In line with Austria's desire to contribute to 
of power stations at present under construction; 
progress and development, his Government was 
gratified and proud that, nearly a decade previously, 

1) Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

Annex II to the annual report of the Board of 
Governors to the General Conference [GC(X)/330] 
clearly illustrated the situation in that respect. 

3. As a corollary to efforts directed at the development 
of nuclear power, more attention should, 
his delegation believed, bedevoted to applied nuclear 
technology. The time had come to co-ordinate the 
Agency's efforts with the economic requirements 
which could only be met with the help of the atom, 
and a study of the Agency's Programme for 
1967-68 2) revealed that the Secretariat was conscious 
of that need. The Austrian Government noted 
with satisfaction the intended expansion of activities 
in connection with the applications of isotopes and 
radiation sources in industry, agriculture and medicine. 
4. If his Government had any real criticism of 
the Agency's work, it related to the fact that, 
although budgetary increases now tended to range 
from 8% to 11% per year, the increase in the 
amount actually spent on operational activities was 
much less, and in the budget for 1967 would 
amount to 1.44% only. It would therefore seem 
necessary to devote more effort to securing a dynamic 
growth of the Agency's programmes. 
5. After those remarks of a general nature, he 
now wished to make brief reference to some of the 
Agency's major fields of activity during the past 
year. 
6. The adoption by the ninth regular session of 
the General Conference of the revised safeguards 
system 3) represented an important step, if not an 
actual breakthrough, towards the establishment of a 
universally accepted safeguards system. When the 
time came for far-reaching agreements onsafeguards 
among the major nuclear Powers, the Agency must 
be prepared to assume all the possible functions 
which might be entrusted to it in that connection. 

7. The work done since the preceding session of 
the Conference on the extension of the Agency's 
safeguards system to reprocessing plants was most 
valuable. The relevant resolution adopted by the 
Board of Governors in June 1966 constituted a 
first move towards the inclusion of nuclear facilities 
other than reactors in the safeguards system. Among 
the growing number of Safeguards Transfer Agreements 
was one between the Agency, Austria and the 
United States of America, which had come into 
force at the end of 1965- The first inspections of 
Austrian reactor facilities under that agreement had 
already taken place. 
2) GC(X)/332. 
3) INFCIRC/66. 

8. Another subject which had occupied the Board 
of Governors during the past year had been the 
elaboration of a system of international co-operation 
to provide emergency assistance in the event of nuclear 
radiation accidents. The area of disagreement 
in respect of the system had been steadily narrowed, 
and a resolution adopted by the Board on 19 September 
1966 called for completion of its deliberations 
on the subject before the eleventh regular session of 
the Conference. 
9. Technical assistance was, as always, a vital 
feature of the Agency's work, and the Austrian 
Government was highly appreciative of the skill 
with which the Secretariat administered the resources 
available for technical assistance activities. Concern 
was, however, felt at the 'fact that, while requests 
for technical assistance were continually rising, the 
resources available to meet them remained virtually 
the same; indeed, Agency experts in the field would 
number only 323 in 1966 as compared with 373 in 
1965. Similarly the Agency's fellowship programme, 
in spite of its great efficiency and utility, had unfortunately 
registered a gradual decline in scale since 
1962. The consideration of ways and means of 
increasing the Agency's budget for technical 
assistance operations was therefore urgently called 
for. 
10. On the other hand, the situation was extremely 
satisfactory as far as research contracts were concerned, 
the number of contracts awarded having 
risen from 132 in 1964 to 157 in 1965. It was 
particularly gratifying to note that research contracts 
on radioisotope applications in agriculture, food 
irradiation, medicine and biology had been given 
high priority in 1965. Good progress was also being 
achieved by the Austrian/ENEA/IAEA Programme 
on Irradiation of Fruit and Fruit Juices, 
which seemed to be a most encouraging example 
of successful collaboration between world-wide, 
regional and national organizations. 
11. In both 1965 and 1966 the programme of 
conferences and symposia included a range of subjects 
indicative of the desire of the Director General 
and Secretariat to devote increasing efforts to the 
practical uses of nuclear energy in various scientific 
and industrial fields. Particular mention should be 
made of the Symposium on Magnetohydrodynamic 
Electrical Power Generation held at Salzburg in 
July 1966, which might well represent an important 
contribution to the industrial development of that 
method of power generation. 
12. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste had been yielding some highly promising 
results, and at the Board's meetings in June 
there had been general agreement to increase the 
Agency's contribution to the cost of operating the 
Centre in 1967. However, the time had come to 

106th PLENARY MEETING 

make a thorough examination of all factors bearing 
on the future of the Centre, and the Austrian delegation 
favoured the six-Power draft resolution 
requesting the Director General to initiate negotiations 
with all the interested parties 4). 

13. The Austrian Government greatly appreciated 
the excellent work done by the Director General 
and his staff during the past year. It was proud to 
be the host to an international organization which 
pursued such a noble aim and which served the 
interests of international co-operation so well. In 
his statement at the 101st plenary meeting the 
Director General had pointed out, in his friendly 
references to Austria, that the agreement between 
the Austrian Governmentand the Agency concerning 
the temporary headquarters of the IAEA had thus 
far operated very satisfactorily. The time might now 
have come to consider whether the present provisional 
arrangement should be transformed into a 
definitive one, and the Austrian Government was 
already in contact with the Director General on the 
subject. 
14. The Agency had reached a vital point in its 
development. It was already playing a decisive part 
in ensuring that atomic energy became more and 
more a factor promoting the economic and social 
welfare of humanity, and it must now be ready to 
assume the responsible functions that might be 
entrusted to it in connection with general disarmament. 
The Austrian Government felt that, after 
nearly ten years of activity, the Agency had amply 
fulfilled the great hopes that had been placed in it 
at the time of its inception, and was certain that it 
would continue to merit the confidence reposed in 
it. 
15. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) extended his delegation's 
greetings to the delegations to the Conference 
and hoped that the tenth anniversary session 
would be a successful one. 
16. An evaluation of the Agency's development, 
especially against the background of the circumstances 
that had attended its establishment, justified 
the impression that it had made positive progress. 
Considering the original efforts of one Power to 
maintain a monopoly in nuclear weapons for itself, 
the very fact of the establishment of the Agency 
represented the collapse of those endeavours and 
a significant advance in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. It had been for only a very short period 
that atomic energy had served as a means of blackmail 
in the "cold war". At present, and thanks 
in part to the activities of the Agency, it was emerging 
as a tool for improving the life of man. 
17. The Hungarian People's Republic, one of the 
founding States of the Agency, was doing everything 
in its power to ensure that its activities were 
in line with the objectives laid down in the Statute. 
It was concerned only with the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. The number of Member 
States with the same concern was increasing steadily. 
As a result of the liquidation of the colonial system, 
a number of new States were emerging and playing 
an ever greater part in the work of the international 
organizations. The Hungarian delegation wished to 
welcome the four new Member States: Jamaica, 
Jordan, Kenya and Panama. 
18. One of the most important indices of die 
Agency's'activities was the assistance it extended 
to developing countries in matters relating to nuclear 
technology and nuclear power. 
19. The number of Member States had risen to 
96 and the Agency could soon become a universal 
organization. However, owing to the discriminatory 
policy of certain Powers, a number of States were 
unable to take their places as Members of the 
Agency. As a result, the organization was deprived 
of the active collaboration of countries which had 
made significant achievements in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. 
20. The use of atomic energy had to be controlled, 
and the Agency's safeguards system was being 
applied to prevent its use for military purposes. 
The extension of Agency safeguards to reprocessing 
plants was technologically defensible but the safeguards 
system had not yet been fully perfected and 
was not an adequate means for preventing further 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. However, application 
of the system could yield useful experience 
for the subsequent elaboration of a universal control 
system. It was very important to determine to what 
extent the system could be used to help to ensure 
general international security. That problem was 
particularly important in Europe. His delegation 
therefore welcomed the action of the Governments 
of Poland 5) and Czechoslovakia 6) which had 
offered to place their nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards on condition that the Federal Republic 
of Germany did so as well. More especially, it 
welcomed the telegram addressed to the President 
of the Conference by the Government of the 
German Democratic Republic, stating that in the 
interests of European peace and security and the 
development of intra-European co-operation, the 
Government of the German Democratic Republic 
deemed it necessary that both German States, on 
the basis of sovereign equality, should accept the 
Agency's Safeguards System (1965) and, on condi5) 
GC(X)/OR.103, para. 56. 
4) GC(X)/COM.l/98/Rev.1. 6) GC(X)/Or.l04, para. 13. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

tion that the Federal Republic of Germany declared 
its acceptance of the system, was itself prepared to 
accept it, for which purpose it would have to be 
admitted to the membership of the Agency. 7) 

21. There were certain individual aspects of the 
Agency's activities which he wished to discuss. The 
Board's annual report to the General Conference 
was concerned mainly with the question of nuclear 
power and rightly so, because in the period that 
had elapsed since the Third Geneva Conference 
nuclear power had been playing an ever greater 
part in the power-generation planning of certain 
countries. The Agency could play a significant role 
in that respect by lending assistance in specific 
economic calculations and by helping the developing 
countries in the choice of reactor sites and types 
and the training of scientists. 
22. As a result of the growing number of nuclear 
power stations, the problem of radioactive waste 
was becoming acute. So far the problem had not 
been solved and it could not, of course, be solved 
by the Agency's small research group at Monaco. 
The Agency could set itself the task of acting as 
an organizer and co-ordinator of the very varied 
research work being carried on in that field by 
different countries and it could enlist the collaboration 
of the big nuclear Powers. It could also work 
towards the establishment of more specific international 
rules and regulations in that regard. The 
portion of the Board's report dealing with radioactive 
waste (paras. 166-176) made mention of 
important successes, but the measures which had 
been taken were still insufficiently related to the 
special requirements of nuclear power, even though 
methods of processing and storing waste were a 
significant factor in the economics of electric power 
stations. 
23. The Hungarian People's Republic was devoting 
increasing thought to nuclear power, especially 
in view of the fact that preparatory work had begun 
on the construction of a nuclear power station 
which would have a total capacity of 800 MW and 
be powered by a water-cooled, water-moderated 
reactor of the Novo-Voronezh type. Studies on 
reactor designs and costing were also under way, 
some of them in conjunction with the Agency under 
the research contract programme. 
24. A great deal of attention was being paid in 
Hungary to applications of isotopes and sources 
of radiation. In the opinion of his delegation, that 
was a subject in which the Agency could lend extensive 
practical assistance to the developing countries. 

7) For the full text of the telegram see document GC(X)/ 
INF/91. 

25. Significant progress had been made in Hungary 
during recent years in the production and use of 
isotopes. Some 200 different organic and inorganic 
isotopic preparations were being manufactured in 
the country. The figure for isotope shipments in 
1965 had been about 5000 lots. Isotope production 
had received new impetus with the completion of 
construction work on a large laboratory, built in 
accordance with the latest health requirements. The 
laboratory had been visited and inspected by the 
Director General and other members of the 
Secretariat. Hungary was prepared to make available 
to any other country, through the Agency, the 
experience it had gained in the construction of the 
laboratory. 
26. As far as isotope applications in medicine were 
concerned, much attention was paid to the further 
development of diagnostic methods. Isotopes were 
being used extensively in Hungary in research on 
diseases of the thyroid gland, the liver, the kidneys, 
the stomach and the spleen, and in studies on 
haemopoiesis, basal metabolism etc. The more extensive 
use of those methods was attributable to 
the successful production during the preceding two 
or three years of 34 preparations, involving 12 isotopes, 
for use in diagnostic work. 
27. Hungary was prepared to lend assistance to 
the developing countries in matters relating to the 
medical uses of isotopes. But the Agency, too, was 
playing a growing role in that work by standardizing 
requirements with regard to preparations and by 
organizing controls to ensure compliance with those 
standards. 
28. In the opninion of the Hungarian delegation, 
the Agency was not doing enough in the matter 
of the industrial uses of isotopes. In particular, 
too little consideration was given to lending the 
developing countries practical assistance in problems 
of nuclear geophysics. It was unlikely that the situation 
would improve during the coming years. The 
Budget for 1967 8) showed that considerable shifts 
were being made in funds allocated from the Operational 
Budget, but the additional funds which became 
available would be distributed exclusively between 
the agricultural and medical sectors. 
29. The Hungarian delegation considered that a 
rational yardstick must be found for increasing the 
Agency's expenditures. The Agency's tasks and the 
scope of its activities were increasing steadily but 
that should not lead to an excessive and unlimited 
increase in outlay. 
8) GC(X)/333. 


106th PLENARY MEETING

30. He had high regard for the Agency's work 
in organizing its various conferences, symposia and 
panels and found it contradictory that budgetary 
allocations for the organization of such meetings 
were being reduced while the number of staff members 
in the Secretariat was being increased. 
31. The Hungarian delegation noted that the 
Agency had become an organic part of international 
life, a qualified body which played an indispensable 
part in regard to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Great importance attached to improving the operations 
of the Secretariat, and especially to the leadership 
of the Director General. Fellowships, scientific 
undertakings, active participation in the organization 
of the Second and Third Geneva Conferences on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy,-the preparation 
and elaboration of vital international agreements 
relating to the uses of atomic energy, the initiation 
and co-ordination of international scientific research 
programmes — all those things were characteristic 
aspects of the Agency's work and demonstrated 
the value of its activities. 
32. The Agency could perform effective work 
only on the basis of broad international co-operation 
in which every State could take part, regardless of 
its social and political structure. However, the prerequisite 
for such co-operation was mutual trust and 
a satisfactory international climate. The Moscow 
agreement of 1963 prohibiting the testing of nuclear 
weapons in the air, in space and under water had 
had a beneficial effect on every sphere of international 
life, including the work of the Agency. Events 
that had taken place since that time had led to a 
change for the worsein the international atmosphere. 
U Thant, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
had expressed concern in his message because 
he felt that the world was moving in the direction 
of a third world war. The aggression of the United 
States in Viet-Nam, along with the increasingly 
dangerous extension of the dirty colonial war, conjured 
up the spectre of a thermonuclear world wart 
33. There was no need to provide any special 
proofs of the positive attitude of the Hungarian 
Government towards the work of the Agency. However, 
no one could fail to see that the facts which 
he had just mentioned could poison the atmosphere 
in the Agency as well. He hoped that the Agency 
would pass successfully through that difficult period. 
By promoting ever wider international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, the Agency 
was contributing to better understanding among the 
peoples of the world. 
34. Mr. CHOONHAVAN (Thailand) said that 
his delegation welcomed the growth in the Agency's 
activities since Thailand had joined the Agency and 
noted with satisfaction that the spirit of co-operation 
in the field of atomic energy among Member States 
had become increasingly cordial, thereby undoubtedly 
facilitating the Agency's task. 

35- It was well known that Thailand had endorsed 

the principles of the Agency's safeguards system 
from its inception. Thailand would support the 
extension of the Agency's safeguards to reprocessing 
plants. It also endorsed the Agency's valuable efforts 
to familiarize countries in the areas of South East 
Asia and the Far East with the economic aspects 
of the use of radiation and radioisotopes. 

36. His delegation wished to state, as it had the 
year before, that some action should be taken to 
increase the Agency's Operational Budget so that 
its technical assistance programme would be of 
real benefit, especially to developing countries. 
37. It had been a privilege for Thailand to act 
as host to the Agency's Regional Seminar on Health 
Physics and the Inter-regional Advanced Training 
School on the Medical Applications of Radioisotopes 
in Bangkok. His delegation supported the selection 
of Bangkok as an important base for the Agency's 
Regional Advisers and Regional Officer and would 
welcome the Agency's co-operation in making 
Thailand's Atomic Energy Centre serve the region. 
Thailand would continue to support the Agency 
in its programmes. 
38. His delegation wished to congratulate the 
Director General and Secretariat on their very successful 
achievements in all aspects of their work. 
39. Mr. McCORDICK (Canada) said that as it 
was two years since his delegation had contributed 
to the general debate, he thought it might be of 
some interest if he briefly outlined the more 
important recent developments in the Canadian 
nuclear programme, with special reference to those 
broad areas in which Canada's interests were related 
to those of the Agency and of developing countries. 
40. The first Canadian nuclear power station on 
a fully commercial scale, situated at Douglas Point, 
Ontario, and using a 200-MW(e) pressurized heavywater 
reactor, would be in service before the end 
of the year. In addition, the largest Canadian electric 
utility company had embarked on the construction, 
near Toronto, of a major nuclear power station 
employing two reactors of the natural-uranium, 
pressurized heavy water type, scheduled to go into 
service in 1970 and 1971. The design would permit 
expansion of the station from an initial capacity 
of 1000 MW(e) to at least 4000 MW(e). A second 
major public power utility, in the Province of 
Quebec, had also decided to enter the nuclear 
field. The proposed station, which was scheduled 
to enter into operation in 1971, would generate 
250 MW(e) and would be based on a reactor using 
heavy water as moderator but boiling water as 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

coolant. In order to provide for the expanding 
needs of the Canadian nuclear power programme, 
two large plants for the production of heavy water 
were also under construction. 

41. On the research front, important information 
about power reactors moderated by heavy water 
and cooled by organic liquids would be provided 
by a 40-MW engineering test reactor which had 
come into operation in 196542. 
Altogether Canada had eight research and 
power reactors in being and four under construction 
or committed to construction, with a thermal rating 
totalling over 500 MW. Moreover, Canadian 
designed reactors were now widely recognized abroad 
as well suited for the needs of a good many 
countries that were on the verge of embarking on 
a nuclear power programme. Two such reactors 
were already under construction, one in India and 
the other in Pakistan. With those and the power 
reactors in Canada, the capacity of Canadiandesigned 
reactors would soon exceed 1750 MW(e). 
43. Turning to the Agency's own achievements, 
he felt there was every reason to congratulate it 
on a job well done. There was, he tought, general 
agreement that the Agency had amply demonstrated 
its capacity to serve the international communityin 
a wide variety of ways in an area of vital and increasing 
importance, and that its usefulness and 
authority were growing steadily with each passing 
year. In his opening address 9), the Director General 
had made some excellent suggestions for working 
out a programme which would meet the priority 
needs of developing countries. The Canadian delegarion 
would study those suggestions, as well as 
those made by other delegations, with great care, 
and looked forward to co-operating in formulating 
a constructive programme for the future. Without 
mentioning all those areas where the Agency was 
making an important contribution, he wished to 
single out a few specific activities to which his delegation 
attached particular importance. 
44. In the first place he expected the Agency to 
have an increasingly worthwhile part to play in the 
field of nuclear power, particularly in helping Member 
States to determine when and how they should 
embark on a nuclear power programme. He believed 
the Agency had clearly recognized its uniquely 
important and sentitive position in that field. A 
related problem of particular importance to many 
developing countries, and one in which the Agency 
was properly becoming increasingly interested, was 
the use of nuclear power for desalting water. 
45. He also believed the Agency had an important 
contribution to make in regard to the extremely 
9) GC(X)/OR.101, paras. 28 to 54. 

complex problems created by the "information explosion". 
New methods, such as those provided by the 
computer sciences, were essential if the storage and 
retrieval of technical information were to be organized 
in the most rational and effective manner. The 
major technically advanced countries had already 
made considerable efforts to transfer to odier countries 
the fruits of their conventional information 
systems. The Agency could play a key role in 
harmonizing and co-ordinating those efforts with a 
view to avoiding duplication of effort between Member 
States and between individual scientists. On 
the other hand, great care must be taken';in deciding 
how far it was appropriate for the Agency to play 
a major operational role in that field and how much 
of its resources could reasonably be devoted to it. 

46. A related field where there was a worthwhile 
job of international co-ordination to be done, 
likewise requiring wisdom and discretion, was the 
international exchange of nuclear data. There too 
the Agency had already begun to make a definite 
contribution, which would become increasingly 
important, given continued co-operation from all 
concerned. 
47. In accordance with its general policy of support 
for international efforts to avoid the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, Canada had undertaken to supply 
nuclear materials to other countries for peaceful 
purposes only, and subject to proper safeguards. It 
had therefore derived particular satisfaction from 
the manner in which the Agency was fulfilling its 
statutory responsibilities in regard to the development 
and application of a system of international 
safeguards and was encouraged by the growing 
extent to which Members were resorting to the 
Agency's services in that respect. It believed that 
with the great expansion in the use of nuclear 
energy which was bound to occur soon throughout 
the world, that aspect of the Agency's work would 
assume ever greater significance. It should also be 
borne in mind, as the Director General had indicated, 
that the progress made with regard to safeguards 
was of direct relevance to the attainment of 
the objectives towards which the Eighteen-Nation 
Committee on Disarmament was striving in Geneva. 
48. In accordance with its policy of transferring 
to the Agency responsibility for administering the 
safeguards embodied in bilateral arrangements to 
which it was party, Canada had on 20 June 1966 
signed the first such transfer agreement with the 
Agency and the Government of Japan. In order 
to assist the Division of Safeguards and Inspection 
in carrying out its duties, it had also informed the 
Director General that it would henceforth notify 
him on a regular basis of Canadian transfers of 
nuclear material to other countries, and hoped that 
other States would find it possible to take similar 
action. 

106th PLENARY MEETING 

49. The Agency was to be commended for its 
efforts to refine the safeguards system to meet the 
practical requirements of the expanding nuclear 
power industry. It should be encouraged to continue 
the technical side of its safeguards work, 
with particular emphasis on the development of 
methods for applying safeguards with the maximum 
efficiency and effectiveness, so as to ensure that 
existing techniques did not become outdated or prove 
inadequate in thelight of experience and the rapidly 
increasing commitments with which the Division of 
Safeguards and Inspection would be faced. 
50. Canada fully supported the Budget for 1967 
and the Director General's efforts to avoid wasteful 
expenditures. It was, however, anxious lest undue 
budget paring be carried out at the expense of a 
desirable measure of health and growth in the 
programme. It believed that the programme of 
every organization within the United Nations family 
should be assessed on the basis of its content, its 
quality, the priorities assigned to various activities 
in relation to the overall objectives and the organization's 
capacity to execute the programme. The 
Agency was to be commended for attempting to 
plan ahead, since that enabled Member States to 
ensure that the most effective use was made of 
both human and material resources. The Canadian 
delegation would always be willing to give sympathetic 
consideration to constructive ideas for improving 
the programme and enabling the Agency to 
play an even more realistic and fruitful role than in 
the past. 
51. In conclusion he wished to express his 
Government's appreciation and gratitude for the 
helpfulness and generous hospitality displayed by 
the Austrian authorities. 
52. Mr. YUN (Republic of Korea) expressed 
his delegation's appreciation to the Director General, 
the Secretariat and the Members of the Board of 
Governors for the efforts they had made. 
5 3. The Korean Office of Atomic Energy now 
comprised three institutes. The Atomic Energy 
Research Institute, established in 1959, had undertaken 
fundamental and applied research "with a 
TRIGA Mark II reactor, which had gone critical 
in March 1962. The Radiology Research Institute, 
established in November 1963, had made a remarkable 
contribution to cancer treatment with its 
cobalt-60 therapy unit. Finally the Radio-Agricultural 
Institute, previously a division in the Atomic Energy 
Research Institute, was assisting with the Government's 
agricultural modernization programme. As 
far as nuclear power was concerned, a preliminary 
survey mission for the Agency had visited Korea 
in October 1963, and a further Agency mission had 
been invited in June 1965 to advise on the siting 
of a nuclear power station. As a result of the mis


sion's work, the conclusion had been reached that 
nuclear power would be competitive in Korea, and 
three locations had been chosen as promising sites. 
A power survey mission had consequently been 
sent from the Korean Office of Atomic Energy to 
various countries from May to July of the current 
year with a view to presenting recommendations 
on the basis of which the Government could draw 
up a more detailed project. If it was to succeed in 
its aim of constructing a 300-MW power reactor by 
the mid-70's, it would still need a great deal of 
assistance and co-operation from other Members 
of the Agency. 

54. Hi's first suggestion regarding the Agency's 
work was indeed that it should pay special attention 
to nuclear power so as to help meet the growing 
gap between power supply and demand, particularly 
in the developing countries, where local power 
resources were for the most part inadequate and 
living standards were rising rapidly. For instance it 
might be advisable to set up some sort of standing 
technical commission to promote and co-ordinate 
technical assistance in that field. 

55. Secondly, the Agency should also promote 
co-operation in regard to the use of nuclear energy 
for water desalination and the utilization of underground 
water. 
56. Thirdly, his delegation appreciated the various 
forms of technical assistance which developing countries 
received through the Agency, but pointed out 
that it was essential that any equipment which was 
to be used by an expert should arrive at the same 
time as he did. 
57. While the services of foreign experts were 
valuable, it was even more important to train nationnal 
scientists and engineers, and retain their services 
once they were trained. In diat connection he suggested 
that trainees accepted for training abroad 
should be notified of their acceptance, and where 
they were going, far enough in advance for them 
to be able to brush up the foreign language they 
would be using. 

58. Korea had already been awarded eight contracts 
under the Agency's research contract programme 
and had applied for a further five. There 
was no doubt that the award of contracts to the 
developing countries provided valuable encouragement 
to their research laboratories and other acedemic 
institutes. 
59- Finally he suggested that to facilitate the 
exchange of technical information in that area, the 
Agency's Regional Office for Asia and die Far East 
be given more money, a larger staff and wider 
powers. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

60. Mr. PASECHNIK (Ukrainian SovietSocialist 
Republic) said that his delegation warmly congratulated 
the Agency on the occasion of the tenth 
anniversary session of the General Conference and 
wished it great success in its future activities. 
61. During the past decade the Agency had taken 
a definite step towards achieving its basic aim. 
Its work in convening international scientific conferences, 
symposia, courses and seminars, publishing 
conference proceedings and review articles and 
taking measures to promote the flow of scientifc 
information deserved special attention. 

62. The fact that in recent years the Agency had 
doubled its membership indicated the growth in 
its international authority. Hi's delegation welcomed 
the admission to the Agency of developing countries 
in Africa, Asia and Latin America. 
63. During the past decade a number of countries 
had accumulated vast technical experience in the 
use of atomic energy, and the economic justification 
for building atomic power plants had been fully 
proved not only in remote areas and areas poor in 
fossil-fuel resources, but also in advanced industrial 
centres. The peaceful atom was moving across the 
world with gigantic strides. Whereas at the time of 
the First International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy 10) only one atomic power 
station, with a capacity of 5000 kW, had been 
operating — that first atomic power station in the 
world had been in the Soviet Union—, by the 
beginning of the Third Geneva Conference the 
installed capacity of atomic power stations had 
attained almost 5 million kW; and now it was 
8 million kW. A good deal of experience had been 
accumulated in the use of atomic energy for transport 
purposes and for providing heat; large atomic 
installations had been constructed for water desalination, 
an example of which was the plant in the 
Soviet Union near the fort named after the Ukrainian 
poet, T.G. Shevchenko. It could be said with 
confidence that the use of nuclear energy in spacecraft 
would also lead to a revolutionary leap forward 
in the conquest of outer space. 
64. The work done in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic showed what a huge saving was secured 
by the application of isotopes in the mining, iron 
and steel and shipbuilding industries, and in the 
production of synthetic materials. 
65. That was all evidence of the fact that nuclear 
scientists had not only opened the door to vast 
power resources, new materials and means of automation 
and control, but had also acquired the 

10) Held at Geneva from 8 to 20 August 1955. 

practical know-how and overcome the technical 
obstacles to the extensive use of the energy from 
nuclear fission to improve the well-being of nations 
and to satisfy man's material and spiritual needs. 
The time was not distant when man would also be 
able to use the energy of nuclear fusion to satisfy 
his power requirements. 

66. He noted with regret that the use of nuclear 
energy in the interests of peace and prosperity was 
considerably impeded by the nuclear arms race. 
67. On the basis of its peaceful policies, the 
Government of the Ukrainian SSR emphatically 
supported the banning of atomic weapons and the 
destruction of all stockpiles thereof. The Ukrainian 
delegation associated itself with those delegates 
who in their statements had emphasized that the 
task of prohibiting atomic weapons was particularly 
urgent at the present time, when the United 
States militarists were expanding the aggressive 
war in Viet-Nam and when peace was being seriously 
threatened by the aggressive forces of the United 
States. 
68. The prevention of the further proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and the achievement of agreement 
on the prohibition of underground nuclear 
weapon tests would open up new opportunities for 
a still broader development of international cooperation 
in the use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. 
69. In the Ukraine great importance was attached 
to the development of nuclear power as the power 
of the future. However, the special features of the 
national economy had to be taken into consideration 
at the same time. 
70. As was well known, the Ukrainian SSR possessed 
vast power resources. Its industry was based 
on the use of its own coal, oil and gas. Thus, 
under the current Five-year Plan, it was not 
intended to increase the power resources of the 
Ukraine through the construction of new nuclear 
power stations. 
71. Attention was being focussed above all on 
basic research as the foundation of the new technology 
and also on the extensive use of isotopes 
and nuclear radiations in the national economy. 
72. Ukrainian scientists considered that further 
progress in the use of intra-nuclear energy was 
linked with the development of nuclear theory 
and the study of the nature of nuclear forces, the 
structure of the nucleus and the interaction of 

neutrons with nuclei and matter. The Ukraine's 
research programmes embraced a wide range of 
problems in that field. To fulfil those programmes, 
Ukrainian scientists and engineers had devised and 


106th PLENARY MEETING 

brought into operation a 2-GeV electronic linear 
accelerator. They had electrostatic generators, proton 
linear accelerators, multiply-charged ion accelerators 
and powerful gamma-radiation sources; a large isochronous 
cyclotron and other nuclear facilities were 
being built. 

73. The WR-M research reactor with a neutron 
flux of 10 W neutrons/cm2.sec, introduced in 1960, 
was being used primarily for research in neutron 
physics, radiation biology and chemistry, solidstate 
physics and the study of materials and reactor 
physics. 
74. The Ukraine was glad to provide foreign 
scientists with the opportunity to work in its installations, 
and at the recently established Institute of 
Theoretical Physics of the Ukrainian SSR Academy 
of Sciences in Kiev half of the total staff would 
consist of foreign scientists. 
75. Great importance was attached to exchanges 
of scientists. In recent years a number of joint 
projects had been carried out by Ukrainian scientists 
and scientists from France, Italy, the United 
Arab Republic and the United Kingdom, in both 
Ukrainian and foreign laboratories. Scientists from 
the Ukrainian SSR had, as was well known, taken 
an active part in scientific conferences convened 
by the Agency. They expected to continue their 
active participation in the Agency's projects. 
76. After examining the Board's report on the 
Agency's work in 1965-66, the Ukrainian delegation 
substantially approved the main trend of the 
Agency's activities, which were playing a definite 
part in providing countries with assistance in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and facilitating the 
international exchange of experience in the realms 
of pure science and industrial practice. At the same 
time he wished to stress that the Agency's activities 
would be much more successful if the atom finally 
cast off its military uniform and imperialistic aggression 
were abandoned for ever. 
77. It would be incorrect, however, to attribute 
the defects in the Agency's activities solely to the 
aggravated international situation. Many defects 
could be avoided if the Agency and its Secretariat 
were guided strictly by the Staute and the relevant 
decisions of the General Conference. 
78. His delegation considered it inadmissible 
for example, that in a number of cases the Secretariat 
had taken action without obtaining specific 
instructions from the Board of Governors. The 
Statute dealt in unequivocal terms with the question 
of the relations between the Board and the 
Secretariat, on the basis that it was the Board 
which, in the period between sessions of the General 
Conference, bore the entire responsibility for the 
Agency's actions. That was an important matter 
of principle. 

79. The Ukrainian SSR, like all the socialist 
States Members of the Agency, had attached and 
was continuing to attach great significance to the 
provision of technical assistance both within the 
framework of the Agency and under bilateral agreements 
between countries. The Ukraine, as was 
well known, was participating in the jointprogramme 
of assistance under which the socialist countries 
were making medical radiological centres available 
through the Agency. Such centres were being supplied 
to Morocco, Pakistan, Iraq, Burma, Algeria and 
Afghanistan. Deep satisfaction could be felt that 
that specific kind of technical assistance had aroused 
such interest on the part of the developing countries. 
However, no less profound surprise was aroused 
by the fact that some members of the Agency's 
Secretariat did not acknowledge the provosion of 
equipment as constituting technical assistance. That 
much emerged from the report on the technical 
assistance provided by the Agency from voluntary 
contributions. In that report there was no mention 
of the assistance offered or even already provided 
by the socialist countries. The report only considered 
assistance in the form of money. No formalistic 
pretexts could justify such an approach to technical 
assistance. That approach was leading in practice 
to a diminution of the opportunities for developing 
countries to obtain technical assistance through 
the Agency, was in effect worsening the conditions 
for obtaining such assistance, and was impeding 
the economic progress of the countries in question. 
It was absolutely impossible to agree with such an 
approach. 
80. In that connection he wished again to raise 
objections to the grant of technical assistance to 
South Korea, South Viet-Nam and Taiwan. Such 
action was all the more,inadmissible now that those 
countries were taking a direct part in the United 
States' aggression in South-East Asia, and thereby 
sharing the responsibility for the dangerous increase 
of tension in the world. Under such conditions 
the Agency's assistance served aims directly 
opposed to those laid down in the Statute and 
involved the Agency in the suppression of movements 
of national liberatipn, what amounted to 
undermining the very basis of peaceful co-operation 
between States. 
81. His delegation would urge the Agency's 
Secretariat to submit to the General Conference 
documents which gave not merely a factual account 
of the current position with regard to the matters 
in question but showed how the directives contained 
in the Statute and the decisions of the General 
Conference were being implemented in practice. 
That applied above all to the staffing policy pursued 
by the Secretariat. It would certainly be interesting 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

for the Conference to know how, in particular, 
Agency inspections were carried out, who was conducting 
them, and what Members of the Agency 
provided inspectors for that responsible work. In 
the recruitment of inspectors it was particularly 
important to observe the principle of equitable 
geographical representation, so as to secure maximum 
impartiality in the conclusions reached by 
inspectors. 

82. His delegation could in no way agree to the 
Ukraine.being without a single post in the Secretariat. 
He would recall, in that connection, Article 
VII. D of the Statute, which stated that in the 
recruitment and employment of staff and in the 
determination of the conditions of service, in addition 
to professional competence, "due regard shall 
be paid to the contributions of Members to the 
Agency and to the importance of recruiting the 
staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible". 
He hoped that the Director General would take 
the necessary action to rectify the position. 
83. In conclusion, he wished to refer to certain 
proposals put forward by delegates. Great importance 
was attached to the initiative taken, in connection 
with Agency safeguards, by the Czechoslovak 
Socialist Republic and the Polish People's 
Republic. 
84. His delegation also associated itself with the 
request by the Czechoslovak and Hungarian delegations 
that the Secretariat circulate as a General 
Conference document the text of the telegram addressed 
to the President by the Government of the 
German Democratic Republic on the subject of 
Agency safeguards. 
85. Sir William PENNEY (United Kingdom) said 
he would not comment on the political issues 
raised by some delegates, since such matters did 
not lie within the province of the Agency. The 
tenth anniversary was important: it had provided 
the opportunity for distinguished men to survey 
the Agency's progress. The steady increase in membership 
showed the confidence inspired by the 
Agency's activities, and he welcomed Uganda and 
Singapore as new Members. 
86. Within the limited funds available the Agency 
had achieved a great deal. It had wisely decided to 
disseminate knowledge and promote techniques 
and skills in as many countries as possible. The 
training of scientists and the provision of the services 
of experts, equipment and impartial advice on 
a wide variety of subjects had been of great benefit. 
In using atomic energy, particularly for power production, 
great care had to be taken to ensure that 
radioactivity did not lead to harmful consequences. 
Since that had been generally realized, there had 
been remarkably few accidents in the nuclear industry 
and the Agency's health and safety standards had 
played a very useful role in that respect. Its 
regulatory functions, developed with the assistance 
of many Member States, had gained wide acceptance. 

87. A particularly notable achievement was the 
development of a rational and flexible safeguards 
system which would meet gradually changing requirements; 
die United Kingdom would continue to 
support the system and to co-operate with the 
Agency in improving, when necess ary, die procedures 
involved. 
88. Commenting on the progress made in the 
United Kingdom, he pointed out that power stations 
were now an accepted part of the electricity generating 
system. The total operating nuclear generating 
capacity was nearly 4 million kW and a further 
3 million kW of capacity was under construction. 
By 1975, nearly one quarter of the electricity used 
would be generated in nuclear power stations. For 
the most* part, gas-cooled graphite-moderated 
reactors were used, but within the next year a 
100-MW(e) SGHW reactor would be operating at 
Winfrith. The reactor was a pressure-tube, heavyand 
light-water system whose design, embodying a 
number of interesting features, would allow flexibility 
in the choice of fuel cycle. Also at Winfrith was the 
High Temperature Reactor Project, "Dragon", in 
which a number of countries participated under 
the auspices of the European Nuclear Energy Agency. 
In the previous month, the "Dragon" reactor had 
successfully completed its first long run of fullpower 
operation at temperatures substantially higher than 
those so far attained by any other power reactor 
in the world. 
89- Two very important decisions, which reflected 
confidence in the future of nuclear power, had been 
taken in the United Kingdom within die past year. 
First, the Government had decided to re-activate 
and modernize the diffusion plant at Capenhurst 
in order to ensure an adequate supply of enriched 
uranium for the next generation of civil reactors. 
Secondly, it had been decided, as a result of experience 
gained wist fast-breeder reactors, to construct 
a prototype fast reactor at Dounreay, and it was 
expected that that 250-MW(e) sodium-cooled prototype 
would reach criticality in 1971. Sub-assemblies, 
each containing 77 fuel pins, with a mixture of 
plutonium and uranium oxide clad in stainless steel, 
had been irradiated to peak burn-ups of 7 % ; subassemblies 
designed to achieve higher burn-ups were 
already being tested. Good progress was also being 
made with regard tocorephysics, sodium technology 
and components. The economic benefits of incorporating 
a well-engineered breeder reactor into a nuclear 
power system needed no emphasis. 

90. A special-purpose cyclotron was now being 
used in the United Kingdom exclusively for the 

106th PLENARY MEETING 

production of neutron-deficient isotopes, and its 
ancillary equipment permitted rapid and safe handling 
of the radioactive products. The production of 
sodium-22 and several other isotopes, started in 
May, was steadily increasing. Progress was also 
being made in the use of scanning agents for medical 
purposes, low-energy gamma-emitters for gauging 
and non-destructive testing in industry, and labelled 
nucleic-acid components and other compounds for 
research in molecular biology. 

91. Turning to the Agency's achievements during 
the past year, he said the devising of special procedures 
for safeguarding reprocessing plants was an 
important step, and he congratulated all concerned, 
particularly Dr. Randers, Chairman of the Working 
Group which had drafted the necessary provisions. 
It was gratifying that the Agency was dealing with 
the difficult problem of safeguards in a realistic and 
scientific manner. In that connection the agreement 
between the Agency and the United Kingdom on 
the safeguarding of the Bradwell Nuclear Power 
Station — the largest plant in the world subject to 
safeguards — would provide the Agency with very 
valuable experience; one of theinterestingproblems 
for inspectors was the fact that fuel could be 
changed at any time without taking the station off 
load. 
92. He was pleased to note that in 1965 nearly 
60 countries had been provided with technical 
assistance. The United Kingdom had made voluntary 
contributions every year for that purpose and 
had accepted many Agency fellows — 37 during the 
past year. The United Kingdom was pledging a 
voluntary contribution of $110 000 for the coming 
year and would continue to provide experts and 
places for fellows. 
93. The best use of Agency funds was of concern 
to all. Sometimes a regional or international centre 
— such as the Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste — was the best means of meeting a particular 
need. A centre of that kind, assisted by Agency 
funds, could attract high-quality staff from the outset. 
As regards future financial support for die 
Trieste Centre, die United Kingdom reserved its 
position until the Board had received a report on 
the first two years' work at the Centre and the 
Director General had reported on alternative sources 
of finance. With a view to using funds to the best 
advantage the Agency should also continue to increase 
its co-operation with the specialized agencies; 
that had been borne out by the work done by the 
Joint FAO/IAEA Divison of Atomic Energy in 
Food and Agriculture. 
94. He hoped serious consideration would be 
given to the suggestions made by the Representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and 
by several delegates to the effect that biennial budgeting 
should be introduced, and that the General 
Conference should be held every two years. The 
Statute would need some amendment, but biennial 
programming was already established, and the 
Secretariat had been asked to incorporate in each 
year's draft budget a preliminary estimate of expenditure 
in the following year. He questioned whether 
it was necessary, at the present stage in die 
Agency's development, to spend 2 1/2 % of the 
Regular Budget and ask delegates and the Secretariat 
to spend so much time on the present type of 
annual conference. 

95- The United Kingdom fully supported the 
Agency's important task of stimulating the acquisition 
and dissemination of new knowledge and 
indeed had contributed about an eighth of die 
papers submitted to Agency conferences and symposia 
over die last five years. 

96. Widi regard to the future he was confident 
the Agency would play an important part in promoting 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Its programme 
for 1967-68 set out activities which the 
Agency could properly carry out during that period 
and the resources available had been sensibly 
apportioned between them. 
97. The Director General and the Secretariat 
deserved praise for their past achievements, and 
the United Kingdom would help tiiem to continue 
the good work; it would examine their proposals 
in a constructive spirit and was confident diat, 
during the next decade, the Agency would maintain 
its paramount position as die international 
focal point in all matters pertaining to the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
98. Mr. GANEV (Bulgaria) expressed his delegation's 
gratitude to the Austrian Government and die 
Vienna municipal audiorities for their hospitality. 
99- Tribute must be paid to the efforts made by 
the Agency to disseminate the scientific and technological 
advances made in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 

100. The Agency should regard it as its abiding 
task to fight for a ban on nuclear weapons. His 
delegation would therefore welcome any step taken 
in the spirit of the Agency's Statute to contribute 
to a solution of that problem. 
10.1. The initiative taken by the Polish and Czechoslovak 
Governments in regard to safeguards was 
designed to introduce important new factors into 
the Agency's safeguards work which would help to 
prevent die use of nuclear energy for military purposes. 
The socialist countries' proposal in that 
respect had found a positive response throughout 
the world. It was however a striking fact that the 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

reaction in Bonn had been unfavourable. It had 
been stated in the Press that the Government of 
the Federal Republic of Germany considered that 

it was unnecessary and inopportune to raise the 
question of placing the Federal Republic's nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. The fact that it 
had adopted that attitude to the socialist countries' 
proposal showed that ruling circles in the Federal 
Republic still wished to have access to nuclear 

weapons and did what they could to prevent an 
agreement on the non-dissemination of such weapons. 

102. The Bulgarian delegation associated itself 
with the Soviet and Czechoslovak delegations' 
request that the President should circulate the 
German Democratic Republic's important declaration 
on safeguards. 
103. The Agency's programme, which had been 
drawn up on the basis of the long-term programme 
that had been adopted H), had also taken into 
account subsequent developments in nuclear science, 
nuclear technology, physics and chemistry. The 
Agency was now devoting greater attention to 
questions of nuclear power, water desalination and 
the use of radioisotopes in industry. 
104. He welcomed the Agency's efforts to intensify 
and extend the use of radioisotopes in various 
branches of science and attached great importance 
to its work in spreading knowledge on the progress 
made in the use of radioisotopes in industrial undertakings 
in the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, France 
and the United Kingdom. 
105. In Bulgaria radioisotopes were used in several 
branches of industry and, more particularly, in 
geological surveying. Great attention had recently 
been paid to the use of radioisotopes in agriculture 
and a national conference on that subject would 
be held on 29 and 30 November. 
106. In view of the ever wider use made of radioisotopes 
and the increasing number of power and 
research reactors it was essential that the Agency 
should give the most careful attention to the 
question of nuclear safety. It had indeed already 
done useful work in regard to the transport of 
radioactive materials. 
107. Another important question was the storage 
of radioactive waste, particularly now that many 
States, including Bulgaria, were planning to build 
nuclear power stations. As was well known, the 
treatment of radioactive waste from nuclear power 
stations differed from the treatment of radioactive 
waste from nuclear research centres. In that con11) 
INFCIRC/50. 

nection his delegation could only congratulate the 
Agency on its efforts to make effective methods 
of radioactive waste treatment known to a number 
of Member States. The increased quantity of highly 
radioactive waste confronted the Agency with another 
problem, that of waste disposal. 

108. The Bulgarian delegation reaffirmed its view 
that the Agency's Laboratory was carrying on work 
that had no direct connection with the aims and 
purposes of the Agency. Such work resulted in an 
exceptional increase in the Laboratory's budget, 
which was 15.5 % higher than in the previous year. 
109. Scientific conferences and symposia were of 
great benefit, though closer co-ordination of the 
Agency's activities with those of certain of the 
specialized agencies of the United Nations would 
obviate some duplication and make for a more 
coherent programme. 
110. The Agency's work on the training of 
scientists, the dispatch of experts and, more 
especially, the supply of equipment and material 
was also useful. It must be pointed out however 
that the demand for technical assistance was growing 
faster than the funds available to satisfy that 
demand. Clearly some satisfactory solution of that 
problem must be found, particularly in view of 
the fact that assistance was most useful when it 
took the form of the supply of equipment and 
material. Several of the developing countries already 
had trained scientists and it was not always 
necessary to send experts at the same time as 
supplying equipment. Even if experts were needed, 
the duration of their missions could be substantially 
reduced; that would make it possible to 
increase considerably the amount of equipment 
and material supplied. In that connection his delegation 
considered that the Agency should increase 
the allocations for the supply of material and equipment 
rather than reducing them as was proposed 
in the budget, where they were reduced from 22 % 
to 14% of the whole. 
111. Though his delegation had no doubt that 
in drawing up the Agency's programme the 
Secretariat had tried to cut down on unneccesary 
expenditure, it could not avoid noticing that a 
considerable increase in staff was proposed. 
112. Almost one-third of the administrative posts 
were held by staff members with permanent contracts, 
and many others had signed long-term contracts. 
He feared that in such circumstances the 
principle of equitable geographical distribution was 
not fully observed. 
113. In his delegation's view the budget increase, 
amounting to more than 8%, was a considerable 
one. It was due mainly to an increase in the 

106th PLENARY MEETING 

expenditure for the Laboratory, an expansion in 
its activity and the salary increases for the staff. 
Other expenditures which his delegation regarded 
as incompatible with the aims and purposes of the 
Agency were those arising from the application of 
Agency safeguards in relation to bilateral arrangements. 
His delegation was not in principle opposed 
to such safeguards. However, expenditure resulting 
from their application should be borne by die two 
countries concerned. 

114. To conclude, the Agency, notwithstanding its 
narrow specialization, could fulfil its purpose only in 
conditions of peaceful co-existence and observance 
of the principle of non-intervention in the internal 
affairs of other States, not in conditions where one 
great Power was engaged in aggression against 
a peace-and freedom-loving people. He was deeply 
convinced that the Agency must inevitably accept, 
the view that it must adopt a clear and definite 
attitude to die question of nuclear weapons, and 
that that attitude was unambiguously expressed in 
the Statute, which laid down that atomic energy 
must be used for the welfare and benefit of mankind. 
115. Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) congratulated 
Sierra Leone, Singapore and Uganda on 
their admission to the Agency. 
116. During the past year, collaboration between 
the Agency and Spain had continued. In particular 
fellowships had been made available to the Agency, 
and had been used by students from four countries, 
and Spanish scientists and technicians had acted 
as Agency experts in various countries. His delegation 
would be glad if that collaboration could 
be extended to the scientific and technical staff 
of the Secretariat. As things stood, there was a 
tendency for particular areas and countries to have 
an excessive number of posts allotted to them. 
As for Spain, it had had only one of its scientists 
working for the Agency during the past four years. 
117. Spain had agreed to accept the application 
of the Agency's safeguards system in relation to 
the bilateral agreement which had been concluded 
with the United States of America and which was 
shortly to be applied for the first time to the 
construction and operation of two power plants 
with a total power of 613 000 kW. His country 
considered that the acceptance of safeguards, in 
relation to both bilateral and multilateral arrangements, 
constituted a first step on the part of the 
smaller countries, which agreed to accept the 
absence of reciprocity in the hope that the major 
Powers would soon be able to reach agreement 
on the universal application of safeguards to all 
nuclear installations with the aim of ensuring that 
the latter were used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. 
118. Like other delegates, he considered that the 
Agency should place less emphasis on the establishment 
and maintenance of laboratories and on the 
convening of conferences, and more on technical 
assistance in the form of experts and materials, 
technical advice to Member States in connection 
with siting evaluations and technological assessments 
of different types of nuclear power plants, studies 
on safety problems, and information and experience 
on the subject of desalination, a subject of considerable 
interest to Spain. 
119. In Spain, satisfactory progress was being made 
in connection with the construction of the first 
Spanish nuclear power station at Zorita de los 
Canes, 100 kilometers to the east of Madrid, which 
was due to go into service at die end of the coming 
year; the plant was of the PWR type and would 
have a capacity of 15 3 000 kW. In 1966, work had 
been started on the construction of a second PWR 
plant, of 460 000 kW capacity, in the upper part 
of the Ebro valley 60 kilometers from Bilbao. A 
final agreement on a third plant, of 520 000 kw, 
was due to be concluded in the next few days 
between the French and Spanish Governments; 
the station would be a joint undertaking by Electricite 
de France and four regional Catalan groups, 
one of which was mainly a State concern and the 
other three private. The agreement in question, the 
conclusion of which had been greatly facilitated by 
the collaboration between the Commissariatarenergie 
atomique (French Atomic Energy Commission) 
and the Spanish Nuclear Energy Commission, constituted 
an excellent example of international 
co-operation. There were also plans for a fourth 
power station with a capacity of 400 000 to 
500 000 kW, for which tenders would be invited 
on an international basis and which would be constructed 
on the Mediterranean coast near Valencia. 
Thus by 1970-71, Spain would have a nuclear generating 
capacity of 1 500 000 kw. 

120. Although all the contracts relating to die 
above agreements had been accompanied by research 
and development agreements between thesuppliers, 
the Spanish buyers and the Spanish Nuclear Energy 
Commission, work had also been going on in Spain 
for some time on the development of a type of 
power station that could form the basis for a second 
generation of nuclear stations. The project in 
question — the so-called DON project — was based 
on a reactor moderated with heavy water and cooled 
with organic liquid, which it was hoped to start 
building in the coming year. His delegation wished 
to take the opportunity of expressing its appreciation 
to the United States Atomic Energy Commission for 
its co-operation in connection with that project. 

121. The production and use of radioisotopes had 
continued to grow at an increasing rate. The 
number of isotope users in medicine, industry, 

 TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

agriculture, hydrology and research was now increasing 
by 20 % each year. 

122. The year had seen the establishment of the 
Institute of Nuclear Studies, the purpose of which 
was to make available, for higher education and 
research, the technical staff and resources of the 
Spanish Nuclear Energy Commission. Another 
centre, the Juan Vigon National Nuclear Energy 
Centre, now had a staff of 280 scientists and 
engineers, as well as 1000 technicians and laboratory 
and auxiliary staff. 
123. Spain was extremely interested in the problem 
of desalination. An inter-ministerial commission was 
studyingthe problem and research and development 
work was being conducted by the Spanish Nuclear 
Energy Commission. 
124. A small plant for desalination and generation 
of electricity by conventional means had come into 
service in 1965 on the island of Lanzarote. Another 
plant, designed to supply water tot the town of 
Ceuta, had gone into operation in the same year, 
and advanced studies were now proceeding in connection 
with a third, larger installation which would 
supply water to the island of Gran Canaria. In the 
future, however, desalination work would be geared 
to large-scale projects involving nuclear energy. It 
was very possible that the DON plant would be 
employed as a dual-purpose prototype, i.e. as a 
plant for desalination and the generation of electricity. 

The meeting rose at

125. ' It was obviously important, therefore, that the 
Agency should itensify its work in desalination and 
that it should serve as a forum for the interchange 
of information on the subject. 

126. Another fact of general interest was that Spain 
had now completed the final stage in the commissioning 
of an irradiated fuel reprocessing plant. 
The facility would be able to regenerate the nuclear 
fuel from Spain's four research reactors, the last 
of which had been completed in 1966 using 
exclusively Spanish technical resources. The fuel 
reprocessing plant itself had been designed and 
constructed in Spain by Spanish engineers. 
127. He also wished to mention the zero-power 
fast-reactor project known as the Coral project, 
the highly enriched uranium fuel for which would, 
it was hoped, be supplied through the Agency. 
He expressed appreciation of the Agency's cooperation 
in connection with the safety studies 
relating to the project and noted that the experience 
gained in that case clearly indicated the necessity 
of simplifying the procedures "used. At the moment 
the procedures took far too long because each project 
had to be approved in detail by the Board 
of Governors, which only met very occasionally. 
It would be useful if the Board could approve 
projects in the initial stage and thus help to avoid 
regrettable delays. 
12.55p.m. 


GC(X)/OR.107 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

7 March 1967 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 26 September 1966, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1965-66 {continued) 1-157 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Gabon 1-6 
Ceylon 7-• 15 
Indonesia 16-• 28 
Byelorussian SSR 

29-• 51 


Turkey 52-62 
Romania 

63-• 82 


China 

83-• 89 


Chile 

90-• 102 
Netherlands 103-113 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 114-123 
Switzerland 124-130 

Ghana 131-•143 
El Salvador 144-•149 
Venezuela 150-•157 

GC(X)/343. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE to review the Agency's achievements during the 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965-66 last nine years. 
[GC(X)/330, 341] (continued) 


3. Nevertheless, he would stress that the Government 
of Gabon had alsways followed with the 
1. Mr. N'GUEMA N'DONG (Gabon) extended greatest interest the Agency's activities in its various 
his Government's warmest congratulations to Ugen-fields of competence. In particular, it had noted 
da and Singapore on their admission to the Agency. that one of the Agency's main preoccupations was 
to bring the benefits of atomic energy to the de


2. He said Gabon had not been independent veloping countries. He hoped that that trend would 
at die time of the establishment of the Agency, be maintained and intensified. 
to which it had been admitted only in 1963, shortly 
after the opening-up of the Mounana uranium de-4. The African continent was destined to assume 
posit. His delegation would therefore not proceed increasing importance in both the production and 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

utilization of nuclear materials. The question might 
be asked, therefore, whether the matter of African 
representation on the Board of Governors should 
not be re-examined. 

5. Although Gabon was a producer of uranium, 
it was still only a minor consumer of that material, 
mainly in the somewhat restricted field of medical 
applications. However, Gabon would shortly approach 
the Agency with a request for the services 
of an expert to draft legal provisions relating to 
nuclear energy. Aware as it was of the Secretariat's 
activities and efficiency in that respect, Gabon was 
convinced that the assistance it received would be 
extremely valuable. 
6. The Government of Gabon fully supported 
the Agency's objectives and was happy to be able 
to take part in the joint efforts to achieve them. 
7. Mr. PEIRIS (Ceylon) said that while appreciating 
what the Agency had achieved, his delegation 
was conscious of the fact that much more 
could and should be done. It earnestly hoped 
that the Agency would find new ways of providing 
the developing countries with information and expertise 
concerning atomic science and research. 
Ceylon would support any constructive suggestion 
for the evaluation and assessment of the Agency's 
activities. 
8. His Government had noted with satisfaction 
the results which were being obtained in power 
generation and was glad to share the optimism that 
had been expressed for the future. Access to cheap 
sources of power was of increasing importance to 
the developing countries, which were struggling 
against heavy odds to improve their economies 
and the living standards of their peoples. 
9. Those countries were in the unenviable position 
of having to run at full speed merely in order 
to avoid losing ground. They were thus forced with 
an ever-increasing need for technical knowledge, 
including that relating to the use of isotopes in 
agriculture, industry and medicine. Ceylon attached 
great importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
and acknowledged the valuable help which it had 
already received from the Agency. Any move to 
hold a larger number of seminars in the developing 
countries would receive Ceylon's whole-hearted support. 
The Agency might also wish to consider the 
desirability of undertaking additional regional projects, 
particularly in agriculture and medicine, with 
provision for the free exchange of techniques and 
results. 
10. The establishment of a radioisotope centre 
at the University of Ceylon had made it possible 
to conduct courses for undergraduates takingscience 
subjects, and those courses had proved highly beneficial. 
The centre would be pleased to accept candidates 
from other countries in any study course 
which the Agency might be able to organize making 
use of the facilities of the establishment, and the 
authorities concerned had already suggested radiological 
protection and nuclear medicine as suitable 
subjects. The Agency had also been contacted regarding 
the possibility of developing the establishment 
into a regional centre for training and research. 

11. Studies already carried out indicated that 
the sterile male technique might be useful in controlling 
or eradicating Filaria, It was hoped that 
the Agency, in collaboration with WHO, would 
conduct a pilot experiment using that technique 
in Ceylon, where very suitable sites were available. 
12. His delegation realized that the Agency could 
not take the action Ceylon hoped for unless it had 
sufficient funds, and therefore noted with regret 
that the Agency's budget had, in real terms, been 
shrinking over the past three years. Ceylon had 
made as large a financial contribution as its meagre 
resources permitted and hoped that the more fortunately 
placed countries would enable the Agency 
to extend its efforts to harness nuclear energy for 
the benefit and prosperity of mankind. Ceylon 
would continue to make whatever small contribution 
it could towards furthering the Agency's aims. 
13. His delegation supported the remarks made 
by earlier speakers regarding the inadequacy of 
representation of the developing countries in the 
Secretariat, and hoped that the matter would soon 
be rectified. 
14. Regarding the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste, his delegation recognized 
the usefulness of the work done by that institution 
and noted that the Board of Governors would 
shortly be discussing the future activities and 
financing of the Centre. His Government would 
reserve its position pending the completion of that 
examination. 
15. The developing countries required an extended 
period of peace and stability if they were 
to proceed successfully with their plans for economic 
development, and they were disturbed by the fact 
that Asia had become a centre of strife and tension. 
They drew some consolation from the belief that 
extension of the Agency's activities might produce 
a corresponding reduction in the tensions and a 
lessening of the dreadful possibility of a nuclear 
holocaust. The Ceylonese Government hoped that 
the Agency would lead the nations of the world 
to the conviction that the energy of the atom 
should be applied exclusively in the interest of 
progress and prosperity. 

107th PLENARY MEETING 

16. Mr. SUDARSONO (Indonesia) remarked 
that, as the Agency was soon to embark on its 
second decade, the time was opportune to assess 
its past policies and achievements and consider 
its future aims and objectives. In commenting on 
those matters, he would make it plain that Indonesia 
was fully aware of the difficulties the Secretariat 
had to overcome in carrying out the Agency's functions 
and duties. 
17. In general, it might be said that the Agency 
had satisfactorily fulfilled the expectations and hopes 
placed in its creation, as exemplified by the aims 
set out in Article II of the Statute, although opinions 
would no doubt differ on points of detail. 
18. Undoubtedly the Agency had played a significant 
part in the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in the developing countries, 
including Indonesia, largely as a result of the willingness 
of the more advanced countries to give 
the requisite aid and assistance. However, there 
was much more that the Agency could do, not 
only through technical assistance but byway of promoting 
activities and advising on the formulation 
of programmes. The Agency's technical assistance, 
apart from its primary purpose, served to stimulate 
the growth of scientific activity, thus contributing 
to the general development of science in the developing 
countries. And it would be tragic if, in assessing 
the effectiveness of technical assistance, 
intangible benefits of that kind were not given due 
weight. 
19. The recent trend towards biennial programming, 
regional co-operation and integration of the 
Agency's programmes within the general development 
programmes of the recipient countries was 
most welcome, and it was to be hoped it would 
be intensified. 
20. Indonesia would welcome comments by the 
Agency on its atomic programme. At the moment 
it was engaged in reviewing plans and redrafting 
programmes to bring atomic energy development 
into step with die general economic development 
plans; and advice from Agency experts could be 
valuable in that work. Incidentally, his country 
would be glad to pass on information to other 
developing countries on the lessons learnt from 
its past experience in matters relating to the administration 
and execution of its programme. 
21. It was only through the provision of technical 
assistance to the developing countries that the 
Agency could truly achieve its objectives, with the 
emphasis on accelerating and enlarging the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world, and on allocating 
resources so as to bring the greatest possible general 
benefit to all areas of the world. To that 
end, a bigger proportion of the funds should be 
allocated in the future to technical assistance. 

22. His country also welcomed the emphasis in 
the Agency's work on symposia and panel meetings 
on nuclear power. The ever-increasing number of 
orders being placed for nuclear power plants was 
evidence that that form of electric power generation 
was now competitive and that the nuclear industry 
had a bright future before it. Although a petroleumexporting 
country, Indonesia was interested in 
nuclear power with a view to utilizing its thorium 
deposits and because of the contribution a nuclear 
power programme would make to its scientific 
capability and industrial progress. It planned to 
follow the example of other developing countries 
whose nuclear power programmes had been conductive 
to scientific development and self-reliance 
in die peaceful applications of atomic energy, and 
looked forward to active help in that task from 
the Agency. 
23. Much attention had been devoted in recent 
years to the question of the Agency's safeguards. 
According to Article II of the Statute, the Agency's 
safeguards should in reality apply only to facilities 
set up with assistance from the Agency. But recently 
the Agency had been burdened more and more with 
the task of safeguards inspection of reactors constructed 
with no Agency assistance whatsoever. 
There was thus a danger of neglecting the principal 
objective to which he had already drawn attention. 
Indonesia was not opposed to safeguards in principle; 
it was merely against their indiscriminate 
application. As a signatory, it hoped diat the 
Moscow test ban treaty could be extended to cover 
underground tests and further that the United 
Nations conference on nuclear disarmament would 
succeed in reaching a satisfactory agreement. 
24. Indonesia was still in the process of development, 
and attention was primarily devoted to improving 
living standards and advancing the wellbeing 
of the people. Therefore it was not in a po.
sition, 
in common with other developing countries, 
to spend vast sums of money on non-economic 
projects or programmes. The funds at the Agency's 
disposal were very limited and greater allocations 
should be made for technical assistance, at the 
expense of activities not directly related to the 
developing countries' needs. 

25. His delegation supported the call for a review 
of some aspects of the Agency's activities. It would 
appeal to Member States to contribute more to the 
General Fund. His Government would contribute 
for 1967 as in previous years. However, it would 
suggest that Member States give consideration to 
a basic change in the financing of technical assistance. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

26. His delegation also placed great importance 
on improved representation in the Secretariat of 
nationals from the developing countries. The experience 
gained would be invaluable later to the 
respective national authorities. 
27. Research contracts should be awarded exclusively 
to developing countries. There was no 
reason why an advanced country with an established 
research and development programme in atomic 
energy should be allowed recourse to the Agency's 
limited resources. In general, what he was advocting 
was that all activities should be directed to the 
needs of the developing countries in accordance 
with the Agency's objectives. 
28. In conclusion, he welcomed Singapore and 
Uganda as new Members of the Agency; the beneficial 
uses of atomic energy should be available to 
all countries of the world. 
29. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said that the fact that the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy had recently begun to take more 
definite shape and the technical achievements in 
that field had become universally recognized was 
an excellent portent for the tenth (anniversary) 
session of the Agency's General Conference. 
30. At the same time, international co-operation, 
while contributing enormously to technical progress, 
could not develop if political questions were ignored. 
31. The present international climate in which 
the Conference was working was burdened by a 
number of circumstances. As a result of the war 
against the Vietnamese people a tense situation, 
endangering international security, was developing. 
That war, in which the most barbarous means 
of human destruction were used, was a challenge 
to the whole of mankind. By leading to a serious 
aggravation of the international climate, it was 
preventing the consolidation of international cooperation, 
for the sake of which the Agency had 
been set up ten years previously. 
32. The situation in Europe also aroused grave 
concern among all to whom international peace 
and security were dear. The present policies of 
the ruling circles of Western Germany posed a 
direct threat to peace in Europe and the security 
of the European nations. Those circles, which were 
quite unconcerned about the vital interests of the 
German people itself, demanded the revision of 
the post-war frontiers in Europe and obstinately 
sought access for the Federal Republic of Germany 
to the nuclear weapons of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization. In Western Germany itself the establishment 
of a scientific and industrial infrastructure, 
which at a given moment might become 
the basis for the manufacture of its own nuclear 
weapons, was being speeded up. 

33. The peoples of Europe, including the Byelorussian 
people, on whom during the Second World 
War German militarism and fascism had inflicted 
incalculable suffering and caused the death of millions 
of its sons and daughters, could not view with unconcern 
the dangerous events taking place in Western 
Germany. 
34. The tenth session of the Agency's General 
Conference was an opportunity for summing up 
the Agency's activities not only for the past year 
but also over the whole decade of its existence. 
The Byelorussin SSR, being one of the founder 
States of the Agency, looked back with satisfaction 
on the past decade. It had been a period of rapid 
development in atomic science and technology, 
particularly nuclear power. Whereas in 1956 the 
first nuclear power plants in the world had only 
been starting to operate, at the present time there 
were already several score of such plants, with a 
total capacity expressed in millions of kilowatts. 
Whereas ten years previously competitive nuclear 
power had been only a hope, the desirability of 
making wide use of nuclear power plants was now 
recognized. 
35. It was pleasant for him, as a person who 
had devoted twenty years of his life to the development 
of nuclear power, to note such a speedy 
development in that new branch of science, which 
was providing mankind with the basis for technical 
progress. 
36. The Agency's activities had gready contributed 
to that speedy development. In the interesting 
lectures delivered during the present session on 
23 September the representatives of scientific and 
industrial bodies had expressed their complete confidence 
in the emergence of nuclear power as an 
economic proposition. 
37. In other sectors too die peaceful uses of 
atomic energy were developing at an accelerated 
pace. In many countries of the world radioisotopes 
were being widely used. Scientific knowledge of 
the atomic nucleus had also made great headway. 
38. Obviously progress in nuclear science and 
technology during the past ten years would have 
been considerably greater if atomic energy had 
been used solely for peaceful purposes, to further 
human progress. Unfortunately, however, atomic 
energy continued to be a factor in building up 
military potential, which could not but hold back 
the development of peaceful branches of atomic 
science and technology. General and complete disarmament, 
the banning of nuclear weapons, their 
manufacture and use, and the destruction of existing 

107th PLENARY MEETING 

stockpiles of nuclear weapons were not only the 
prime condition for the maintenance and consolidation 
of peace on earth, but could also become an 
important stimulus to the rapid development of 
atomic science and technology for peaceful purposes. 
Therefore all scientists, and the Agency itself, were 
vitally concerned with the achievement of nuclear 
disarmament. In that connection, he noted with 
regret that the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament 
in Geneva, which had been instructed 
by the General Assembly of die United Nations 
to seek ways of achieving agreement in the field 
of nuclear disarmament, had still been unable to 
reach agreement. 

39- During die ten years which had elapsed since 
the Agency was set up, tme Byelorussian SSR had 
also achieved no little success in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. Since 1962 it had been successfully 
operating an IRT-2000 reactor, with which 
extensive research was being carried out, In 1965 
a second reactor had been started up, the "Roza" 
critical assembly, designed for research in reactor 
physics. 

40. A radiochemical laboratory and gammairradiation 
plant were operating successfully in the 
Byelorussian atomic centre. With the help of those 
facilities research was being conducted in radiochemical 
processes, and technological methods for 
the production of new materials were being devised. 
The radiochemical treatment of timber apparently 
offered particularly good prospects. 
41. The Nuclear Power Institute of the Academy 
of Sciences of the Byelorussian SSR was the leading 
establishment in his country dealing with problems 
of nuclear power, reactor construction and nuclear 
research. It designed power reactors and conducted 
research in nuclear reactor physics with a critical 
assembly. 
42. A number of other institutes of the Byelorussian 
Academy of Sciences were engaged in various 
types of research in conjunction with the Nuclear 
Power Institute. For example, research was being 
done with a reactor on the biological effect of 
intermediate neutrons on the heredity of microorganisms. 
43. The activities of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency during the past decade showed 
that on the whole it was fulfilling its statutory 
functions. The Agency promoted exchanges of information 
on problems concerning the peaceful 
use of atomic energy, provided Member States 
with technical assistance in the form of experts 
and equipment and helped in training their scientists, 
and held scientific conferences, symposia and 
seminars on various problems of nuclear science 
and technology. The technical literature that was 
published by the Agency was of great value for 
a large number of specialists. The Directories of 
Nuclear Reactors issued by die Agency l) were very 
important since they made it possible to draw on 
the experience gained in various countries. 

44. He hoped those aspects of the Agency's 
activities would continue to develop and that the 
symposia and technical meetings on long-term trends 
in nuclear power and reactor physics would become 
a regular channel for exchanging experience between 
specialists of various countries. In his delegation's 
opinion, the Agency in its scientific information 
activities should focus attention on die problems 
of nuclear power as the most important of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. In that connection, 
the Byelorussion delegation supported the Agency's 
scientific conferences on reactor problems which 
were scheduled for 1967-68. 
4 5. The international training courses and schools 
organized by the Agency were another valuable 
means of exchanging information and improving 
the training of scientists and should be further 
developed. Byelorussian scientists had on more 
than one occasion taken part in such activities and 
highly appreciated their usefulness. 

46. There were however still some shortcomings 
in the Agency's work. 
47. He noted with regret the fact that, despite 
the spirit and letter of its Statute, the Agency had 
not yet become a universal international organization 
in die field of die peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
A number of socialist countries, whose successes 
in atomic science and technology were widely known, 
were not permitted to join the Agency for political 
reasons. Among such countries was the German 
Democratic Republic, whose Government had recendy 
addressed animportantmessagetotheAgency's 
General Conference 2). The delegation of the Byelorussian 
SSR supported the statement by the Government 
of the German Democratic Republic and, like 
the delegations of other countries, urgently requested 
the President to inform the delegates at the General 
Conference of its contents. 
48. His delegation had serious observations to 
make regarding the staffing policy of the Agency's 
Secretariat. It considered that the distribution of 
posts in the Secretariat was not carried out entirely 
fairly. Some countries had too many posts, extremely 
influential and important ones, while other countries 
either were not represented in the Secretariat or 
had an insufficient number of posts. The Byelorussian 
SSR was one such country. 
1) STI/PUB/9, 22, 53and73. 
2) See document GC(X)/INF/91. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

49. His delegation was concerned at the continuing 
growth of the Agency's Regular Budget, 
which was already approximately $10 million. He 
considered that a definite ceiling for the Agency's 
administrative expenses should be set. 
50. In conclusion, he declared his delegation's 
full support for the important initiative taken by 
the delegation of the Polish People's Republic 3) 
and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic4) in expressing 
readiness to place their atomic installations 
under Agency safeguards provided that the Federal 
Republic of Germany did the same. That initiative, 
like the initiative of the German Democratic 
Republic, was an important new step towards 
extending the application of the Agency's safeguards. 
51. He wished to express his confidence that 
the work on the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
would develop successfully on the basis of international 
c-operation and that the Agency would 
concentrate all its efforts on the fulfilment of the 
tasks which it was set under its Statute. He also 
wished to congratulate the new Members of the 
Agency, Uganda and Singapore. 
52. Mr. TURAGAY(Turkey)saidthathisGovernment 
welcomed the increase in the number of 
Member States from 96 to 98. 
53. As the international authority dealing with 
the greatest source of power that mankind had 
ever possessed, the Agency occupied a. unique position 
in the field of international co-operation. 
By directing nuclear energy and techniques to productive 
uses it could play a great role in narrowing 
the gap between advanced and developing countries. 
It also had an increasing duty to ensure that the 
immense power of nuclear energy was used solely 
for peaceful purposes. 
54. The world had reached a stage where technical 
development could make immense contributions 
to economic growth, but much of the progress 
achieved in that development had of course taken 
place in the advanced countries, thanks to the 
huge financial resources on which they could draw. 
The Agency should direct its main efforts to ensuring 
that the whole of mankind benefited from 
such development, by promoting the spread of the 
accumulated technical knowledge and know-how 
from the advanced regions to the less favoured 
ones. 
55- The handicaps of the developing countries 
included low production and scarcity of power, 
which weakened their efforts to convert their economy 
from a predominantly agricultural basis to 

3) GC(X)/OR.103, para. 56. 
4 ) GC(X)/ OR. 104, para. 14. 

an industrial one. That, plus the rapidly expanding 
world-wide demand for power, made it essential 
for the Agency to put more emphasis on nuclear 
power and power reactors. Much more work was 
needed on the evaluation of nuclear power costs, 

the development of reactor technology and the 
co-ordination of activities to enable Member States 
to choose the most suitable reactor for their purposes. 
At the same time the Agency should be 
able to play a more effective role in meeting the 
nuclear fuel requirements of Member States and 
helping them to develop their own nuclear resources, 
in compliance with Article XI of the Statute. It 
was the sincere wish of his Government that the 
Agency should progress towards fulfilment of one 
of its original aims, that of supplying nuclear fuels; 
that could of course be achieved only by building 
up a stock of such fuels. 

56. One of the Agency's greatest future responsibilities 
would consist in protecting mankind from 
the dangers inherent in atomic energy. Even the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy were accomapnied 
by the accumulation of potentially destructive products, 
the control of which presented a serious 
problem. Also, if agreement were reached on disarmament, 
the Agency should be ready to take over 
control responsibilities in that field as well. In the 
meantime it could serve as a registration centre, 
by recording all transfers of nuclear materials. 
5 7. His Government fully supported the Agency's 
efforts to improve its safeguards system, especially 
by extending the system to cover power reactors 
producing more than 100 MW(e) and reprocessing 
plants. 
58. On the whole, technical assistance had constituted 
one of the more positive aspects of the 
Agency's work, in spite of the limited funds at 
its disposal. Integrated programming with certain 
well-defined objectives, together with efforts to 
simplify the legal aspects of technical assistance, 
had been important steps forward. On the other 
hand it was regrettable that, in spite of the needs 
of the developing countries, there had been a 
further decline in the number of fellowships awarded. 
That had been due, to a large extent, to delays 
in selecting host countries and, in some cases, 
to the shortness of the periods for which fellowships 
were offered. 
59- Turkey was concentrating its efforts on research, 
on the application of isotopes in medicine 
and agriculture, and on training. However, an Agency 
mission which had visited Turkey in 1965 had 
concluded that power generation would have to 
be increased by at least 500 MW from 1975 onwards, 
and that a detailed system-planning study 
should be started by 1970 to determine the role 
of nuclear power stations in the period 1975-80. 


107th PLENARY MEETING 

60. He expressed his country's gratitude for the 
assistance it had received and voiced the hope 
that such assistance would continue and would be 
intensified. Turkey, for its part, had continued to 
work for the attainment of the Agency's objectives, 
in particular by acting as host to a number of 
meetings. An Agency study group meeting on developments 
in radiation techniques has been held 
at Istanbul in November 1965 and a panel meeting 
on research co-ordination on the treatment of aerosol 
and volatilization products during waste processing 
operations was to be held there late in 1966. In 
addition, a regional course on the use of isotopes 
in hydrology* would take place at Ankara in 1967. 
61. The Turkish Government believed that a 
model agreement based on the revised safeguards 
system and prepared by the Agency would, as 
a standardized text, both serve as a guide for 
Member States and help the Agency in applying 
safeguards agreements. 
62. In conclusion, he wished to convey his Government's 
sincere good wishes for the success of the 
tenth session of the General Conference. 
63. Mr. PELE (Romania) said the Agency was 
making great strides towards achieving effective 
international co-operation in a field of major importance 
for the future of mankind. It was efficiently 
tackling the various tasks with which it was faced, 
such as the training of staff, the practical application 
of new nuclear techniques, the provision oftechnical 
assistance to developing countries, etc. 
64. The Romanian delegation sincerely hoped 
the Agency would do its best to intensify technical 
and scientific co-operation among all the countries 
of the world. It could do that both by spreading 
its experience in the nuclear field among Member 
States and by working out basic studies, of general 
interest, on all problems connected with the utilization 
of atomic energy. Romania would use every 
means at its disposal to support the Agency's efforts 
to further the common interests of all Member 
States. 
65. The work of the'tenth regular session of 
the General Conference was proceeding under conditions 
which demonstrated the necessity to eliminate 
the consequences of the cold war and to establish 
relations between all States based on the principles 
of national independence and sovereignty, equality 
of rights and non-interference in internal affairs. 
Romania was devoted to the cause of peace and 
international collaboration and was making its contribution 
towards restoring an atmosphere of cooperation 
in Europe and in the entire world. 
66. His country recognized the inalienable right 
of every people to determine its own destiny, and 
therefore identified itself fully with the people of 
Viet-Nam in its struggle for freedom and national 
independence. In that spirit the Government of 
Romania resolutely called for the immediate cessation 
of bombing in the Democratic Republic of 
Viet-Nam and the termination of the war of agression 
in South Viet-Nam, for withdrawal of all 
American military forces and foreign troops from 
that part of Viet-Nam, for the application of the 
Geneva Agreements and for respect for the right 
of the Vietnamese people to choose its own destiny. 

67. Romania also considered that universality 
was an essential element in the Agency's structure. 
It could not remain indifferent to the fact that the 
People's Republic of China, a nuclear Power, was 
excluded from its rightful place in the Agency. 
Such an abnormal situation should be corrected 
as soon as possible. 
68. The Romanian delegation warmly congratulated 
Uganda and Singapore on their admission 
to the Agency; it was convinced that those two 
countries would contribute to the cause of international 
co-operation in the Agency's field of 
activity. 
69. The Agency had shown itself to be an organization 
of value to its Member States. On the 
present occasion also, the report of the Board of 
Governors [GC(X)/330 and 341] reflected an improvement 
in the Agency's work. The Agency was 
devoting constant attention to the question of nuclear 
power in accordance with suggestions made in 
previous years by many delegations, including that 
of Romania. The Agency was making a great effort 
to disseminate scientific, technical and economic 
information of high quality by means of conferences, 
courses, monographs and so on. In that connection, 
special mention should be made of the reports 
on the economic and technical aspects of nuclear 
power, the panel of experts on processing of lowgrade 
uranium ores, the publication of comprehensive 
information regarding reactors, the development 
of methods for technical and economic calculations, 
and the publication of data on the construction 
and operation of reactors in Canada, Sweden, the 
United Kingdom and the United States. 
70. In the Agency's Programme for 1967-68 5) 
he particularly welcomed the steps to be taken in 
connection with the development of nuclear power, 
the studies to be carried out on the characteristics 
of the various components of a nuclear power 
station and the proposed meeting on the technical 
and economic aspects of nuclear power stations. 
71. The training of staff should constitute one 
of the Agency's main preoccupations. The developing 
5) GC(X)/332. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

countries needed above all specialists who could 
make efficient use of technical assistance. 

72. That problem could only be solved on a 
long-term basis and required still more careful 
attention. As an aid to fellows it would be useful 
if more information were available on training 
centres and on the facilities which they offered, 
the curricula of studies and advanced training, the 
basic qualifications required, the length of the 
courses and so on. The Romanian delegation was 
submitting a draft resolution jointly with Bulgaria, 
India, Italy, Mexico, the United Arab Republic 
and Yugoslavia, with the support of many other 
States, in connection with the important problem 
of education and training 6). 
73. The Agency's policy of offering fellowships 
had had positive results in 1965-66, but it would 
be better if more Type II fellowships and more 
travelling fellowships were available. 
74. Gratifying results were accruing from the 
co-operation between FAO and the Agency, with 
their joint research programmes, and his delegation 
hoped that even more efficient collaboration would 
be established with WHO and UNESCO. 
75. The Trieste Centre had proved its usefulness, 
and the Agency and UNESCO should therefore 
continue supporting the Centre, whose work 
was of high scientific value. 
76. The Romanian delegation was pleased to 
note that every year the Agency developed and 
improved its technical and scientific information 
activities. 
77. Continuous improvement could be noted in 
the programme of scientific meetings, which were 
devoted to sub j ects of maj or imp ortance. The Agency's 
publications were of a high standard, from the 
point of view both of content and presentation. 
The Agency was also to be congratulated on its 
efforts to keep Member States informed of the 
latest scientific works published by various laboratories, 
thereby facilitating a useful exchange of 
scientific data. 
78. Mention should also be made of the work 
done in connection with the development of radiological 
health and safety standards, the transport 
of radioactive materials (of great use to national 
authorities) and radioactive waste disposal. 
79- He then drew the Conference's attention to 
various aspects of Romania's nuclear programme. 
In Romania the applications of nuclear physics 
and technology were proceeding satisfactorily in 

6) Subsequently issued as document GC(X)/COM.l/99. 

various fields of activity ranging from pure research 
to research in medicine, agriculture, prospecting, 
the chemical industry, metallurgy, etc. The results 
obtained had been of substantial economic benefit 
to the country. 

80. The Romanian nuclear power programme 
provided for the installation by 1975 of several 
nuclear power stations having a total capacity of 
about 1000 MW(e). Romania was hoping for fruitful 
co-operation with the Agency, especially in connection 
with the training of experts and various 
technical and economic problems. 
81. Mindful of the Agency's needs, the Romanian 
Government had decided to present it with six 
complete electronic radiation counting sets to a 
value of some $10 000. That gift was additional 
to the offer of 15 short- and long-term fellowships 
which had already been announced. 
82. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency's 
second decade would open with attainment of the 
objectives which had been set, in an international 
atmosphere compatible with fruitful co-operation 
between all nations, large and small, in the interests 
of universal progress, peace and happiness. 
83. Mr. YEN (China) said he found it most 
inspiring to take part, for the first time, in the work 
of a body dedicated to the advancement of science 
for world peace. 
84. As a founder member of the Agency his 
country was a most staunch supporter of the high 
principles enshrined in its Statute. At the moment 
it possessed only one research reactor but before 
long several power reactors would be in operation 
to meet the ever-growing demand for electric power. 
Extensive work had been done in using isotopes 
and radiation sources in medicine and agriculture 
and a start had also been made in industrial applications 
of radioisotopes. Development plans, he 
would stress, were entirely related to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
85. International co-operation was a prerequisite 
for full achievement of the Agency's objectives. 
The partial test ban treaty and the Agency's safeguards 
system were specific steps towards that 
co-operation. His country was a signatory to the 
test ban treaty and also had entered into a trilateral 
agreement with the Agency and die United States 
Government, requiring it, inter alia, to adhere faithfully 
to the safeguards system. It would thus be 
seen that his country had done its utmost in the 
interest of international co-operation for wold peace; 
and it was ready to support any future action by 
the Agency intended to make it even more difficult 
for atomic energy to be used for other than peaceful 
purposes. 

107th PLENARY MEETING 

86. The Agency had an important part to play 
in promoting the welfare of mankind. Nuclear energy 
would meet many of the urgent needs of the world 
to-day for electric power, and would do so, to an 
even greater extent, in the future. The Agency's 
major responsibility was to map out a technical 
assistance programme designed to improve living 
standards, particularly in the developing countries. 
He was glad to note that the Programme for 
1967-68 made provision for technical assistance 
in general training, the application of radioisotopes 
and radiation sources in medicine, agriculture, food 
preservation and health, and nuclear power. 
87. It was on the development of nuclear power 
that the future of the developing countries would 
hang. The demand for power was a general measure 
of a country's prosperity and material well-being, 
and the Agency should provide technical assistance 
designed to develop either conventional or nuclear 
power - depending on which was the more economic wherever 
needed. 
88. With its research reactor, his country was 
producing 15 different isotopes in quantities sufficient 
to meet domestic demands for medical and 
agricultural purposes. Over the past few years, its 
power requirements had grown by about 14% a 
year on the average. A feasibility survey had already 
been completed and it was likely that work on 
the construction of the first nuclear power plant 
would begin around 1970. His Government wished 
to express its thanks to the Agency for the help 
given in that project. It was also grateful for help 
received in respect of other projects and for the 
research contracts awarded in connection with the 
mutation and uptake of labelled fertilizers and 
hot-atom chemistry, which were producing significant 
results. 
89. In conclusion, his delegation would thank 
the Austrian Government for the hospitality and 
facilities extended to the Conference. 
90. Mr. SANTA CRUZ (Chile) expressed, on 
behalf of his Government, great satisfaction with 
the Agency's important achievements. The steady 
growth in its membership was unmistakable proof 
of the confidence it inspired and of increasing 
world-wide awareness of its significance. He wished 
to congratulate Uganda and Singapore on joining 
the Agency. The fact that Chile approved of what 
had been accomplished did not mean, however, 
that there should be no changes in the general 
policy of the Agency, or in its structure and the 
nature of its operations. On the contrary, the 
Chilean delegation was convinced that the time 
had come for a thorough review of the Agency's 
activities with a view to adapting it more fully 
to the conditions and requirements of the world 
to-day and helping it to fulfil its objectives more 
satisfactorily. 

91. It had never occurred to those who had 
conceived the idea of setting up the Agency that 
it should have the responsibility of carrying on 
the large-scale research required for discovering 
new and peaceful uses of atomic energy or of 
devising new techniques for its utilization. Those 
tasks could be performed only with enormous financial 
resources, which were available only to a few 
countries, and - in many cases - either in conjunction 
with or as a by-product of military projects. 
The main function of the Agency, whose resources 
were very modest, should be to help less favoured 
countries to acquire the technology and facilities 
necessary for using atomic energy to promote their 
economic and social development. 
92. Viewing the situation in that light, one could 
only come to the conclusion that the Agency was 
not really fulfilling its main objective, and that 
was not the fault of the Secretariat but of the 
Member States, which werenotmakingthenecessary 
financial resources available and which had permitted 
the Agency's primary task to be rendered 
ineffectual. What were $100 000, or even the 
$12 million of the Agency's total budget, compared 
with the thousands of millions of dollars which 
the Great Powers were spending every year on 
nuclear weapons? 

93. Implicit in the United States proposal which 
had given rise to the Agency and which had received 
such widespread acceptance on the part of 
other Governments had been the idea of some 
kind of compensation for nations outside the group 
of nuclear Powers. That compensation would consist 
in the provision of substantial assistance in 
matters relating to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
94. Also implicit in the proposal had been the 
idea of a ratio between what was invested in atomic 
energy for destructive purposes and the sums that 
would be allocated for using that energy to improve 
the living conditions of people in developing regions, 
The less privileged countries needed an intensification 
of the Agency's work in disseminating 
information on scientific advances in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. They needed its help in 
the training of physicists and physicians; they needed 
it to lend technical assistance in the building of 
reactors and of nuclear power stations and desalination 
plants. Chile and other developing countries 
had received extensive and effective help from the 
Agency in all those fields, but the organization 
did not have sufficient funds to give such assistance 
on an adequate scale. 
95. It could be argued that the Agency was not 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

the only source of assistance and that help might 
be obtained on a multilateral or bilateral basis 
under other programmes. It shouldnotbeforgotten, 
however, that for many countries aid from an international 
organization could not be replaced by a 
different type of aid, especially as far as atomic 
energy was concerned. 

96. Another important aspect of the Agency's 
activities was safeguards. No one could fail to 
recognize the importance of that function, and it 
was gratifying that more and more reactors were 
being placed under the Agency's safeguards system 
and that there was an increasing tendency for the 
administration of safeguards in relation to bilateral 
arrangements to be transferred to it as well. 
97. The fact that the Agency was taking a steadily 
increasing part in the supervision of atomic energy 
installations was an encouraging development and 
a further step towards what should be the common 
goal, namely, that all such installations, in every 
country of the world, should be under the supervision 
of the Agency. He realized, of course, that 
that goal could not be achieved except under a 
general disarmament agreement, but any advance 
in that direction was a contribution to mutual 
understanding. For that reason, full support should 
be given to the suggestion of the delegate of 
Norway that States should be encouraged to submit 
their present and future peaceful activities in the 
field of atomic energy to safeguards on a unilateral 
basis 7). 
98. On the subject of safeguards, he wished 
to refer to the plan for setting up a permanent 
denuclearized zone in Latin America. The delegate 
of Mexico had rightly pointed out that such a 
Latin American effort could not conceivably be 
successful unless it had the forthright and determined 
co-operation of the international community 
in general and unless the agreement on denuclearization 
was accompanied by suitable international 
controls8). 
99. The Governments which had participated 
in the preliminary discussions had already placed 
on record their wish that the Agency should take 
over the function of control and apply its safeguards 
system in the denuclearized zone. The Chilean 
delegation agreed with the statement of the delegate 
of Mexico that it was necessary that the Board 
of Governors, at its first meeting in 1967, should 
have at its disposal sufficient information to enable 
the Agency to be able to draw up agreements 
for co-operation in the application of its safeguards 
7) GC(X)/OR.104, para. 87. 

8) GC(X)/OR.103, para. 74. 

system under the treaty on the denuclearization 
of Latin America 9). 

100. Doubtless, one of the best ways of providing 
the Board with extensive information would be 
for the Director General to send an observer to 
the next meeting of the Preparatory Commission, 
to be held in January 1967. The Director General 
should have full authorization to take such a step 
and the Chilean delegation was confident that he 
would not fail to take that action. 
101. On the subject of emergency assistance in 
the event of a radiation accident, Chile hoped that 
the Board, before the next session of the General 
Conference, would reach agreement on and give 
its approval to a draft agreement which would 
be satisfactory to all parties. His delegation trusted 
that account would be taken of its views on liability 
for damage which occurred, not as a direct result 
of an accident, but in connection with die provision 
of emergency assistance in the event of a nuclear 
accident. 

102. In conclusion, he wished to express his delegation's 
gratitude to the Government of Austria, 
since the support of the host Government was 
an important factor in the satisfactory discharge 
of the Agency's tasks. 
103. Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands) said that 
the present session of the General Conference 
marked the opening of the final chapter of the first 
decade of the Agency's existence. While such an 
occasion was an important milestone for any international 
organization, he thought there were ample 
reasons to celebrate that happy event with more 
than usual satisfaction in the Agency's case. 
104. In the first place it should be recalled that 
the inception of the Agency had required lengthy 
negotiations, largely no doubt because both the 
nature and the objectives of the Agency differed 
considerably from those of other United Nations 
bodies. In fact, the setting up of an organization 
to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
as a member of the United Nations family had 
represented a bold venture into new and unknown 
fields of international co-operation. The Agency 
had thus been handicapped in the years of its 
infancy, not only by the ordinary teething troubles, 
but also because of the problems and controversies 
arising from the unique and unprecedented functions 
assigned to it. 
105. The main objectives of the Agency were 
twofold, on the one hand "to promote", and on 
the other "to restrain". It was a cause for con9) 
Ibid., para. 75 


107lh PLENARY MEETING 

siderable satisfaction that, in spite of the difficulties 
he had just mentioned, the Agency had now 
reached a degree of maturity which enabled it to 
focus its activities constructively on the simultaneous 
attainment of both those objectives. Under both 
heads, the Agency was now engaged in a wide 
range of activities, so that it was more than ever 
important to have proper co-ordination in drawing 
up and in implementing the Agency's programme. 

106. That problem had several aspects, both internal 
and external. As to the first, it could not 
be denied that the Director General's efforts had 
yielded notable results, in streamlining the structure 
and the activities of the Secretariat in order to 
avoid overlapping and inefficient utilization of personnel. 
As to the external aspects, his delegation 
welcomed the fact that co-ordination of the Agency's 
activities with those of other organizations had 
been considerably intensified. It was clear that one 
of the main problems was the co-ordination of 
the Agency's technical assistance programme with 
assistance provided by the United Nations Development 
Programme, by other organizations or under 
bilateral agreements. He noted with satisfaction 
that the Secretariat was earnestly endeavouring to 
improve its programming procedures by adopting 
a policy of so-called "integrated programming". He 
was convinced that could not fail to be beneficial, 
provided Member States requesting technical assistance 
co-operated with the Agency by adopting 
the same principles of integrated programming on 
a national level. Similarly, the understanding and 
active co-operation of Member States would greatly 
facilitate the Agency's efforts to concentrate its 
activities on a number of priority areas of especial 
interest to developing countries, bringing its programme, 
as far as practicable, into line with the 
recommendations of the United Nations Advisory 
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology 
to Development. 
107. However satisfying those and other developments 
might be, they did not alter the fact that, 
from the very beginning, the Agency had laboured 
under a lack of adequate financial means. With 
rising costs, the situation was now such that the 
Secretariat was forced to admit that it could do 
no better than "to make an optimum use of diminishing 
resources". Quite apart from the need 
for economy, co-ordination and concentration of 
effort, it was imperative, in view of the rapidly 
increasing number of requests for assistance, to 
put the Agency on a sounder financial basis. In 
his view, that might well prove to be one of the 
matters of special concern for the Board and the 
General Conference in the next few years. In that 
connection it would be appropriate for the Board 
also to consider realistically how far the Agency 
could go in supporting regional projects for the 
establishment and maintenance of training centres 
and the like. 

108. As to the "restraining" or safeguarding functions 
of the Agency, he expressed his delegation's 
deep satisfaction that the Safeguards System 
(1965)10) had recently been provisionally extended 
to materials in chemical reprocessing plants. The 
process of transferring to the Agency responsibility 
for the administration of safeguards in relation 
to bilateral arrangements was perceptibly gaining 
momentum. Moreover, several large nuclear facilities 
had already been, or would be, put under 
the Agency's control unilaterally. That offered the 
Agency's inspectorate a unique opportunity to gain 
administrative and technical experience which 
would prove valuable if ever the Agency were called 
upon to play an auxiliary role, in accordance with 
Article III.B.l of the Statute, "in conformity with 
policies of the United Nations furthering the establishment 
of safeguarded world-wide disarmament". 
109 • He hoped that in future more emphasis would 
also be placed on the Agency's custodial functions, 
embodied in Article XII.A.5 of the Statute, and, 
as a logical consequence, on the supply of nuclear 
materials, as provided for in Article IX. 

110. The suggestion that had been made as to 
how the safeguards transfer procedures in relation 
to bilateral arrangements could be simplified11) 
might well be further considered by the Board. 
111. As regards the proposal for unilateral submission 
of peaceful nuclear activities to Agency 
safeguards, he would expect that in view of its 
political overtones the full implications of that 
proposal would be further clarified by the sponsors 
in the proper place and context. 
112. Certainly the Agency had shown a remarkable 
capability to adapt itself to a changing pattern 
of technical and political factors, which it had been 
impossible for the drafters of the Statute to foresee. 
In his view the present session had brought to 
light a growing consensus about the Agency's future 
objectives. If that trend continued, ways and means 
could undoubtedly be found to overcome such 
deficiencies as were still inhibiting the Agency's 
forward march. 
113. In conclusion he thanked the Director General 
and his staff for the excellent work in which he 
had been privileged to share while representing 
his country on the Board. The efficiency of its 
staff would be a valuable asset to the Agency in 
its future work. 
10) INFCIRC/66. 
11) GC(X)/OR. 103, paras. 44 and 45. 



TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

114. Mr. MASSANGU (Democratic Republic of 
the Congo) remarked that the Agency had laid 
down roots and was now one of the most important 
organizations in the United Nations family. Since 
1957 the Agency had devoted itself to its task of 
promoting and facilitating in its Member States 
research to further the utilization of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes. Its programme was ambitious, 
but already, it must be recognized, excellent work 
had been done. In his opening address12), the 
Director General had drawn attention to the achievements 
the Agency might lay claim to - achievements 
made possible only through the prevailing spirit 
of co-operation and understanding which was a 
cause of envy to many, for the Agency had provided 
a noteworthy example of what could be accomplished 
by true international collaboration. 
115. Undoubtedly, the safeguards system figured 
among the most notable of the results obtained 
by the Agency. For the developing countries, the 
control exercised over fissionable materials was 
in principle a matter for satisfaction, but control 
was applied mainly to advanced countries with 
large power reactors. In that connection, it was 
to be hoped that, in the event of the Agency's 
deciding that the reactor owners should pay the 
cost of inspection, the inspection of research reactors 
would continue to be free of charge. 
116. Technical assistance represented another positive 
aspect of the Agency's work. All were aware 
that the resources available were inadequate to enable 
the Agency to meet all requests; yet when changes 
in the budget were proposed, invariably the purpose 
was to increase staff salaries and effect saving on 
technical assistance. It was to be regretted that 
the case was never the other way round. Another 
matter the Agency had to take into account was 
the administrative difficulties experienced in the 
developing countries; sufficient time mustbe allowed 
for files to be circulated among Government departments. 
117. The Congo was particularly grateful to the 
Agency for the recently signed agreement under 
which, as a result of assistance from the United 
States, it would be able to convert its TRIGA 
Mark I reactor into a TRIGA Mark II model of 
250 kW. His country was also placing great hopes 
in the three or four Agency experts who were 
being assigned to Kinshasa to train qualified nationals 
and take part in the regional course to 
be organized with the Agency's assistance in 
November 1966. 
118. Having stressed the Agency's positive achievements, 
he would draw attention to the many 
12) GC(X)/OR.101, paras. 28 to 54. 

problems still remaining; in particular, there was 
the question of the revision of the Statute. The 
Statute still showed too little of the flexibility, 
streamlining and realism that marked the statutes 
of older organizations. It was time Member States 
realized the inadequacies, not to say errors, it 
presented. His Government had made suggestions 
for a number of amendments, only one of which 
had been submitted officially. 

119- Most delegations were apparently in favour 
of the suggestion that the General Conference should 
meet only every two years. If one examined the 
agenda for the current session and eliminated from 
it customary formal items, what remained to justify 
annual meetings of the General Conference? The 
Administrative and Legal Committee, for instance, 
had exhausted its agenda in a quarter of an hour, 
which was all to the credit of its Chairman and 
members; doubtless, however, it it met for half 
an hour every two years, that would suffice. Furthermore, 
it had to be admitted that the Agency would 
function better if it had a biennial rather than 
an annual budget. 

120. It was essential that the Agency, as a scientific 
organization, should respect scientific truths 
and duly established facts. With the passage of 
time one country could lose its status as a uranium 
producer whereas another might acquire that status, 
e.g. as a result of its achieving national sovereignty. 
Accordingly, only countries which were in fact producers 
of uranium should be designated for membership 
on the Board of Governors. Thus, the amendment 
proposed by the Congo in June 1965 had 
been designed merely to bring the text of the 
Statute into line with the true situation: the Board 
of Governors would select two countries every 
year, taking into account any developments that 
had occurred in regard to the production of source 
materials. It was to be regretted that the Board 
had not seen fit to study the question raised by 
the Congolese amendment and to submit specific 
proposals to the General Conference. 
121. When the matter had come before it in September 
1965, the Board had pleaded lack of time 
and the need for thorough study; it had stated 
that a study would be made in 1966 and that 
the Congo would be associated in the discussions. 
In February 1966, the question had been before 
the Board once again but had been postponed 
indefinitely; and no opportunity had been given 
his country to take part in the discussions nor 
had Member States had the chance to submit their 
views. 
122. Article VI.A.2 of the Statute was unfortunately 
only one example of unwarrantable solicitude to 
ensure that certain Member States had seats on 
the Board. On the basis of paragraph A. 1 of the 

107th PLENARY MEETING 

same article, certain countries were designated by 
the Board on the fallacious pretext of their being 
the most advanced in the technology of atomic 
energy; despite repeated calls to do so, the Board 
had so far taken good care not to state the facts 
on which the designations were based. 

123. The Agency could not go on indefinitely 
in that way without seriously mortgaging the promising 
future opening before it. At the current 
session, marking a notable anniversary, all delegations 
should give serious thought to the question. 
In all sincerity, the Statute should be adapted to 
present realities and to the wishes of the great 
majority of Member States. If that were done, 
the smooth functioning of the Agency, far from 
being jeopardized, could not but be assisted. 
124. Mr. HOCHSTRASSER (Switzerland) said it 
was customary on the occasion of a tenth anniversary 
to look back on past achievements. Undoubtedly 
the Agency had played a useful role 
in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Thanks were due to the Director General and his 
predecessor and to the Agency's staff, whose devoted 
work in the face of difficulties had placed the 
Agency in a position to-day to do effective work 
in many fields. 
125. The commercial nuclear exhibition recendy 
held in Basle had demonstrated very clearly that 
atomic energy had come of age. A number of 
countries now possessed excellent research facilities 
and a substantial body of competent nuclear experts, 
and industry had on offer, on a commercial basis, 
many products and services in the atomic field. 
That being so, some adjustment in the Agency's 
programme was undoubtedly called for. The obvious 
financial limitations on expansion of the Agency's 
budget required that some activities should be 
reduced as others took on added importance. In 
that context, die technical assistance programme 
had to be given particular attention. In some instances, 
other international organizations might be 
able to carry on where developments had reached 
the stage of routine application; he had in mind 
certain uses of radioisotopes in medicine and 
agriculture. 
126. It was regrettable that more funds were not 
available to carry out the operational programme. 
As in preceding years, his Government would contribute 
to the General Fund an amount that was the 
same percentage of the target figure as its assessed 
contribution to the Regular Budget, in accordance 
with the General Conference resolution adopted 
five years previously *3). Unfortunately, the recommendations 
in that resolution had been followed 
by too few Member States. Until a considerable 
13) GC(V)/RES.100. 

majority of the Member States, including the financially 
weaker countries, agreed to bear their part 
of the burden, it might prove difficult to increase 
operations. His delegation urged all the Governments 
concerned to reconsider their attitude in 
that matter. 

127. In order to make, the fullest use of available 
resources, efforts should be maintained to streamline 
the Agency's administration. Many activities were 
by now so well established that they no longer 
gave rise to discussions in the Board of Governors 
and the General Conference. His delegation therefore 
supported the proposal to introduce biennial 
budgets and to convene the General Conference 
only once every two years, as well as to cut down 
the number of Board meetings. Even with no 
change in the Statute, it was possible to take some 
steps to reduce the considerable expenditure on 
meetings of those two bodies. One would be to 
reduce the time devoted to meetings. In the case 
of the General Conference the general debate had 
come to determine the length of the session. An 
analysis of the statements made at the current 
session showed that the debate could be considerably 
shortened if speakers would limit their remarks 
essentially to comments and suggestions concerning 
the Agency's activities. However, in order to meet 
the legitimate desire to show what was being done 
in the atomic energy sphere in the various countries, 
the Agency could prepare a report on such national 
activities for submission to the Conference, based 
on material provided, if so desired, by Member 
States. He hoped the Board would examine all 
such possibilities and make specific proposals along 
the lines he had mentioned. 
128. The advent of competitive nuclear power 
had added to the importance of safeguarding the 
special fissionable materials furnished by the Agency 
for peaceful purposes. His delegation welcomed 
the extension of the Agency's safeguards system 
to cover reprocessing plants. It was very desirable 
that the complete fuel cycle, and in particular its 
beginning and end, should be covered by the 
system. By controlling the fabrication and reprocessing 
of nuclear fuel, it might become possible 
to simplify the safeguarding of power reactors in 
particular. As experience was gained, it was to be 
hoped that the Agency would revise the existing 
inspection procedures to take advantage of such 
possibilities. The South African proposal for the 
introduction of bilateral transfer agreements should 
be carefully examined in view of the need for uncomplicated 
safeguards procedures. One field in 
which the Agency could offer valuable help at little 
cost would be in publicizing the safety of nuclear 
power plants, by circulating the relevant information 
published for the education of the general public 
in Member States. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

129. As the current President of the Steering Committee 
of the European Nuclear Energy Agency 
(ENEA), he would like to express his satisfaction 
regarding the good collaboration that existed 
between ENEA and the Agency. Some tasks could 
best be undertaken on a regional basis prior to 
integration in an international framework. He accordingly 
hoped that the close and friendly relations 
between the two organizations would be maintained. 
130. Lastly, he expressed the wish that the Agency 
would continue to thrive throughout the second 
decade of its existence and that it would be able 
to make further valuable contributions to the application 
of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind. 
131. Mr. LINDSAY (Ghana) congratulated Singapore 
and Uganda, sister Commonwealth nations, 
on their admission to membership of the Agency. 
132. The tendency among United Nations and 
other international organizations in recent times 
had been to endeavour to create and promote 
conditions which would abolish the unnecessary 
division of the world into developed and developing 
countries, since peace was clearly impossible in 
a world divided into haves and have-nots. It was 
in the context of those endeavours that the Conference 
should attempt to appraise the work carried 
out by the Agency during the years of its 
activity. 
133. Since its establishment, the Agency, in consonance 
with the ideals of its founders and in 
pursuance of its statutory functions, had striven 
to promote and disseminate knowledge pertaining 
to nuclear energy with a view to ensuring that the 
vast potential of that new source of energy was 
used for the benefit of mankind rather than as 
an instrument of destruction. In that connection 
the establishment of the safeguards system was 
clearly a step in the right direction, and his delegation 
was glad to note that the system had now 
been extended to cover reprocessing plants. 
134. While it welcomed the work done by the 
Agency in connection with the establishment of 
the safeguards system, Ghana looked forward to 
the day when it would be possible to bring the 
nuclear activities of all countries under an expanded 
safeguards system. In addition to arresting the 
arms race, such a development would help to 
ensure that the vast potentialities of nuclear energy 
were directed exclusively to peaceful purposes. 
135. The developing countries had a vested interest 
in peace. In the United Nations and other forums 
their representatives had repeatedly made the point 
that the immense resources now being diverted 
to military uses would be better utilized in helping 
to raise living standards in the poorer areas of 
the world. 

136. The Agency had made great progress in 
other directions. Its provision of technical assistance 
to developing countries, although still somewhat 
limited by lack of funds, had been commendable. 
His country had been one of those which had 
benefited from that programme during the past 
year. In 1965 a mobile radioisotope unit had spent 
five months in Ghana providing training for a 
total of 89 persons. Ghana was also grateful to 
the Agency for the encouragement it had given 
in connection with its projected research reactor 
programme. 
137. The work of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division 
of Atomic Energy in Agriculture was a source of 
hope to the developing countries. Its programmes, 
which provided for work on rice and maize fertilization, 
the efficient use of water, entomology, 
the sterile male technique, rice breeding and production 
and the use of induced mutations in plant 
breeding, could make a valuable contribution to 
the solution of some of the urgent economic 
problems of the modern world. 
138. The Agency had also displayed commendable 
initiative in its recommendations and studies dealing 
with the general problem of radiation. Its study 
groups, seminars and symposia had stimulated research 
and had helped to increase the general fund 
of knowledge on atomic energy. The Agency's 
publications had also made a valuable contribution 
in that direction. Useful work had also been done 
as regards the application of isotopes and radiation 
sources in medicine, biology, hydrology and industry. 
139- He wished to associate himself with the congratulations 
that had been expressed by other 
speakers on the achievements of the Trieste Centre 
since its establishment two years previously, and 
he hoped that the Agency and Member States would 
continue to lend their support to the Centre in 
future. 

140. It was clear that the Agency was striving 
to fulfil its primary duty of ensuring that nuclear 
knowledge was used to foster peace and to improve 
the lot of the poor areas of the world. As far as 
Ghana was concerned it would continue to assist 
the Agency in every way possible to achieve those 
aims. 
141. While good progress had been made, improvements 
were possible in a number of fields. 
The Agency's technical assistance programme should 
reflect more accurately the needs of the world, and 
Secretariat staff should be more representative of 
the various regions of the world. Only a fully re

107th PLENARY MEETING 

preservative Agency could accurately gauge the 
feelings and needs of those regions. 

142. Ghana recognized that the Agency was a 
technical organization and that the criteria for determining 
membership of its governing body should 
be technical and not political. On the other hand, 
it was not reasonable to insist that a country should 
represent an area on the governing body if its 
political policies made it impossible for it to share 
with the other States of the area the technical 
skills and knowledge it acquired through participation 
in the work of the Agency. 
143. In conclusion he wished to congratulate the 
Director General and his staff on the work they 
had done for the Agency over the past years and 
to wish them further success in their noble task 
of ensuring international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
144. Mr. CONTRERAS CHAVEZ (El Salvador) 
stated tiiat his country was now a member of the 
Central American economic integration group, a 
common market which had been set up in 1951 
and which formed part of the Organization of 
Central American States, whose goal was the unity 
of that geographical region and whose present 
membership consisted oftheRepublicsofGuatemala, 
Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua and El Salvador. 
145. A few years previously, the Agency had sent 
a preliminary assistance mission to die area. It 
had expressed the opinion, as far as El Salvador 
was concerned, that the use of nuclear power was 
not advisable at the time. Since dien, however, 
electric power consumption had nearly tripled and 
it was expected that the rate of increase would 
rise sharply in the years to come. Since the hydroelectric 
resources of the Central American countries 
were being exploited to the maximum, it was 
obvious that widiin about ten years nuclear power 
would definitely become economic. 
146. In the Central American region the United 
Nations, in co-operation with the Agency, was 
carrying out an experimental programme for the 
eradication of insect pests. The countries of the 
area were confident, in view of the importance 
of that work, that it would be possible to continue 
it until 1968, as planned. 
147. Under its technical assistance programme, 
the Agency had during 1966 supplied $4000 worth 
of equipment for the radioisotope department of 
Rosales Hospital and had sent an expert, who 
would remain six months, to reorganize the department 
and assist in the training of qualified 
personnel. 
148. The delegate of Mexico had referred to the 
favourable results that could be expected from the 
Agency's participation in the future treaty on the 
denuclearization of Latin America. At its meeting 
in May 1966, die Preparatory Commission for 
the Denuclearization of Latin America had actually 
envisaged the possibility of application of the safeguards 
system by the Agency as a means of control. 

149. The delegation of El Salvador shared the 
view of die Mexican delegation concerning die 
desirability of the Agency's assuming an appropriate 
control function under the treaty to be concluded 
on die denuclearization of Latin America. 
150. Mr. ALBERTO VELANDIA (Venezuela) expressed 
satisfaction at the admission of Uganda 
and Singapore to the Agency. 
151. He recalled that in August 1961 the Venezuelan 
Government had decided to halt the operation 
of Venezela's R.V.I reactor, which had become 
critical a few months before. It had taken that 
action because it had not then had available the 
staff to run the installation and because it had 
seemed likely diat three years would be required 
to train the minimum staff for operating the reactor 
and the related laboratories. Moreover, research 
work in the country, and especially at the Venezuelan 
Scientific Research Institute (IVIC) had not been 
dependent on the reactor, so that its temporary 
shut-down could not affect progress in research. 
152. The decision to cease operation of the reactor 
had been accompanied by a plan for die training 
and utilization of staff. That plan had been presented 
at an international seminar held atBariloche, 
Argentina, in November 196I and had met with 
the approval of the participants. A summary of the 
plan had been published by the Agency. 
153. The predicted results had been achieved and 
die decision taken in 1961 was beginning to bear 
fruit. Between 1962 and the present time, 185 scientists 
and technicians had received training in the 
use of isotopes widi equipment donated by the 
Agency. Thirty-five technicians and scientists, trained 
in reactor technology, physics, radiochemistry, health 
physics, electronics and other related subjects, were 
now available. 
154. Since October 1965 nuclear activities in Venezuela 
had again been in full swing and die IVIC 
was at present carrying out an intensive programme 
covering many subjects. During 1966, work had 
been started on a study of the possible nationwide 
use of radioisotopes and radiation sources 
in industry and food technology, respectively. 
155. During the present year, a seminar on the 
operation and maintenance of research reactors 
had been held in Venezuela under the auspices 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

of the Agency, with the participation of 32 experts 
from Latin America, the United States, Canada 
and Spain. The Eighth Latin American School of 
Physics had also been held in Venezuela and had 
been attended by 70 Latin American scientists who 
had participated in seminars conducted by experts 
in the fundamental problems of modern physics. 

156. Venezuela had participated in the meetings 
of the Preparatory Commission for the Denuclearization 
of Latin America, and the Venezuelan Government 
wished to express its appreciation of the 
Agency's assistance and co-operation in matters 
relating to the legal aspects of the application of 
the safeguards system. He did not think that it 
was appropriate, however, for the Agency to participate 
directly in the negotiations relating to the 
treaty itself, since the latter involved matters which 
lay outside the Agency's competence. The Venezuelan 
delegation did not feel that the Agency 

should participate in discussions of a political nature 
between Governments. 

157. In conclusion, he wished to express his support 
of the extension of the safeguards system to 
reprocessing plants and of plans for making improvements 
in the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste. The Venezuelan delegation 
approved the Programme for 1967-68 and Budget 
for 1967 and expressed its gratitude for the 
Agency's assistance during past years in the development 
of nuclear activities in Venezuela. 
The meeting rose at 6p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(X)/OR. 108 
17 March 1967 

GENERAL Distribution 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 27 September 1966, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 

CONTENT S 
Item of the 
da* 
Paragraphs 
10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1965-66 (continued) 1 67 
6 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Syria 
Viet-Nam 
Bolivia 
Italy 
Madagascar 
Brazil 
Iraq 
Peru 
Applications for membership of the Agency 
1 — 
8 — 
18— 
27— 
37— 
46 — 
5664— 
68— 
7 
17 
26 
36 
45 
55 
63 
67 
72 
11 Opening date of the eleventh regular session 73 — 74 
15 The Agency's accounts for 1965 75 — 76 
16 The Agency's relations with intergovernmental organizations 77— 78 
18 Annual reports on the Agency' s activities 79— 82 
19 Appointment of the External Auditor 83 — 86 
21 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 1967 87— 89 

* GC(X)/343. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 2. Syria, as a small developing country, was 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1965-66 eager to share in the benefits of atomic energy, 
[GC(X)/330, 341] (continued) but was faced by certain problems. It was in the 
rather singular situation of having a not inconsiderable 
number of scientific personnel trained in various 

1. Mr. KADDOURA (Syria) said that his dele-branches of atomic energy, but had very few facilgation 
extended its sincere congratulations to the ities for research, development and application in 
Agency as a whole on the occasion of the tenth that field. That unfortunate situation was leading 
anniversary, and to the Director General and his to a brain drain" in two respects. Firstly, there 
staff on their untiring work in the service of the was temporary and permanent emigration of many 
Agency's ideals and of its Member States. of Syria's best nuclear scientists to advanced 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

countries. Secondly, the services of many nuclear 
scientists were being lost through their beingforced, 
by insufficient opportunities for work in the atomic 
sciences, to direct their energies and talents to 
other fields. 

3. That situation could be improved only through 
international and regional collaboration — on the 
international level primarily through the Agency, 
and on the regional level through the recently 
established Arab Council for Peaceful Applications 
of Atomic Energy. Arab countries with more experience 
in the subject, in particular the United 
Arab Republic, would extend their help to other 
Arab countries desiring to share in a common Arab 
atomic energy programme and having the resources 
to contribute to its success. The Agency would be 
well advised to discuss with that regional body the 
conditions of possible collaboration. 
4. With regard to the assistance which Syria 
hoped and expected to receive from the Agency, 
he supported the many delegates who had urged 
the Agency to extend and develop its technical 
assistance programmes. There was no need to repeat 
the convincing arguments for such a course of 
action. In that connection, however, the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste could, and 
should, play a very important role in helping the 
small developing countries retain and develop their 
limited resources of scientific manpower. Hi's delegation 
was full of admiration for the efforts of 
Professor Salam and his colleagues at the Trieste 
Centre to build up a first-class research school, 
which would be devoted not only to the advancement 
of scientific knowledge, but also to helping 
nuclear scientists from the developing countries. 
5. His delegation also appreciated the various 
schemes worked out by the Centre to keep those 
scientists in close and fruitful contact with the main 
body of world nuclear scientists. He urged the 
Agency to continue to give all possible assistance 
to the Centre. 
6. The Agency could also assist by sponsoring 
co-operation between two laboratories (one in a 
developing, and one in an advanced country). Some 
material help from the Agency for the developing 
country's laboratory might encourage such cooperation 
by the sister laboratory in the advanced 
country. In that respect, too, the Trieste Centre 
had its part to play. 
7. Finally, he wished to express the appreciation 
of Syrian nuclear scientists for the significant contribution 
that the Agency's publications were making. 
He hoped the Agency would extend its efforts in 
that regard. 
8. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam) expressed his 
delegation's gratification at the Agency's record of 
positive, if limited, achievements under Dr. Eklund's 
leadership. The Director General had a difficult 
task to perform in reconciling the growing needs 
of Member States with available resources, and 
his delegation wished to assure him of its continuing 
sympathy and support in the work ahead. 

9. Despite the tragic situation in which it found 
itself, the people of Viet-Nam was fully alive to the 
importance of tackling the problems of economic 
and social development which would have a direct 
bearing on the shaping of the country's future as 
soon as peace was re-established. In that connection 
his country was continuing to carry out a research 
programme, which, although modest, was designed 
to ensure a gradual extension of the use of isotopes 
to the two areas which were most clearly bound up 
with the life of the people of Viet-Nam, viz. 
medicine and agriculture. 
10. In the medical field systematic use was now 
being made of radioiodine for the diagnosis of 
thyroid disorders. In some medical centres the 
same radioisotope had been used for therapeutic 
purposes. Assistance had been promised by the 
Agency which would enable his country to proceed 
with work on the fundamental problem of protein 
metabolism. Plans had also been elaborated with 
a view to developing therapeutic techniques in the 
National Cancer Institute. 
11. The Office de 1'energie atomique, together 
with the associated nuclear research centre at Dalat, 
were in a position to supply most of the radioelements 
required by the Faculty of Medicine at 
Saigon. So far it had only been possible to supply 
radioelements in the form of liquids for oral administration, 
and the Agency's assistance in connection 
with the preparation of injectable radioactive solutions, 
particularly solutions of iron-55 and chromium-
51, would be extremely valuable. The work 
of the Dalat Centre's Radiochemestry Division was 
concerned with the activation analysis of latex, 
powders from hevea leaves and local foodstuffs. In 
that connection the services of an expert in irradiation 
techniques would be very useful. 
12. In view of the central role of agriculture in 
the economy of Viet-Nam every effort was being 
made to develop the country's research potential 
and to increase the number of technical staff available 
to the Radiobiology Division. The recent 
installation of a special glass-house at the Dalat 
Centre had greatly facilitated research on plant 
metabolism and the effects of X-rays and neutrons 
on rice, maize and soya bean seeds. The Research 
Division of the Ministry of Agriculture had now 
started to make use of nuclear methods to carry 
out soil studies. 

108th PLENARY MEETING 

13. The Agency had performed commendable 
regulatory work with regard to radiological protection, 
and his delegation fully endorsed the health 
and safety programme for the next two years. The 
Agency's work in that connection could not fail 
to be of value to the developing countries, where 
the need for appropriate legislation became more 
and more urgent as increased use was made of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Viet-Nam 
hoped that the Agency would provide increased 
assistance of that kind by organizing practical training 
and courses for legal and administrative staff 
to enable such staff to become familiar with the 
various legal problems arising in the implementation 
of a nuclear programme. 
14. Viet-Nam was following with interest the 
efforts being made by the Agency to encourage the 
pairing of laboratories in the developing countries 
with those in the advanced countries. The Agency 
had already succeeded in arranging for four such 
inter-laboratory co-operation projects, and he hoped 
that it would be possible to extend the scheme 
to Viet-Nam. 
15. At the last session of the General Conference 
he had expressed certain hopes as regards the 
Agency's regional co-operation projects 1) and he 
was glad to see that work in that sphere had developed 
very much in line with those hopes. The 
tripartite programme of co-operation in neutron 
spectrometry 2) and the co-ordinated research programme 
on rice and maize breeding had met with 
the general approval of the countries concerned. The 
efforts that were being made to discover areas of 
common interest testified to the importance which 
regional study groups attached to regional co-operation. 
In that connection Viet-Nam warmly supported 
a proposal to organize regional collaboration in 
activation analysis work made by experts from 
Thailand at a meeting of the Study Group on the 
Utilization of Research Reactors. 
16. Because of its awareness of its own limitations 
his country attached great importance to the 
technical assistance programme, which, in its view, 
constituted one of the most promising aspects of 
the Agency's work. Viet-Nam placed great faith in 
that programme and hoped that its requests for 
technical assistance would be given sympathetic 
consideration justifying that faith. 
17. His country wished to give practical expression 
to its faith in the value of international co-operation 
through the Agency by fulfilling the primary duty 
of all Member States, to help the Agency perform 
its obligations towards those nations which were 
1) See document GC(IX)/OR.96, para 94. 
2) See document INFCIRC/56. 


most in need of increased international solidarity. 
Accordingly he was glad to announce that his 
country would make a voluntary contribution to 
the General Fund for 1967 that was based on its 
Regular Budget assessment for that year. In view 
of the trials which the people of Viet-Nam had 
undergone for more than 20 years and the sacrifices 
it continued to make in the interest of a 
better future, he hoped that that contribution, however 
modest it might be, would demonstrate the 
importance his country attached to international 
collaboration and also its desire to contribute to 
the welfare of all nations. 

18. Mr. VELTZE MICHEL (Bolivia) recalled 
that the establishment of the Agency had stemmed 
from the misgivings felt by Members of the United 
Nations. The Government of Bolivia had joined 
the Agency and given it full and determined support. 
The Agency fulfilled the urgent need for an international 
body which would not only devise and 
administer a world-wide system of safety and control 
in the utilization of nuclear energy, but would also 
study, finance and grant technical assistance to 
developing countries in connection with peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. Those principles formed the 
guide-lines of Bolivia's international policy in atomic 
energy matters. 
19. Bolivia hoped that the tools of modern 
science could be put to good use in its valleys, 
its mines and factories, and it was impatient to 
learn how nuclear energy could help it to achieve 
true national liberation. Bolivia was a newcomer 
in the field of nuclear science and was anxious to 
adopt modern methods. The country had in fact 
already achieved some of its aims in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
20. The Bolivian Nuclear Energy Commission 
had been established about four years previously. 
Bolivia had joined the Agency a few months later 
and had since succeeded in launching a research 
programme which, in the case of nuclear medicine 
for example, consisted of measures to combat 
endemic goitre through the use of radioisotopes, 
the determination of haemodynamic, cardiopulmonary 
and haematological parameters under highaltitude 
conditions, and research on hypertension in 
relation to the kidneys and as a function of high 
altitude. WHO had included Bolivia in the "Black 
Zone" of its goitre classification and the country 
was therefore planning to extend its anti-goitre 
programme, which had started in La Paz, to Sucre, 
since in some parts of the latter region up to 90 % 
of the population was affected. 
21. Radioisotopes were also being used extensively 
in agriculture, and Bolivia had set itself the .goal 
of eradicating various insect pests and diseases. It 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

was realized that that objective could be achieved 
most quickly by using radioisotopes. Theproblemof 
the fruit fly was a serious one for his country, 
since in some areas the entire fruit crop was 
damaged and the annual loss amounted to about 
60 million Bolivian pesos (5 million US dollars), 
an excessive amount for a country with such a 
small national income. His Government was therefore 
paying special attention to the problem and 
thought it would be necessary to take emergency 
measures and to ask the Agency for its assistance 
in using the new methods and techniques that it 
had developed. 

22. The mineral wealth of Bolivia was immeasurable 
and its possibilities were attracting international 
interest. Some six months earlier, aerial photographic 
and geophysical surveys had been carried 
out for the purpose of delimiting the metal-bearing 
regions of the Andes mountains in Bolivia. Assistance 
in interpreting the results obtained was of vital 
importance for locating future sources of radioactive 
minerals. In addition, there were many accessible 
points at high altitudes in Bolivia which were 
suitable for the installation of special laboratories. 
The Cosmic Radiation Laboratory at Chacaltaya, 
situated at a height of 5 300 meters, had done 
valuable research on cosmis rays even though it 
was operating on limited funds. It was carrying out 
studies on atmospheric activity and on changes in 
the intensity of cosmic radiations, as well as 
research on electromagnetic states in interplanetary 
space, which would be of great value for interplanetary 
exploration programmes. 

23. His Government was of the opinion that 
effective use could be made of nuclear energy only 
when the necessary Bolivian staff had been trained, 
and that involved a readjustment of study programmes 
in schools and universities and a modernization 
of the curricula of technical schools. Those changes 
could be made only with effective assistance from 
the Agency under its fellowship and training programmes. 
In that connection, Bolivia had signed 
bilateral agreements with Argentina and Brazil. 
24. Bolivia had been one of the countries that 
had joined in the call for the denuclearization of 
Latin America, which had led to the submission of 
a draft resolution to the General Assembly of the 
United Nations in 1962. It had also played an active 
part in the discussions of the Preparatory Commission 
for the Denuclearization of Latin America. His 
Government endorsed the statement of Mexico 
expressing the hope that the Agency would in due 
course consider the possibility of applying its safeguards 
system under a Latin American denuclearization 
treaty. 3) 
3) GC(X)/OR.103, paras 74 and 75


25. His Government considered that the results 
of research carried out by the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics at Trieste were of great 
importance for the advancement of nuclear science. 
26. On the occasion of the tenth session of the 
General Conference, Bolivia wished to congratulate 
Dr. Eklund and the Secretariat on their efficient 
execution and administration of the Agency's programmes 
and, in particular, bearing in mind the 
general atmosphere of anxiety throughout the world, 
it wished to reaffirm its determined support of the 
principle that atomic energy should be used in the 
service of humanity, economic development and, 
above all, peace. 

27. Mr. SALVETTI (Italy) said that the tenth 
General Conference was an ideal occasion for reviewing 
the past activities of the Agency and for 
obtaining valuable indications for the future. He 
gratefully acknowledged the excellent work accomplished 
by the Agency, and was particularly gratified 
that the results achieved greatly exceeded expectations, 
bearing in mind the large number of Member 
States and the deep ideological, social and economic 
differences between them. That the Agency had 
remained faithful to its statutory aims, thus giving 
the maximum possible impetus to the technical and 
economic advancement of thepeaceful uses of atomic 
energy, was largely due to the invaluable efforts 
of the Director General and the Secretariat. 
28. The Agency's activity in the past year had 
been mainly directed towards the important field 
of technical assistance. However, even the commendable 
efforts it had made had still been inadequate 
to meet the many and complex requests for 
assistance, especially in view of the importance of 
atomic power in furthering the industrialization of 
developing countries. 
29. Special mention should be made of the 
Agency's work on many problems related to the 
use of atomic energy, such as those concerning 
various aspects of safety, waste disposal and the 
desalting of sea water. Italy was particularly 
interested in the latter problem, whose solution 
might prove extremely beneficial to the economic 
development of certain regions, and had already 
drawn up programmes of study and research; the 
problem was a major one for many countries. 
3 0. The extension of contacts between the Agency 
and other international organizations in sectors of 
mutual interest in order to avoid duplication was 
also deserving of commendation. 
31. The International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
in Trieste was one of the Agency's most 
important achievements. At the end of its second 

108th PLENARY MEETING 

year of operation it was unanimously acknowledged 
as one of the leading institutions in its field, and it 
served as an excellent demonstration of how common 
scientific interest could help in overcoming the 
political and ideological barriers between peoples. 
There was no question as to the need for keeping 
the Centre in operation after the end of its first 
four-year period. He was therefore somewhat disturbed 
by the Programme, Technical and Budget 
Committee's approval of a resolution whereby any 
decision about the future of the Centre was to be 
submitted to further study.4) All the implications 
of that decision should be carefully evaluated. 

3 2. It was in order to meet the needs of developing 
countries and fill a gap in the Agency's 
activities that his Government had invested in the 
Centre sums amounting to nearly nine-tenths of 
the total spent on it. Recently, requests had been 
received to provide permanent facilities, including 
housing, for the Centre. However, in view of the 
latest development he had to inform delegations 
that his Government, while it had no intention of 
departing from the principle that more advanced 
countries should aid those less fortunate, would 
have to draw its own conclucions as to the implications 
of the vote by the Programme, Technical 
and Budget Committee. 
33. Italy's nuclear programme was being successfully 
implemented. The three nuclear power stations 
at Latina, Garigliano and Trino Vercellese were 
producing over 6 % of the total national power output, 
the figure having increased from 2^401 OOOkWh 
in 1964 to 3 500 000 kWh in 1965. 
34. The mostimportanttechnological programmes 
of the National Atomic Energy Commission (CNEN) 
were the EUREX, PCUT, CIRENE and fast-reactor 
programmes and the related fuel programme. Considerable 
advances had been made in constructing 
the plants for the EUREX and PCUT programmes; 
the first cold running of the PCUT plant was scheduled 
to take place at the beginning of 1967, 
while the EUREX plant would go into operation in 
the course of that year. The CNEN-CISE-EURATOM 
joint programme for the CIRENE reactor, initiated 
by Italy, showed many promising technical features 
in the field of advanced thermal reactors. The reactor 
would use natural uranium in the oxide form 
and employ heavy water as a moderator, while its 
cooling was based on the "fog" principle. The 
programme was in an advanced stage of development, 
and a final decision would shortly be taken 
on the production of a prototype of substantial 
power. In the field of fast breeders, the next 
4) See document GC(X)/COM.l/OR.72, paras 18 and 

19. 
objective was the construction of a fuel-elementtesting 
reactor (PEC) with a power of about 
80 MW(th). 

35. Italy would continue to co-operate with the 
Agency in 1967, making a voluntary contribution of 
$45 800, and providing through the National Atomic 
Energy Commission 20 fellowships for a total of 
160 months of training. 
36. Optimistic conclusions could be drawn from 
a review of the activities carried out under the 
Agency's programme. Progress in the past decade 
had exceeded all expectations, constituting a clear 
indication that nuclear energy had become one of 
the essential factors determining theeconomicgrowth 
and progress of the world. 
37. Mr. RAVELOJAONA (Madagascar) said that 
it was a great honour and pleasure for him to make 
his delegation's initial contribution to the work of 
the General Conference. He took pleasure in welcoming 
Uganda and Singapore to the Agency. 
38. Madagascar hoped that the Members of the 
Agency would work together in close collaboration 
and would pool their scientific knowledge and 
nuclear power resources. 
39. Widespread application of safeguards and the 
drafting of truly international standards and legisgation 
covering all nuclear activities would make a 
valuable contribution to the establishment of conditions 
conducive to peace, which the young nations 
and developing countries needed even more than 
the others. 
40. One of the major tasks faced by international 
organizations consisted of bridging the gap between 
the rich and the poor, and the Director General 
had pointed out with regret that four out of five 
applications for technical assistance could not be 
satisfied. 5) It was impossible to overstate the special 
importance of technical assistance and of adopting 
fair and effective measures for implementation of 
the biennial technical assistance programme. It had 
to be remembered, in that connection, that the 
needs of the Member States would grow as the 
developing countries made increasingly wide use 
of atomic energy. 
41. The radioisotopes laboratory in Madagascar 
was attached to the Faculty of Science of Tananarive 
University and had been equipped with the 
help of the Commissariat a l'energie atomique 
(French Atomic Energy Commission) which also 
5) GC(X)/OR.101,para 38. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

helped with its operation. It consisted of two sections: 
a medical section with scintigraphic equipment 
and appropriate clinical facilities, which was 
already collaborating with hospitals in the capital; 
and an agricultural section, which was working on 
the labelling of fertilizers and insects and the use 
of neutron moisture meters, in conjunction with the 
Agronomic Research Institute and the Madagascar 
Scientific Research Institute. The laboratory possessed 
rooms for treatment and research, and an 
air-conditioned room for counters. An electronics 
technician was responsible for the operation of the 
counting equipment and repaired it on the spot 
when necessary. 

42. The laboratory accepted young graduates from 
the Faculty of Science and, since the beginning of 
the year, had been organizing weekly lectures and 
practical introductory work on the principles and 
techniques involved in die use of radioisotopes in 
medicine and agriculture. 
43. A radiodiagnosis and radiotherapy service 
was to be set up in the new Central Hospital in 
Tananarive. The question of training specialists in 
nuclear medicine already had to be considered; 
young doctors were interested in specializing in 
that branch and Madagascar hoped that the Agency 
would grant fellowships and training facilities. 
44. With the existing system of organization and 
the scientific staff already working in Madagascar 
it would be possible to undertake research contracts 
on subjects figuring in the Agency's Programme 
for 1967-68. 6) So far as the developing countries 
were concerned, the Agency's research contracts were 
closely bound up with its technical assistance activities, 
the training of specialists and supply of 
equipment. The award of research contracts immediately 
called attention to the lack of national specialists 
in the receiving country. Conversely, in the 
case of Member States which had only recently 
started using radioisotopes and radiation, the 
Agency should encourage use of the knowledge 
which its former fellows had acquired, and could 
best do so by awarding research contracts enabling 
them to keep in touch with the experts and laboratory 
that had trained them. 
45. By participating in the Agency's assistance 
programmes, the developing countries demonstrated 
their confidence in the Agency and their conviction 
that it was the organization best able to help them 
in accelerating their development; effective assistance 
from the Agency would enable them to reduce the 
gap separating them from the better-endowed nations. 
In fulfilling the mission which the Member States 

6) GC(X)/332. 

had allotted to it — to help maintain peace and 
increase the prosperity of nations — the Agency 
would show that there was hope for mankind. 

46. Mr. PRADO (Brazil) observed that, on the 
occasion of the tenth regular session of the General 
Conference, it would be appropriate to attempt a 
summary of what the Agency, as a whole, had 
accomplished during the period which had elapsed 
since its establishment. 
47. All in all, the Agency certainly had ample 
reason to be proud of its performance. It had 
fostered and promoted international co-operation, 
and had been active in the study of world-wide 
problems related to the utilization of atomic energy. 
It had convened an impressive number of scientific 
meetings covering all aspects of nuclear affairs, and 
had disseminated much valuable information, particularly 
in die form of conference and symposium 
proceedings and periodicals. The Agency was now 
embarking on a new venture on a world-wide scale, 
namely the organization of an international nuclear 
data system which would embrace all the producers 
and users of such data. 
48. Of great importance was the assistance afforded 
by the Agency to the programmes of the developing 
countries, and its help in die training of scientific 
and technical staff by means of fellowships, courses 
and special missions was also of great significance. 
49. His delegation wished to thank the Agency 
for its help and assistance to Brazil throughout the 
nine years which had passed since its inception. 
The scientific and technical missions sent by the 
Agency, the equipment which had been provided, 
and the fellowships which had been granted to 
Brazilian candidates had undoubtedly been of considerable 
assistance to the country in the implementation 
of its national atomic energy programme. 
50. On its side, Brazil had always been an enthusiastic 
participant in the work of the Agency. He 
recalled that that participation had started at the 
very beginning when, in 1955, Brazil had been a 
member of the 12-Power group which had worked 
on a draft of the Statute in Washington. The Conference 
on the Statute, held in New York in 1956, 
had had a Brazilian as its President, a Brazilian 
had served as Chairman of the Preparatory Commission 
and, later on, as Chairman of the second 
Board of Governors, and the Scientific Advisory 
Committee had included a Brazilian representative 
ever since its establishment. 
51. In his statement on the work of the Agency, 
the Director General had made special reference 
to certain problems which would soon have to be 
faced. In particular, Dr. Eklund's observations on 
the Agency's technical assistance programme, and 

108th PLENARY MEETING 

his indication that, with its present resources, the 
Agency would be able to satisfy perhaps only 20 % 
of the requests made by developing countries, gave 
grounds for considerable anxiety. It was indeed 
disturbing to observe, in that connection, that between 
the last budget and the one which the Conference 
was being called upon to approve at the 
present session there was an increase of only 1.4% 
in the resources allocated to technical assistance 
activities. 

52. That was why the Brazilian delegation associated 
itself with those who felt that Member States, 
particularly those more advanced economically, 
should endeavour to make larger contributions to 
the Agency's technical assistance programme. It was 
unfortunate that that programme depended upon 
voluntary contributions, but the situation could to 
some extent be eased if every Member State contributed 
to the Operational Budget at least in the 
same proportion as it did to die Regular Budget. 
5 3. In view of the limited time allowed for the 
general debate, he would refrain from listing all 
the present highlights of nuclear activities in Brazil. 
A survey of that kind would include a reference to 
recent discoveries of promising ore deposits, and an 
account of the continuing expansion of Brazilian 
atomic centres, of new developments in laboratories 
and plants handling nuclear materials, and of the 
growing interest and participation of local industry 
in die atomic field. 
54. He would, however, comment in a little more 
detail on the present situation regarding nuclear 
power in Brazil. Systematic studies had been going 
on since 1963 on the country's hydro potential. 
Collection of data and their evaluation had begun 
in Central South Brazil, which included the most 
industrialized area of the country, and where power 
requirements were increasing at an annual average 
rate of nearly 11%. The studies that had been 
made showed that large hydro plants could be built 
at a very reasonable unit cost. That fact, and the 
existence of other power resources not fully evaluated 
until recently, probably rendered nuclear 
power plants unattractive as an immediate proposition. 
In north-eastern Brazil on the other hand 
most rivers had torrential regimes, there was no 
coal, and oil had to be transported from distant 
refineries. There were only limited hydro resources 
in diat area, and there was also a serious shortage 
of fresh water. That problem might be solved by 
die construction of dual-purpose nuclear plants. 
55. Although the overall situation, in terms of 
the energy resources available, did not warrant the 
immediate construction of power reactors in Brazil, 
as time went on other considerations would come 
into operation and would mean that a definite 
nuclear power plant programme would be required. 
Recourse to nuclear power would possibly have to 
be made within about two decades, and accordingly 
the main Brazilian nuclear centres were undertaking 
feasibility studies on proven and advanced reactor 
types. In conclusion, he wished to reaffirm his 
Government's confidence in the future of the Agency, 
and its belief in the ideal of co-operative development 
of atomic energy which had motivated the 
Agency's establishment. 

56. Mr. ZALZALAH' (Iraq) congratulated die 
Director General and all those who had contributed 
to die success of the Agency in the past nine years. 
He also wished to welcome the new Member States 
which had joined the Agency since the last General 
Conference. The continuous increase in membership 
was a clear indication of the importance generally 
attached to the Agency, and it was noteworthy that 
new States in particular had shown great interest in 
availing themselves of the knowledge and skill at 
the Agency's disposal. 
57. In February 1966, the Board of Governors 
had approved the allocation of a cobalt unit to Iraq. 
Hi's Government was grateful to the Agency and to 
the Government of the Soviet Union for that donation, 
and had allocated more than £500 000 to the 
Medical Radiological Centre in which the unit was 
to be installed. Work on Iraq's research reactor 
would be completed in 1967 and the project, with 
its attached research centre, would employ about 
130 technicians. 
5 8. The Director General had already mentioned 
two points of vital importance to the future of the 
Agency. 7) The first was the revision of the Statute, 
Article XVIII. B of which read: "At the fifth annual 
session of the General Conference following the 
coming into force of this Statute, the question of 
a general review of the provisions of this Statute 
shall be placed on the agenda of that session." 
Since then five additional years had elapsed and no 
revision had yet been undertaken. His delegation 
believed that the time had come to bring die 
Statute, in the Director General's words, "into 
line with reality ". The Agency's membership had 
almost doubled since its foundation, and all die 
new Members were developing countries. Although 
the Director General was to be congratulated on 
his efforts to obtain a more equitable post distribution, 
there was still a high concentration of representatives 
of advanced countries in senior posts 
and holding permanent contracts. In view of die 
marked variations in the relative importance attached 
to die various functions of the Agency, he believed 
that appointments should be made rather by longterm 
than by permanent contracts, and he wished 
7) GC(X)/OR.101, paras 33 and 38. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

to appeal to those countries which were over-represented 
on the staff and whose nationals were concentrated 
in senior posts to relinquish some of 
those posts in the interests of fair representation 
on the basis of geographical distribution. 

59. The second point mentioned by the Director 
General was the lack of sufficient funds to meet the 
needs of developing countries. In view of that fact, 
he believed that other activities, such as research 
contracts and the Laboratory, should be kept under 
strict control lest they adversely affect the technical 
assistance programme, and should be reviewed in 
the very near future. There was also scope for 
improvement in the allocation of research contracts; 
they should not always be given to the best qualified 
institutions, which would eliminate the element of 
training, and it might also be advisable to restrict 
the total sum which could be allocated to any 
one State. 
60. His delegation also recommended that a maximum 
limit should be set to the allocations for the 
Seibersdorf Laboratory. The Laboratory should have 
a well-defined long-term programme, and an annual 
list of its requirements should be presented to 
Member States in advance to guide them in making 
contributions in kind. It would indeed be a great 
help to Member States if a complete list were 
produced of all the donations to the Laboratory 
in the past, together with an indication of their 
estimated value. 
61. Regional centres seemed to him to complement 
the technical assistance programme. Therewas 
a genuine need for an increase in the number of 
such centres, especially in the developing countries 
within each region; their expenses could be brought 
within reasonable limits by making their programmes 
complementary to each other, each specializing in 
a definite field. 

62. Finally, he wished to refer to the question of 
safeguards. States in theMiddle East were disturbed 
by the fact that atomic weapons might be introduced 
into the^ area at any time, if they were not there 
already, and therefore supported all the efforts to 
establish denuclearized zones, which should include 
the Middle East and Africa. The safeguards system 
should be accepted by all countries, whatever their 
size and stage of advancement, and should apply 
to all nuclear projects. 
63. While the danger of proliferation of atomic 
weapons should not be minimized, the parallel 
danger of poverty and famine, which might prove 
to be equally disastrous for mankind, should not 
be forgotten. The work which the Agency could 
perform in that field should not be under-estimated. 
The challenges facing the Agency were great, and 
it was the individual and collective responsibility 
of all Member States to see that they were met. 

64. Mr. MUJICA GALLO (Peru) said his delegation 
was convinced that today there was greater 
need than ever to help strengthen the will to peace, 
i.e. to promote in every way the principles proclaimed 
by the United Nations concerning world 
disarmament and the use of the power of the atom 
solely for peaceful purposes. 
65. His delegation fully agreed with the Mexican 
delegation on the pressing need for the Agency to 
play a part in promoting the establishment of a 
permanent denuclearized zone in Latin America, 
through its safeguards system as envisaged in the 
Statute, thus giving henceforward its support and 
the weight of its authority to the efforts that were 
being made to elaborate an appropriate multilateral 
instrument for denuclearization of the Latin 
American continent. 
66. Despite the differences of approach the Argentine 
delegate had mentioned 8), the agreement on 
essentials and the sincere intent underlying those 
differences would lead to a practical meeting of 
minds on the matter. Undoubtedly, if differences 
on the matter — understandable from the human 
point of view — were resolved through the influence 
of an enlightened ideal and more than two hundred 
million human beings joined together to free themselves 
of the frightful responsibility implicit in the 
nuclear threat, the Agency, in contributing to the 
success of that exemplary moral achievement, i.e. 
the speedy conclusion of a treaty for the denuclearization 
of Latin America and the suppression of 
traffic in nuclear weapons throughout the continent, 
would once more have acted within the spirit of 
its immediate objectives. At the same time, in a 
world that was dangerously sceptical, confidence 
in its effectiveness as an organization would be 
strengthened, thus augmenting the trust reposed 
in the moral authority of those directing it. Ever 
since 1964 Latin America had been endeavouring 
to bring a denuclearization treaty into being. In 
1967 its efforts to that end would be redoubled 
when the Preparatory Commission to study the 
conclusion of such a treaty would meet again. 

67. On the occasion of the Agency's tenth anniversary, 
Peru wished to congratulate the responsible 
leaders of the Agency who were carrying out its 
mission of promoting world peace and prosperity, 
for the especial benefit of the developing countries, 
the overwhelming majority of which called for preferential 
treatment in the matter of assistance from 
the Agency. Peru was proud of being a founder 
Member of the Agency. He would avail himself 
8) GC(X)/OR.103, para 32. 


108th PLENARY MEETING 

of the opportunity to express appreciation of the 
timely collaboration lent by the Agency in technical 
matters and research. He would also like to thank 
the Austrian Government for its hospitality. 

APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY [GC(X)/345] 

68. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
consider the recommendation of the Board of Governors 
concerning the application for membership of 
the Agency made by Sierra Leone, in respect of 
which the Board had submitted the draft resolution 
set out in document GC(X)/345. 
69. Sir William PENNEY (United Kingdom) expressed 
his pleasure at the fact that another member 
of the Commonwealth was joining the Agency. 
70. Mr. SAFOUAT (United Arab Republic) and 
Mr. LINDSAY (Ghana) supported the application 
for membership made by Sierra Leone. 
71. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
72. The PRESIDENT stated that, in accordance 
with Article XXI. C of the Statute, Sierra Leone 
would become a Member of the Agency as soon as 
its instrument of acceptance of the Statute had been 
deposited with the United States Government. 
OPENING DATE OF THE 

ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 

73. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee 
had requested him to recommend to the 
Conference on its behalf that the opening date of 
the eleventh regular session should be Tuesday, 
19 September 1967. The Austrian authorities had, 
however, informed the Director General that they 
would find it more convenient if the session opened 
on 26 September, and the General Committee 
accordingly recommended that Tuesday, 26 September 
1967 be set as the opening date of the 
eleventh regular session. 

74. The recommendation of the General Committee was 
accepted. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1965 

[GC(X)/346] 

75. Mr. VELTZE MICHEL (Bolivia), Rapporteur 
of the Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report on the Agency's 
accounts for 1965 [GC(X)/346]. 
76. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(X)/346 was adopted. 
11. Mr. VELTZE MICHEL (Bolivia), Rapporteur 
of the Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report on the Agency's relations 
with intergovernmental organizations 
[GC(X)/347]. 
78. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC{X)j347 was adopted. 
ANNUAL REPORTS ON THE AGENCY'S 
ACTIVITIES [GC(X /336, 337] 

7 9. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the recommendation 
of the Board of Governors [GC(X)/3 36] 
relating to the Agency's report to the General 
Assembly of the United Nations for 1965-66. As 
the draft resolution submitted by the Board was 
couched in the same terms as similar resolutions 
adopted by the Conference in the past, he suggested 
that it be adopted. 
80. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(X)/336 was adopted. 
81. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
consider the draft resolution submitted by the Board 
in its recommendation [GC(X)/337] concerningthe 
Agency's report to the Economic and Social Council 
of the United Nations for 1966-67. 
82. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(X)/337 was adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE 
EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

83. The PRESIDENT recalled that in 1963 the 
General Conference had appointed the President 
of the Court of Accounts of the Federal Republic 
of Germany as External Auditor of the Agency to 
audit the accounts for the years 1964, 1965 and 
1966. It was therefore necessary for the Conference 
to make a further appointment at the present 
session. 
84. The President of the Court of Accounts of 
the Federal Republic of Germany was prepared 
to accept reappointment, and he (the President) 
therefore proposed that he be appointed to audit 
the Agency's accounts for the year 1967. 
85. The President's proposal was accepted. 
86. The PRESIDENT expressed gratitude, on 
behalf of the General Conference, to the External 
Auditor and his staff, who had discharged their 
task in an extremely competent and conscientious 
manner. 

TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 
GENERAL FUND FOR 1967 [GC(X)/34o/Rev.4] 

87. The PRESIDENT said that at 6 p.m. on 
26 September the Director General had received 
pledges of voluntary contributions from 52 Member 
States to a total equivalent to $1 246 562. 
88. He pointed out that the total pledged was far 
short of the proposed target of $2 million for 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 
1967, and appealed to Member States for more 
and increased contributions in order to make up 
the deficit. 

89. Everyone realized that the Agency's operational 
activities were entirely dependent on the 
voluntary contributions of Governments to the 
General Fund. The amount of money in the Fund 
could be regarded as determining the Agency's 
ability— or inability —toassistdevelopingcountries, 
which was one of its main objectives, and he was 
sure Member States would not wish to see the 
achievement of that objective hampered by lack 
of funds. 
The meeting rose at 12.50p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(X)/OR. 109 
17 March 1967 

GENERAL Distribution 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 27 September 1966, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda*. 
12 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
Paragraphs 
1 — 15 
3 Credentials of delegates to the tenth regular session: (b) Report of the Credentials 

Committee 

GC(X)/343. 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD 
OF GOVERNORS [GC(X)/329, 344] 

1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the report 
of the General Committee [GC(X)/344], in paragraph 
1 of which the Committee notified the Conference 
that five Members must be elected to the 
Board during the present session. The Committee 
specified the geographical areas in respect of which 
elections were required and drew the Conference's 
attention to the fact that elections must be conducted 
with due regard to equitable representation 
on the Board as a whole of the Members in the 
geographical areas specified under Rule 83 of the 
Rules of Procedure. Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure 
provided that the elections should be by 
secret ballot and that there should be no nominations. 
2. At the invitation of the President, a member of 
the Afghan delegation and a member of the Swedish 
delegation acted as tellers. 
16 — 33 

3. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect two Members from the area of Latin 
America. 
4. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Members to be elected: 2 
Ballot papers returned: 128 
Invalid votes: 4 
Abstentions: 5 
Valid votes: 119 
Required majority: 30 
Votes obtained: 
Mexico 59 
Brazil 57 
Peru 2 
Venezuela 1 

5. Having obtained the required majority, Mexico and 
Brazil were elected Members of the Board. 
6. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

elect a Member from the area of Africa and the 
Middle East. 

7. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 66 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions: 1 

Valid votes: 65 
Required majority: 3 3 
Votes obtained: 

Lebanon 59 
Iran 6 

8. Having obtained the required majority, Lebanonwas 
elected a Member of the Board. 
9. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of South East Asia 
and the Pacific. 
10. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 66 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 62 
Required majority: 32 

Votes obtained: 

Indonesia 61 
New Zealand 1 

11. Having obtained the required majority, Indonesia 
wfls elected a Member of the Board. 
12. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
fill the remaining vacant seat on the Board. 
13. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 66 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions: 2 

Valid votes: 64 
Required majority: 3 3 
Votes obtained: 

Federal Republic of 
Germany 51 
Iran 13 

14. Having obtained the required majority, the Federal 
Republic of Germany was elected a Member of the Board. 
15 - The PRESIDENT declared the elections completed 
and pointed out that, under Article VI .D 
of the Statute, the Members just elected to the 
Board would hold office from the end of the tenth 
regular session of the General Conference until 
the end of the twelfth regular session. He congra


tulated Brazil, the Federal Republic of Germany, 
Indonesia, Lebanon and Mexico on their election 
and thanked the tellers for their work. 

CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE 
TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE [GC(X)/349] 
16. The PRESIDENT announced that the Credentials 
Committee had examined the credentials 
of delegates in accordance with Rule 28 of the 
Rules of Procedure; its report, containing two draft 
resolutions, was to be found in document 
GC(X)/349. 
17. Mr. GANEV (Bulgaria) said that his delegation 
had already informed the Credentials Committee 
that it could only recognize as valid credentials 
issued by the legal Government of China, 
which in its opinion was the Government of the 
People's Republic of China. He wished to repeat 
that view to the Conference as a whole. His delegation 
thoroughly deplored the policy of discrimination 
practised against the People's Republic of 
China and also against the German Democratic 
Republic; that policy was detrimental to the Agency, 
at variance with the principle of universality and 
harmful to the cause of international collaboration 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
18. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said that in his delegation's view it was 
improper and illogical that the report of the Credentials 
Committee should have been taken up 
when it had. The report should have been considered 
at a much earlier stage. The External 
Auditor had been appointed and new Members 
of the Board had been elected before the Conference 
had had an opportunity of considering the report 
of the Credentials Committee. It was therefore 
not clear whether the delegations that had taken 
part in the voting had been properly accredited 
or not and the legality of the elections was thus 
open to doubt. Care would have to be taken at 
future sessions of the Conference to prevent a 
repetition of such occurrences. 
19- His delegation wished to make it quite clear 
that the Soviet Union, like other socialist States, 
had not recognized and did not recognize the 
validity of the Chiang Kai-shek group's signature 
of the Agency's Statute and consequently could 
not concede that that group was legally entitled 
to represent China at the Agency's General Conference. 
His delegation could not therefore approve 
the draft resolution contained in the Credentials 
Committee's report recognizing the validity of the 
Chiang Kai-shek group's credentials and requested 
that a separate vote be taken on that draft resolution. 



109th PLENARY MEETING 

20. His delegation deplored the fact that the 
membership of the Agency was not yet universal. 
It was particularly unjustifiable that the Federal 
Republic of Germany should be a member of the 
Agency while the sovereign State of the German 
Democratic Republic was debarred from participating 
in the organization's work. The German 
Democratic Republic was fully entitled to participate 
in the work of the Agency, not only because its 
admission to the organization would be in accordance 
with international law and the Agency's Statute, 
but also because that country was a highly industrialized 
nation which was making a substantial 
contribution to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
21. Mr. LEWIS (United States of America) endorsed 
the report of the Credentials Committee 
together with the two draft resolutions contained 
therein. In regard to the objections raised against 
the credentials of China, he saw no point in entering 
into protracted arguments since the General Assembly 
of the United Nations had considered that 
question on a number of occasions, most recently 
at its 20th regular session in 1965, and had always 
rejected attempts to replace the representatives of 
the Republic of China. His Government believed 
that those decisions of the General Assembly on 
the matter of Chinese representation should be 
taken into account in technical agencies in the 
United Nations family, such as the IAEA. A resolution 
of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations had specifically recommended that its own 
attitude be taken into account in the event that 
conflicting claims over the right to represent a 
Member State became a subject of controversy 1). 
It would be disruptive and would conflict with 
the standard practice followed by specialized agencies 
over the years if subsidiary or associated United 
Nations bodies, having specific technical areas of 
responsibility, were to re-examine the question of 
representation. 
22. Mr. TIBULEAC (Romania) said that the 
only legal Chinese Government was that of the 
People's Republic of China, a country with over 
700 million inhabitants. He would therefore vote 
against draft resolution I in the report of the Credentials 
Committee. 
23. Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) said that his 
country fully endorsed the report of the Credentials 
Committee. It had not abstained in the vote. It 
was essential to seek peaceful and amicable settlements 
of disputes, and until a more responsible 
body decided otherwise the General Conference 
should continue to accept representation of the 
Chiang Kai-shek regime. 
24. Mr. MELLER-CONRAD (Poland) said he 
1) General Assembly Resolution 396(V). 

had often objected to the credentials of the Chinese 
delegation to the General Conference. The People's 
Republic of China with its population of over 
700 million was rapidly becoming an important 
nuclear Power and it could hardly be wise to exclude 
such a country from the Agency's activities. 
If the Agency's work was to be really successful 
membership would have to be universal, and in 
any case the only legal Chinese Government was 
that in Peking. 

25. Similarly, it seemed ridiculous to overlook 
the existence of the German Democratic Republic 
as an independent State and to exclude it from 
membership of the Agency. 
26. Mr. O'CORNESSE (France) recalled that the 
question of Chinese representation had already 
been discussed by organizations belonging to the 
United Nations family and the views of his country 
had already been made known. Those views were 
based on the fact that the People's Republic of 
China was an economic, demographic and political 
reality and his delegation therefore considered that 
the Government in Peking was the only one qualified 
to represent China. 
27. Mr. YEN (China) thanked the delegates of 
the United States of America and the Philippines 
for their support. Drawing attention to developments 
in the Communist world, he found it strange 
that countries such as the Soviet Union and Poland 
were urging representation of the People's Republic 
of China. 
28. As the delegate of the United States had 
said, the question of Chinese representation had 
been discussed on previous occasions by the United 
Nations General Assembly and the General Conference 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
and it had always been decided that the legal 
Chinese regime was that of Chiang Kai-shek. 
29. It had been pointed out by previous speakers 
that there were over 700 million Chinese on the 
mainland, but it had not been pointed out that 
it was precisely the interests of those subjects which 
the Chiang Kai-shek regime was trying to protect. 
30. The PRESIDENT put draft resolution I in 
the report of theCredentials Committee[GC(X)/ 349] 
to the vote. 
31. There were 35 votes in favour and 18 against, 
with 7 abstentions. Draft resolution I was adopted. 
32. The PRESIDENT assumed that the Conference 
also wished to adopt draft resolution II 
in document GC(X)/349. 
33. It was so agreed. 
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(X)/OR. 110 
17 March 1967 

GENERAL Distribution 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

OFFICIAL RECORDS OF THE TENTH REGULAR SESSION (21-28 SEPTEMBER 1966) 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND TENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 28 September 1966, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 

CONTENTS 

Items of the Paragraphs 
agenda * • 
7 Statement by the Director General 18 
13 The Agency's programme and budget: ( a) Budget for 1966 19 — 20 
(b) Programme for 1967-68 and budget for 1967 21 — 29 
14 Scale of Members' contributions for 1967 30 — 31 

22 Closing of the Session 

GC(X)/343. 

STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

1. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that the 
discussions at the General Conference had strikingly 
illustrated the tremendous progress made in the 
development of the atomic energy programmes of 
States Members of the Agency. 
2. As in the past, the Secretariat would study 
carefully and in detail the text of all the statements 
made with a view to incorporating delegations' 
proposals in the Agency's programmes to the maximum 
possible extent. The programme for 1968 
was tentative and could be adjusted to meet the 
most urgent needs. Inevitably, conflicting views had 
been expressed on certain points; in such cases the 
views expressed would have to be reconciled as far 
as possible. 
32 — 44 

3. The debates had shown that Member States 
in general approved the Agency's programme and 
that the Agency must continue to play a significant 
and increasing role in the development of nuclear 
power, particularly in the developing countries. The 
proposed establishment of nuclear research complexes 
centred around reactors and the suggestion 
that the more advanced countries should carry out 
research work with experimental reactors constructed 
by them in the developing countries were among 
the ideas that merited serious study. The Agency 
would continue to provide basic services, such as 
power surveys, site evaluations, reactor safety evaluations 
etc. It hoped that those and related activities 
would make it easier for Member States to 
obtain funds from international sources. 
4. Once again, the great potential of dual-purpose 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(X)/INF/89/Rev.3. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

plants for generating electricity and producing fresh 
water had been emphasized, and he welcomed the 
generous offers made by the more advanced countries 
to assist the Agency in its desalting programme. 
It had been rightly stressed that, at the present 
stage of technological development, the only economic 
application of nuclear desalting was in large 
dual-purpose plants operating in countries with an 
integrated power system and large-scale power consumption. 
However, that should merely encourage 
research with a view to reducing costs and making 
smaller plants commercially available. The late 
Dr. Homi Bhabha had rightly stated that "there is 
no power as expensive as no power". For the arid 
areas of the world it could be said with equal 
truth that "there is no water as expensive as no 
water", since in many cases water was the crucial 
factor for human survival. In that connection, he 
welcomed the favourable references to the Agency's 
hydrology programme and the suggestions made for 
expanding it. The main purpose of the hydrological 
studies was to assist developing countries, and the 
time might now have come to intensify such work. 

5. He was also gratified by thesupportexpressed 
for the Agency's nuclear data and scientific information 
services and by the offers which Member 
States had made to act as hosts to scientific meetings; 
those offers would be accepted wherever 
possible. 
6. The value of regional projects had clearly 
been recognized and a plea had been made for their 
continuation and expansion, but in that connection 
he wished to sound a note of warning. Those projects 
and other activities could not be expanded 
with the funds at present available, and it should be 
recognized that the price for any desired expansion 
might be an increase in the budget, particularly 
if new projects were to be undertaken. 
7. Many of the statements made had expressed 
satisfaction with the achievements of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste and the 
important part it was playing in the scientific field 
and the field of training, as well as its potential 
role in the development of fundamental science. 
The same measure of agreement had not been 
reached with regard to the Agency's responsibility 
for continuing its support of the Centre and expanding 
its work, bearing in mind the priorities to be 
accorded to other activities covered by the Agency's 
budget. He intended to consult the Scientific Council 
of the Centre, asking it to report on the work done 
during the Centre's first two years and make recommendations 
for the future. That report, together 
with the record of the discussions in the Programme, 
Technical and Budget Committee, would be useful 
when the Board of Governors came to consider 
the proposals he would submit to it. 
8. The Agency's activities in developing international 
standards and regulatory services had 
received general commendation. He believed safeguards 
might be more widely accepted if the practice 
of introducing into regional activities elements of 
control which were essentially of an international 
character were avoided. 
9. The provision of basic data by all Member 
States would make it possible to extend the continuous 
study of world resources of uranium and 
thorium. 
10. It had been almost unanimously recognized 
that it would be desirable for the Agency to continue 
its technical assistance activities. The main adverse 
comment had related to the volume of assistance, 
which was determined by the voluntary contributions 
received. He was therefore very pleased that, at the 
present session, voluntary contributions had shown 
an increase over previous years, and the Agency 
welcomed the pledges made by countries which 
had previously made no contributions or which 
were resuming monetary contributions. The Agency 
would continue to press for the maximum financial 
support from the United Nations Development 
Programme. The number of Special Fund projects 
whose execution was entrusted to the Agency was 
expected to increase, but it was for Member States 
to take the initiative in relation to such projects. 
The Agency would continue to place as many 
research contracts as possiblein developing countries. 
11. He was glad that many delegations had stressed 
the importance of Agency safeguards and their 
potential role in ensuring the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. The application of safeguards was 
the result of nine years of patient effort by the 
Agency, and it was gratifying that the safeguards 
system was generally accepted and that its field of 
application had considerably expanded. It had rightly 
been pointed out that the administration of safeguards 
and the inspection procedures needed to be 
kept constantly under review, so as to ensure that 
the operations subjecttosafeguards werenotimpeded. 
It should be noted that the managers of facilities 
placed under safeguards had expressed satisfaction 
with the manner in which inspections had been 
conducted. The goodwill of the Member States 
concerned was most encouraging, and he hoped that 
other countries would be prompted to follow their 
example. 
12. He sympathized with the proposal to simplify 
the legal provisions governing the transfer of the 
administration of safeguards in relation to bilateral 
arrangements. The matter would be further studied 
by the Secretariat. 
13. With regard to control and non-proliferation, 
it had been frequently stated that the Agency was 

110th PLENARY MEETING 

willing to play its part when called upon to do so. 
Continuous improvement of the safeguards system 
was the best contribution the Agency could make 
towards ensuring that atomic energy was not used 
for destructive purposes. 

14. Many comments had been made regarding the 
re-organization of the structure and administration 
of the Agency. Indeed, the continuing efficiency 
of the organization was his constant concern. He 
would continue to propose readjustments within 
the Secretariat, but Member States must support 
him by showing their willingness to relinquish 
posts when it was necessary to abolish them in the 
interests of economy and efficiency. 
15. The desire of developing countries for wider 
representation in the Secretariat was quite legitimate, 
but it should be remembered that Article VII. D of 
the Statute laid down the criteria governing recruitment. 
He was doing all in his power to widen the 
representation of Member States on the staff and 
had tried to remove any possibility of discrimination 
or special pleading by establishing a system whereby 
they were notified of vacant Professional posts and 
invited to submit candidates within a period of 
three months. He strongly urged Member States 
which considered they were inadequately represented 
on the staff to submit candidates with the qualifications 
mentioned in the notifications of vacancies. 
All applications would be impartially considered 
with a view to ensuring as equitable a representation 
as was possible in conformity with the provisions 
of the Statute. 
16. Many Member States had shown interest in 
the Secretariat's study of the possibility of holding 
General Conferences every second year, and the 
Secretariat would continue to study that problem 
and its implications. It had been suggested that 
speakers in the general debate should, before the 
session, provide written statements on achievements 
in their respective countries in order to reduce the 
time devoted to that item. Such statements could 
then be made available at the Conference in the 
form of a booklet providing information on the 
current situation in Member States in regard to 
atomic energy. 
17. The interest shown by Member States in the 
Agency's efficient co-operation and co-ordination of 
activities with other United Nations organizations 
would encourage him to make further efforts in 
that direction in future. Governments must, however, 
help him by giving their delegations to such 
organizations similar instructions. 
18. He was grateful for the support and understanding 
he had received from Member States during 
the five years in which he had served as Director 
General and hoped he would continue to have the 
benefit of that support in carrying out his task and 
solving the increasingly difficult problems which lay 
ahead. 

THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME AND BUDGET 

(a) BUDGET FOR 1966 [GC(X)/348] 
19. Mr. FERRO (Hungary), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report under item 13(a) of 
the agenda: The Agency's budget for 1966[GC(X)/ 
348]. At the end of the report was a draft resolution 
which the Committee recommended for adoption. 
20. The draft resolution in document GC(X)/348 {Supplementary 
budgetary appropriation for 1966) was adopted. 
(b) PROGRAMME FOR 1967-68 AND BUDGET 
FOR 1967 [GC(X)/350, 351, 352] 
21. Mr. FERRO (Hungary), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, introduced 
the Committee's first, second and third reports 
under item 13(b) of the agenda: Programme for 
1967-68 and budget for 1967 [GC(X)/350, 351 
and 352]. Annexed to those reports were four, 
three and one draft resolutions respectively which 
the Committee recommended for adoption. 
22. The draft resolution in Annex I to document 
GC{X)j 350 {Regular Budget appropriations for 1967) 
was adopted. 
23. The draft resolution in Annex II to document 
GC{X)/350 {Operational Budget allocations for 1967) 
was adopted. 
24. The draft resolution in Annex III to document 
GC{X)/350 {Use of the Working Capital Fund in 1967) 
was adopted. 
25. The draft resolution in Annex TV to document 
GC{X)1350 {Abolition of the Publications Revolving 
Fund) was adopted. 
26. The draft resolution in Annex I to document 
GC{X)1351 {The future of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste) was adopted. 
27. The draft resolution in Annex II to document 
GC{X)j351 {Education and training) was adopted. 
28. The draft resolution in Annex III to document 
GC{X)j351 {Centenary commemoration of the birth of 
Marie Sklodowska- Curie) was adopted. 
29- The draft resolution annexed to document GC{X)/352 
{Review of the Agency's activities) was adopted. 


TENTH REGULAR SESSION 

SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 

1967[GC(X)/353] 

30. Mr. FERRO (Hungary), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report under item 14 of 
the agenda: Scale of Members' contributions for 1967 
[GC(X)/353]. At the end of the report was a draft 
resolution which the Committee recommended for 
adoption. 
31. The draft resolution in document GC{X)j353 was 
adopted. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

32. Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) congratulated 
the President on his conduct of the Conference's 
debates. Thanks to his unfailing authority and tact 
the session had proceeded exceptionally smoothly. 
The harmonious atmosphere that had prevailed 
showed that all delegations wished to extend the 
use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes and so 
promote the cause of peace. That was a cause to 
which the Philippines was deeply devoted and it 
was in that spirit that President Marcos had 
convened a summit conference of countries in Asia 
and the Pacific to establish peace in that area and 
throughout the rest of the world. 
33. Mr. McCORDICK (Canada), speaking on 
behalf of Canada and the United States of America, 
paid tribute to the President and expressed his 
thanks to the Austrian Government and the City 
of Vienna which had again extended generous 
hospitality to delegations attending the General 
Conference. 
34. Mr. ESCHAUZIER (Netherlands ) noted with 
satisfaction that the subjects examined by the General 
Conference had generated virtually no heat and that 
under the brilliant direction of its President the 
work of the tenth session had been exceptionally 
fruitful. He joined in the expressions of gratitude 
to the Austrian Government and the City of Vienna 
for their hospitality. 
35. Mr. PRADO (Brazil), on behalf of the Latin 
American delegations, thanked all those who had 
contributed to the successful work done at the 
tenth session, more especially the President, the 
Director General and the Austrian authorities. 
36. Mr. MASSANGU (Democratic Republic of 
the Congo), on behalf of his own delegation and 
those of other African countries, associated himself 
with previous speakers in expressing his gratitude 
to the President, the Director General and the 
Secretariat. 

37. Mr. TIMBS (Australia), on behalf of the 
countries of South-East Asia and the Pacific, said 
that the understanding established between the 
President and the various delegations as well as 
between them and the Director General had enabled 
the Conference to complete its work in the most 
favourable conditions. 
38. The PRESIDENT said it seemed that there 
was general satisfaction with the Agency's achievements 
and broad agreement as to what paths it 
should follow in the immediate future. 
39. Several delegations had pointed out that the 
Agency's work of placing atomic energy at the 
service of the developing countries was one in 
which there was still room for great expansion. 
To do that work effectively the Agency must 
facilitate co-operation between those countries and 
those in which advanced nuclear technologies were 
being developed. 
40. His task as President had been made easier 
by the extent to which delegates had focused their 
attention chiefly upon the scientific and technical 
questions which fell within the Agency's purview. 
That way of proceeding had now become traditional 
in the General Conference, a development which 
could only enhance the Agency's effectiveness. 
41. Methodically and without undue publicity the 
Agency had set about its task of developing techniques 
designed to prevent atomic energy from being 
used for military purposes. In his view the general 
and unconditional acceptance of effective international 
controls could only be beneficial, but that 
process involved problems and decisions outside 
the Agency's domain. 
42. In conclusion, he expressed his thanks to 
the Director General, his staff and all delegations 
for their unstinted co-operation and conveyed the 
Conference's gratitude to the Austrian authorities 
and the City of Vienna for their generous hospitality 
during the session. 
43. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

44. The PRESIDENT then declared the tenth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m. 


