International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XI)/OR.111l 
8 February 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER - 2 OCTOBER 1967) 

ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 26 September 1967, at 3.15 p.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. SARASIN (Thailand) 
President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the 
provisional 

\ Opening of the session 1 -4 
2 Election of the President 5— 9 
3(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 10—11 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 12 — 16 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 17 — 20 
6 Applications for membership of the Agency 21 — 25 
7 Statement by the Director General 26 — 63 
Statement by the Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations 64—7 2 

* GC(XI)/354. 
OPENING OF THE SESSION 
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
the delegates from Member States, the observers 

1. The TEMPORARYPRESIDENT declared the from States which were not yet Members of the 
eleventh regular session of the General Conference Agency, the representatives of the United Nations 
open. and other intergovernmental organizations and of 
non-governmental organizations who had come to 

2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of take part in the work of the General Conference. 
Procedure, he invited the General Conference to The Conference was also honoured by the presence 
observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer of the Federal Chancellor of Austria, the President 
or meditation. of Parliament and the Vice-Chancellor, as well as of 
high officials of the Government and of the City of 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. Vienna. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

4. With the eleventh regular session of the 
General Conference the Agency was entering its 
second decade. Great changes had taken place in 
the world since 1957, but the modest part which 
the Agency had played in efforts to establish world 
peace had been very worthwhile. It was incumbent 
upon all delegates, and upon the Governments 
which they represented, to do all in their power to 
ensure that the Agency, during its second decade, 
contributed even more towards enabling the whole 
of mankind to enjoy the advantages offered by 
atomic energy. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations 
for the office of President. 
6. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said that he had pleasure in nominating 
a delegate from an East European country: 
Mr. Neumann, Chairman of the Czechoslovak Atomic 
Energy Commission. Mr. Neumann had been head 
of his country's delegation to the United Nations 
Conferences on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy; 
since 1965 he had represented Czechoslovakia on 
the Board of Governors of the Agency. His great 
experience in the peaceful applications of atomic 
energy made him especially fitted to assume the 
Presidency for the session. 
7. Mr. HIRSCH (France) seconded, and 
Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) supported the nomination. 
8. Mr. Neumann (Czechoslovakia) was elected President 
of the General Conference for its eleventh regular session by 
acclamation. 
Mr. Neumann (Czechoslovakia) took the Chair. 

9. The PRESIDENT thanked the General Conference 
for the great honour it had done his country 
and himself in electing him President for the 
eleventh session. He regarded his election as recognition 
of Czechoslovakia's constructive role in the 
efforts made to attain the Agency's objectives. The 
importance of the Agency was continually increasing, 
especially in the eyes of the public, in view of the 
responsibility which would devolve upon it in matters 
of control should a treaty on the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons be concluded. Particular attention 
would be given to that question during the present 
session. He would do all in his power to see that 
the proceedings were carried on in a spirit of cooperation. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE 

10. The PRESIDENT proposed, in accordance 
with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, that a 
Credentials Committee should be appointed consisting 
of the following nine Members: Australia, Chile, 
El Salvador, Lebanon, Philippines, Poland, Spain, 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the 
United States of America. 

11. The proposal was adopted unanimously. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

12. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 34 
of the Rules of Procedure, the General Conference 
was required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the 
election of the Chairmen of the two Main Committees. 
He therefore intended to suspend the plenary 
meeting for a short time to enable the two Committees 
to elect their Chairmen. 
The meeting was suspended at 3.30p.m. and resumed 
at 3.40p.m. 

13. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President of the Conference. 
14. Mr. HAYMERLE (Austria) proposed the delegates 
of the following States: Australia, France, 
Federal Republic of Germany, India, Iran, Japan, 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the 
United States of America. 
15. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia) seconded the 
nominations. 
16. The delegates nominated were declared elected to 
the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE 

GENERAL COMMITTEE 

17. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the General 
Conference was required to elect four additional 
members to the General Committee. He invited 
nominations. 
18. Mr. BILLIG (Poland) nominated the delegates 
of the following States: Brazil, Canada, Hungary 
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland. 
19. Mr. EL-SOLH (Lebanon) seconded the nominations. 
20. The delegates of the States nominated were declared 
elected to the General Committee, which was thus duly 
appointed in compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 

AGENCY [GC(XI)/365] 

21. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference 
to consider the recommendation ofthe Board 

111th. PLENARY MEETING 

of Governors in document GC(XI)/ 365 concerning 
the application for membership of the Agency made 
by Malaysia and the draft resolution contained in 
that document. 

22. Lord PENNEY (United Kingdom) supported 
the application, presented as it was by a member of 
the British Commonwealth. Approval of the application 
would be of benefit both to the Agency 
and to Malaysia. 
23. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) also supported 
the application for membership. 
24. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
25. The PRESIDENT stated that Malaysia would 
become a Member of the Agency as soon as its 
instrument of acceptance of the Statute had been 
deposited with the United States Government, in 
accordance with Article XXI.C of the Statute. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

26. The DIRECTOR GENERAL pointed out that 
the present development of nuclear weapons techniques, 
their future potential and the disastrous 
consequences which nuclear war would have for 
the whole of civilization were giving rise to growing 
concern among the peoples of the world, which was 
manifesting itself in various ways. For example, the 
General Assembly of the United Nations had decided 
to undertake a complete study of the effects of the 
possible use of nuclear weapons. Among the experts 
appointed for that purpose by the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations were the Chairman of the 
Agency's Board of Governors and several other 
persons who were participating or had participated 
in the Agency's work. Another example was the 
conclusion of a treaty for the prohibition of nuclear 
weapons in Latin America which, already ratified by 
Mexico, provided that the Agency should exercise 
certain verifying functions. 
27. Since the signing in 1963 of the treaty banning 
nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in 
outer space and under water, the deliberations of 
the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament 
had been followed with the keenest interest, since it 
was hoped that they would soon lead to the conclusion 
of a treaty on the non-proliferation of atomic 
weapons. It was, however, only very recently that 
the two major nuclear Powers had presented to the 
Committee identical proposals for a draft treaty; 
that draft was incomplete and had not yet been 
accepted by the Committee. 
28. He was nevertheless satisfied with the results 
obtained, for he personally felt that the proliferation 
of such powerful means of destruction as nuclear 
weapons would considerably increase the risks of 
conflict and thus make the world less safe for 
mankind. There was also reason for gratification 
in the fact that the draft treaty mentioned the 
Agency's role and the value of its Safeguards 
System. 

29. That system, at first limited to reactors with a 
thermal capacity of less than 100 MW, had been 
extended to reactors of all sizes and to plants for 
processing irradiated fuel. A further extension to 
plants for converting nuclear materials and fabricating 
nuclear fuel was to be studied in November by 
a Working Group of the Board of Governors, which 
had already requested the Agency to investigate 
ways and means of extending the Safeguards System 
to uranium radioisotope separation facilities. 
The system would then cover all the principal 
nuclear facilities involved in the fuel cycle. 
30. The safeguards agreements approved by the 
Board at present covered 65 reactors situated in 
29 countries which had a total thermal capacity of 
3200MW. In one case the Agency was controlling a 
reprocessing plantwheneveritprocessed safeguarded 
fuel. Although present safeguards agreements covered 
less than 8 % of the thermal capacity of eXIsting 
civilian reactors, they represented a promising 
start. It had to be recognized that safeguards would 
not be without effect on a deeply cherished concept, 
that of national sovereignty. The expansion of the 
Agency's Safeguards System raised the question of the 
way in which the Board of Governors and the 
General Conference should exercise their supervisory 
functions. Drawing an analogy with monetary 
control, he recalled that he had recommended the 
establishment at an appropriate time of an external 
auditing unit for safeguards activities, which would 
report to the Board and the General Conference. 
31. It was remarkable that of the 29 States which 
had submitted their reactors to Agency safeguards, 
18 were developing countries. Although the main 
part of the power output he had mentioned was 
represented by reactors in Japan, the United Kingdom 
and the United States of America, it was to be 
regretted that so many countries in Europe, one of 
the most highly developed areas of the world, had 
not yet given tangible expression to their support 
by placing their nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards. 
32. Referring to Agency safeguards as compared 
with regional or bilateral safeguards, he recalled that 
at the sixth regular session of the General Conference 
in 1962 he had stated that in principle it was 
difficult to understand why safeguards applied under 
bilateral agreements should be considered less 
onerous and more acceptable than those of a multilateral 
nature applied by an international organization 
of which the recipient country was a Member 
State [ 1]. Since nothing had happened in the meantime 
to make him change his mind, he still maintained 
that if a safeguards system was to be credible, 
[ 1 ] GC(VI)/ OR.6 3, para. 34. 

 GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

offer the necessary assurance and avoid the discrimination 
so often referred to, it must be international 
in character. 

33. A question which had often been raised was 
whether, if the control functions not yet specified in 
the draft treaty on the non-proliferation of atomic 
weapons were entrusted to the Agency, it would be 
in a position to cope with the task. It was obviously 
not possible to answer that question without knowing 
what would be required, but if it were proposed 
to apply the present system to all nuclear activities 
in countries not possessing nuclear weapons, the 
Agency undoubtedly had the necessary background 
experience to perform that task. Nevertheless, it 
would be necessary to recruit additional staff to 
carry out the safeguards and inspection work which 
the body responsible for control would have to 
undertake immediately, and further new posts would 
subsequently be needed because of the growth in 
nuclear power programmes. Suitably qualified staff 
from other Departments of the Agency could take 
over some of the work. 
34. It might be possible, through research and 
development work carried out in co-operation with 
Member States, to simplify the present inspection 
procedures; to that end, technical representatives of 
nine Member States, of the European Nuclear Energy 
Agency and of EURATOM, had met to exchange 
views on the subject. 
35. Not only would the additional staff already 
mentioned be required; well-trained technicians 
would be needed and, with a view to raising the 
level of competence, he was proposing that a training 
course be held in 1968. 
36. He believed he was expressing the will of the 
Agency in saying that it was ready to perform the 
control function envisaged in the draft treaty. He 
was confident that its eXIsting safeguards system 
would render it capable of doing so, and he 
believed it could justifiably claim that it was the 
organization best suited to perform that important 
task. 
37. At its tenth regular session, the General 
Conference had requested the Board of Governors 
to investigate, in consultation with the Director 
General, ways and means of increasing the Agency's 
assistance to developing countries [2]. Needless to 
say, the recommendations made by the Board of 
Governors and the General Conference would be 
very closely examined in the preparation of future 
programme and budgets. 
38. Most of the developing countries believed that 
there should be a progressive shift in the 
programme towards the applications of atomic energy 
in the fields of electric power, agriculture, hydrology, 
raw materials development, etc. It was only natural 
that more than half of the comments received from 
Governments related directly to the technical assist[
2] GC(X)/RES/217. 
ance programme. He could not but continue to 
lament the inadequacy of the funds available; the 
praise bestowed on the Agency's annual report on 
technical assistance activities was unfortunately not 
reflected in the voluntary contributions pledged. 
Indeed the situation continued to deteriorate, as 
was shown by the fact that, unless there was a 
marked increase in voluntary contributions, it would 
be impossible to satisfy more than 30 % of the 
requests for technical assistance in 1968; unfortunately, 
the indications were that pledges of contributions 
might decrease. He therefore urgently 
appealed to Member States to pledge sums which 
were not necessarily based on the scale for assessment 
of Members' contributions to the Regular 
Budget, but were, if possible, substantially higher. 

39- At a time when the advanced countries were 
turning more and more towards the intensive use of 
nuclear power, the progress they made would still 
further widen the gap separating them from the 
developing countries. Expansion of aid to the latter 
should therefore be an overriding obligation upon 
the advanced countries. 

40. The review ofthe Agency's activities had shown 
the importance of regional projects. In that connection 
it might be noted that the Middle Eastern 
Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab Countries, 
set up in Cairo with the Agency's assistance, would 
be self-supporting as from the end of 1968. 
41. With regard to the desire expressed by numerous 
Member States for larger representation on the 
staff, he said he had done his utmost to give practical 
effect to the policy now followed in the United 
Nations and the specialized agencies. The percentage 
of staff members holding permanent or longterm 
appointments had been reduced during the past 
year, although it had already been lower than in 
other United Nations organizations. The present 
composition of the staff reflected the efforts which 
he had made to rectify the inadequate representation 
of certain Member States. As to the representation 
of developing countries, he had tried to ensure that 
it was not only in keeping with Article VII.D of 
the Statute but that it was also based on population 
and their relative importance in world affairs and 
atomic energy development. It was, however, necessary 
to ensure that the more assertive developing 
countries were not represented to an extent which 
would prejudice future participation in the Agency's 
work by developing countries not yet represented 
in the Secretariat. He also pointed out that a recent 
survey carried out by the Consultative Committee 
on Administrative Questions ofthe United Nations 
had shown that the percentage increase in the 
Agency's staff over the period 1961-1966 had been 
the second lowest in all United Nations organizations. 
42. The number of orders for nuclear power 
stations had continued to increase during the past 
year. In the United States, for example, orders had 
been placed in the first seven months of 1967 for a 

111th. PLENARY MEETING 

capacity of 20 000 MW(e). In 1965 it had been 
predicted that the total capacity in 1980 would be 
170 000 MW(e), but it was now believed that it 
would be at least 300 000MW(e). It was encouraging 
that a few developing countries were now seriously 
investigating the role that nuclear power stations 

— single- or dual-purpose — could play in the near 
future. The expansion of nuclear power raised 
further problems with regard to waste disposal. 
Preliminary consultations were taking place 
regarding the establishment by the Agency, with 
the collaboration of Member States, of a register 
of radioactive waste disposals into the sea. 
43. The rapid development of nuclear power 
raised a number of problems, one of the principal 
of which was related to the financing difficulties 
experienced by developing countries in the construction 
of power stations. In that context it was gratifying 
to note that the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development was consulting with the 
Agency on a report on prospects for loans and 
credits for submission to the Bank's directors. 
44. The Agency was fully aware of the problems 
connected with uranium ore reserves and of the 
resurgence of prospecting for uranium, and had 
reflected that awareness in the programme of scientific 
meetings for 1968. 
45. Desalting was being adopted on an everincreasing 
scale as a means of satisfying world 
fresh-water requirements. Conventional plants producing 
250 000 m3/day were already in operation, 
the largest being those in Kuwait, designed and 
developed in the United Kingdom. The proposals 
pur forward by the United Kingdom for a desalting 
plant in a ship operating in coastal waters were 
very interesting. With regard to the use of nuclear 
power for desalting, a fast reactor plant to produce 
150 MW(e) and 120 000 m3/day of fresh water 
was nearing completion on the Caspian Sea coast 
in the Soviet Union, and in the United States it 
had been decided to build a plant which would 
produce 1600 MW(e) and 190 000 m3/day of 
fresh water. 
46. The installation of large desalting plants in 
some of the world's arid zones might not only 
make it possible to create new centres of population, 
but also help to alleviate political tension. 
47. The shortage of water in the world had been 
further highlighted at the Water for Peace Conference 
held in Washington in May 1967; that 
conference had clearly demonstrated the importance 
of the Agency's activities in desalting and hydrology. 
48. A new concept had recently emerged, that of 
an energy centre with a large power station, whereby 
the economic advantages of the nuclear heat 
source in very large units and the feasibility of 
siting nuclear power plants irrespective of the local 
availability of fossil fuels could be turned to 
account, for instance, to support major chemical 
plants. At the invitation of the United States Atomic 
Energy Commission, an Agency specialist had 
recently participated in studies of that concept. The 
possibility of surrounding such centres with plants 
for manufacturing fertilizers and other industrial and 
agricultural chemicals, and with other industries 
requiring large amounts of power, was being evaluated. 
That type of energy centre, already eXIsting 
in the form of large hydro-electric stations in the 
Soviet Union, might make it possible to plan' new 
population centres in which living conditions would 

be optimal rather than merely tolerable. 

49. In view of the large number of meetings 
relating to atomic energy, he was making efforts 
to achive the closest possible co-ordination with the 
organizations concerned. He also proposed to facilitate 
the participation of developing countries in 
the Agency's scientific meetings by making funds 
available to meet part of the travel costs. 
50. The Regular Budget, totalling approXImately 
$10.5 million, showed an increase of 10.4% over 
that for 1967, of which 5 % was due to rising costs 
and 5.4 % to programme expansion. Those percentages 
were well below the corresponding figures for 
the budgets of the United Nations and most of 
the specialized agencies. 
51. He then referred to certain activities which 
were to be expanded in 1968. First, there was the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
If that system developed in the way preliminary 
studies indicated, and if the necessary support was 
forthcoming from Member States, it could become 
one of the Agency's major activities. It would allow 
a complete file of references to scientific literature 
published in Member States to be stored in the 
Agency's computer, and any Member State would 
be able to use the file in its own computers. The 
importance of automatic data processing was 
recognized in many countries and could be explained 
by the vast increase in the number of publications. 
INIS would be the essential instrument allowingthe 
Agency to "foster the exchange of scientific and 
technical information" in accordance with its statutory 
functions. The collection of nuclear data by the 
Agency continued to expand and was followed with 
increasing interest by Member States. Consultants 
had stressed the fact that savings could be achieved 
if the Agency were soon to replace its present 
computer by a third-generation machine; the preliminary 
work for INIS would make that change 
even more urgently necessary. 
52. The proposed budget increase for safeguards 
represented only the strict minimum necessary to 
enable the Agency to meet its responsibilities during 
1968. 
53. By a decision of the Board of Governors, 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics had 
been established on a more permanent basis, and 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

an agreement was being concluded with the Italian 
Government covering the Centre's operation for the 
next six years. Financing of the Centre remained a 
problem; in addition to the contributions from the 
Agency and the Italian Government, outside sources 
of financing would be required in order to render 
the Centre viable. He had appealed to Member 
States and intended to inquire whether UNESCO 
could make a larger contribution. 

54. The increase in the operating costs of the 
Laboratory tended to reduce the funds available for 
providing technical assistance to the developing 
countries. It would therefore be necessary carefully 
to consider whether the Operational Budget could 
continue to bear those costs and at the same time 
meet the increasing demands made upon it for 
technical assistance. The Laboratory was doing 
useful work for Member States. In studying proposals 
to expand that work, he wished to avoid 
setting up facilities which might already eXIst but 
not be fully used elsewhere. Although it might be 
more convenient if the work was concentrated in 
the Agency's Laboratory, use should be made of 
facilities in other laboratories, particularly in developing 
countries, since that would stimulate research 
in such countries. 
55. In view of the limited resources available to 
the Agency for its own technical assistance 
programme, he hoped that Member States would 
make wider use of the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP). As Member States 
established their own priorities for the requests 
made to UNDP, it was up to them to see that 
atomic energy received an appropriate share of the 
resources available. 
56. During the past year, the report of the Ad 
Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances 
of the United Nations and the Specialized 
Aggencies [3] had been very closely studied by 
various co-ordinating groups. The Board of Governors 
had decided that the Agency should comply 
with the recommendations of that Committee to the 
extent possible without revision of the Agency's 
Statute. The Secretariat was therefore in the process 
of preparing a new six-year plan and a new form 
of presentation of the programme and budget. 
With regard to the joint inspection unit recommended 
by the Committee, he had reserved the 
Agency's position on two points: access to confidential 
commercial and industrial information available 
to the Agency, in particular in relation to its 
safeguards work and the transmission to the Economic 
and Social Council of the United Nations 
(ECOSOC) of inspectors' reports, since certain of 
the Agency's activities did not fall within the 
purview of ECOSOC. 
57. The Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic 
Energy in Food and Agriculture had become a good 
[3] United Nations document A/6343. 
example of collaboration, not only in theory but 
also in practice, between two organizations. He 
wished, however, to refer to one difficulty facing 
joint undertakings — the tendency in governing or 
excutive bodies, to shift the main responsibility for 
financing from one organization to another. The 
representatives of Member States should see to it 
that joint undertakings were treated in a consistent 
manner in all the organizations concerned and that 
they received the support they deserved. 

58. The system of liaison officers between the 
Agency and WHO continued to operate to the full 
satisfaction of both organizations. The Agency representative 
to WHO would in future also maintain 
liaison with other organizations having their headquarters 
in Geneva. 
59. He was gratified at the establishment in Vienna 
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
(UNIDO), and extended a welcome to it on 
behalf of the Agency. Excellent relations had already 
been established with UNIDO, and an attempt was 
being made to establish joint services which would 
result in savings for both organizations. The Agency 
would also welcome the opportunity to co-operate 
with UNIDO in, for example, the industrial applications 
of radioisotopes, the use of nuclear techniques 
in the food industry and, of course, the use of 
nuclear power to promote industrial development. 
60. The Board of Governors had accepted the 
Austrian Government's generous offer to provide a 
site and a building for the Agency's permanent 
headquarters at a nominal rent of S 1 a year for a 
period of 99 years. A similar offer had been 
accepted by UNIDO. The Austrian authorities had 
indicated that the UNIDO and Agency buildings 
would be completed by 1971 and 1972 respectively. 
Discussions had taken place between the 
Austrian authorities, UNIDO and the Agency to 
determine what further arrangements should be 
made, and the Austrian authorities had been provided 
with all the background material requested. 
He wished once again to thank the Austrian Government 
for its continued interest in, and support of, 
the Agency. 
61. He welcomed Sierra Leone and Singapore to 
membership of the Agency, and regretted that one 
Member State, Honduras, had been forced to withdraw 
from the Agency for economic reasons; the 
Agency now had a membership of 97 States. 
62. One week previously the scientific world had 
learned with sorrow of the death of Sir John Cockcroft, 
whose work had contributed greatly to the 
advent of the nuclear age and to the initial activities 
of the Agency. His loss would be keenly felt by all. 
63. The present session of the General Conference 
marked the end of ten years of Agency 
activities and the beginning of a new decade. In 
view of the eXIsting climate of international tension, 

111th. PLENARY MEETING 

it was encouraging to find that nations were able 
to agree on important subjects which might affect 
the survival of mankind. In that connection, the 
Agency might be called upon to assume wider responsibilities, 
and such a development might, to a 
greater extent than anything that had happened in 
the past, enable it to achieve the objectives stated 
in Article II of its Statute, namely to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, and to perform the function, laid down in 
Article III.B. 1, of furthering the establishment of 
safeguarded world-wide disarmament. 

STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS 

64. Mr. SPINELLI (Representative of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations) said that 
it was a great pleasure for him to attend once more 
a session of the General Conference as representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
who had requested him to offer his congratulations 
to the Agency on its achievements during the past 
year, and to express to the Conference his best 
wishes for the success of the present session. 
65. He wished to associate himself on behalf of 
the United Nations with the sentiments expressed 
by the Director General on the death of Sir John 
Cockcroft, who had been a member of the SecretaryGeneral's 
Scientific Advisory Committee. 
66. As the Agency moved into its eleventh year, 
it was fulfilling a role of major importance in the 
United Nations family, a role which could only 
increase in importance as the world significance of 
atomic energy continued to grow. Relations between 
the United Nations and the Agency remained very 
close and the recent establishment of UNIDO in 
Vienna opened up new possibilities for co-operation. 
67. On the subject of co-operation with the United 
Nations, mention should first be made of the work 
of ECOSOC's Advisory Committee on the Application 
of Science and Technology to Development, 
and of that of the United Nations Scientific Committee 
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. A field 
where co-operation was particularly close was that 
of desalting of sea water; during the past year the 
United Nations and the Agency had sent a mission 
to Chile, Ecuador and Peru to investigate the prospects 
in those countries for the use of nuclear 
energy in desalting. In addition, the Agency had 
adopted a large-scale programme for applying nuclear 
techniques in hydrology, which involved co-operation 
with the United Nations and various specialized 
agencies. 

68. As regards technical assistance, the Agency 
was executing a number of major projects under 
UNDP; in the period of 1965-1966 more than 
$2 million had been made available to the Agency 
for that purpose. In 1966 the Agency had received 
about $700 000 for the execution of four projects 
under the Special Fund. 
69. He felt that the delegate to the Conference 
would be interested in subjects of a more general 
nature. He would mention only two of them, of 
widely differing scope and nature: the possibility of 
holding a fourth international conference on the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and the question of 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The first question 
would shortly be considered by the SecretaryGeneral's 
Scientific Advisory Committee. As regards 
the second, to which the Secretary-General attached 
the greatest importance, the draft treaty recently 
submitted by the Soviet Union and the United 
States of America to the Eighteen-Nation Committee 
on Disarmament was a most auspicious development. 
Whatever the final decision on the subject 
of inspection, it was inconceivable that the Agency 
would not have an important part to play. 
70. In the past year, special attention had been 
devoted to the implementation of the recommendations 
of the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to Examine 
the Finances of the United Nations and the 
Specialized Agencies. The Secretary-General appreciated 
the co-operation of the Agency in the consultations 
which had taken place, and was gratified by 
the recent decision of the Board of Governors 
with regard to consultation on the recommendations 
relating to a joint inspection unit. 
71. Like other international bodies and like the 
United Nations itself, the Agency could attain its 
objectives only in a favourable political climate. It 
was satisfactory, in that respect, to note that the 
Agency's work for the good of mankind was not 
being impeded by the disputes and even open 
conflicts with which the world, unfortunately, was 
faced. 
72. In conclusion, he wished to convey to the 
Director General the compliments of the Secretary-
General, who was confident that the fruitful collaboration 
between the United Nations and the Agency, 
whose work was vital to the whole international 
community, would continue to develop. 
The meeting rose at 4.45p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XI)/OR.112 
31 January 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER-2 OCTOBER 1967) 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 27 September 1967 at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the Pargraphs 
agenda * 
8 Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items for initial discussion & 
10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1966-67 3 — 104 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 3 — 27 
Argentina 28 — 40 
South Africa 41 — 52 
Mexico 53 — 71 
Colombia 72 — 93 
Hungary 94 — 104 

GC(XI)/368. 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCA-GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
TION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1966-67 
[GC(XI)/367] [GC(XI)/355, 355/Corr.l, 366] 

3. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) 
said he wished to convey the deep regret felt by 
1. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conthe 
United States delegation at the death of Sir 

ference accept the recommendations made by the 

John Cockcroft, who had been an outstanding 

General Committee in regard to the agenda and 

pioneer in the field of nuclear energy and who 

the allocation of items for initial discussion 

had done so much towards establishment of the 

[GC(XI)/367]. 

Agency. 

2. The recommendations of the General Committee 4. He deeply appreciated the honour of reprewere 
accepted, and the agenda was thereby approved. senting the United States for the seventh time at 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

the General Conference of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency and of addressing his fellow delegates 
to the Conference, and noted with gratification 
that the success achieved to date by the 
Agency was the composite result of the work done 
by all its staff, who were to be congratulated on 
their competence and dedication to the pioneer 
cause of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

5. He wished to read the following message 
to the Conference from the President of the United 
States of America: 
"I welcome this opportunity to speak.through 
Dr. Seaborg, to the Delegates to the Eleventh 
General Conference of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. 

"Today, we realize, more than ever before, 
the power of science and technology to influence 
economic, social and political developments in 
all nations and regions of the world. We also 
realize that the fullest development of scientific 
knowledge and the effective peaceful uses of 
that knowledge demand international cooperation 
and goodwill of an unprecedented 
degree. 

"We stand today at a crossroad in man's 
quest for peace and progress. If we can confine 
its future development to peaceful purposes, 
the atom will be a powerful force for improving 
the lives of people all over the world. If more 
and more nations follow the costly road toward 
military exploitation, the atom will be a heavy 
burden on their ascent to a better life — and an 
increasing threat to the peace of the world. 

"We still have the chance to do something 
about this. In Geneva and the world's capitals, 
we see hopeful progress toward a treaty which 
will halt the spread, of nuclear weapons. Your 
task here is the exciting and hopeful one of 
finding more and better ways of putting the 
peaceful atom at the service of all mankind. As 
you accomplish your task and as you return to 
your scientific institutions and your capitals, 
I urge you to reflect on the danger to our common 
goals and even to our very eXIstence which 
lies along the path of nuclear proliferation. 

"In sending you the best wishes of the American 
people for another successful and productive 
Conference, I commend to you the inspiring 
words of your own Statute: "The Agency shall 
seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health, and prosperity 
throughout the world ' ". 

6. It was a pleasure to contemplate the Agency's 
increasingly meaningful future in the new headquarters 
building which the Government of Austria 
proposed to construct in the Donaupark and make 
available to the Agency on such generous terms. He 
wished to take the opportunity of looking into that 
future, particularly with regard to scientific progress 
and the applications of nuclear science and nuclear 
energy to basic world problems. 

7. It was generally agreed that the rise of science 
was a central phenomenon of the times, that its 
growth and influence pervaded daily life, and that 
it related direcdy to almost every current major 
problem of mankind — to war and peace, population 
and hunger, water and weather, as well as to 
labour and leisure. Modern communication had 
shrunk the world and placed all its people 
in intense social involvement, but at so rapid a rate 
that economic, social and cultural differences had 
been magnified before other branches of science 
and technology had had a chance to help solve 
the most intolerable of those differences. It was 
now imperative for all those involved in worldwide 
co-operation in scientific and technological 
endeavours to find ways to use their energy and 
resources to reconcile those differences and to bring 
all men the fullest benefits of the twentieth century. 
8. Energy was one factor central to all modern 
development, and the Conference's own field of 
nuclear energy was clearly the most promising and 
versatile source of energy for the near and distant 
future, provided greater resources and co-operation 
could be devoted to its development and application. 
The rapid acceptance of nuclear power plants 
as a reliable and economic means of generating electricity 
had led the United States to broaden its 
thinking on the application of nuclear power. 
Amongst other things, scientists were beginning to 
take a serious look at some of the possibilities 
that might result from the production of very lowcost 
electricity in very large reactors, and the use 
of such reactors for multiple purposes. The United 
States would soon be starting construction of a 
large dualpurpose generating-cum-desalting plant 
in the Los Angeles area of California which would 
generate 1 800 000 kW of electricity and, at the 
same time, desalt 150 million gallons of water 
per day. One could now think in terms of how 
such power and water, produced by plants that 
some day would be much larger and yet relatively 
less costly to build, could be utilized in other ways 
besides supplying large metropolitan areas with 
electricity and water. 

9. There were several most promising possibilities. 
One involved the building of nuclear power 
and desalting plants on the arid coasts of the world 
and the creation of productive agricultural communities 
in those otherwise unproductive areas. Such a 
plan would call for the nuclear plant to produce 
power, fresh water and even its own fertilizers to 
support a crop specially developed to thrive under 
the conditions created. During the past summer, a 
task force from Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
had undertaken a study of that type of agroindustrial 
complex, operating under up-to-date, scientifically 
controlled conditions. Among the crops 

112th PLENARY MEETING 

considered were special, recently developed breeds 
of grain. The Agency had sent one of its senior 
staff members to join in the study, which had 
aroused great interest in several countries. It was 
expected that reports, which would be made available 
to the Agency and interested Governments, 
would be issued later in the year or early in 1968. 

10. It was interesting to note some of the figures 
that had emerged from the preliminary study: a 
complex that would produce 10 000 MW of electricity 
and 400 millions gallons of water per day 
could also produce a sufficient quantity of ammonia 
and phosphorus per day to yield enough grain to 
feed tens of millions of people a year at a level of 
2400 calories per day. Part of that food could be 
produced by highly scientific farming on 200 000 
acres of previously unproductive land surrounding 
the complex, but most would come from increased 
crop production on other land making use of fertilizer 
obtained from the complex. Such an idea, 
seriously pursued, might well lead to a great new 
contribution by the atom to the welfare of mankind. 
11. With the advent some day of compact units, 
which made very low-cost nuclear power available to 
a greater number of countries, Man could also look 
forward to that power being used in a variety of 
ways tailored to the needs of an individual country 
or region. Nuclear plants could be used not only to 
produce electricity and fresh water, but to help 
process raw materials from the earth, sea and atmosphere, 
to produce chemicals, fabricate new materials 
and products and recycle waste materials. It was 
foreseeable that in due course such plants might 
greatly affect the economy of a country, helping it 
to exploit its most common resources and to develop 
new industries and markets from other resources 
whose use had become economic. Such developments, 
once started, might have striking effects on 
an entire country, particularly one making its first 
major strides towards industrialization. Eventually, 
regional barriers that might have eXIsted for centuries 
in some areas of the world would break 
down, giving further impetus to development as 
well as the progress of knowledge. 
12. Most other applications of nuclear energy 
were extensions of technologies already beginning 
to be used successfully and in order to derive full 
benefit from many of them,international co-operation 
was essential. One which came to mind was the 
role of nuclear energy in world-wide weather forecasting, 
as initiated by the World Meteorological 
Organization with its "World Weather Watch", in 
which weather stations in remote locations, which 
were unmanned and powered by small reactors or 
isotopic power sources, would play an important 
part. Such stations, strategically located all over 
the world, would be the sensors that, together with 
the weather satellites, would supply a stream of 
information on global weather which, through continuous 
analysis by a computerized weather laboratory, 
might make possible highly accurate, longrange 
forecasts for every place on earth. The proper 
use of such forecasts would save some countries 
millions of dollars annually, quite apart from the 
human losses and misery it might avert. The next 
step beyond accurate global weather forecasting 
would be some form of weather modification; as 
regards extensive use, that might be a long way off, 
but serious investigations were already under way 
and the prospects seemed hopeful. 

13. Another important future use of remote 
nuclear-powered stations was as synchronized orbiting 
communications satellites capable of transmitting 
information and television pictures directly to any 
individual receiver regardless of its location on earth. 
It would appear that such satellites could ultimately 
serve as a world-wide communications network 
which, combined with the computerized information 
networks now being developed, could link all mankind. 
14. There were other fascinating prospects for 
using nuclear energy in the familiar areas of biology 
and medicine, industrial applications and the peaceful 
uses of nuclear explosives, but because so much 
of Man's long-range future depended on success in 
the near future, attention should be given to the 
prospects of the International Atomic Energy Agency 
itself. 
15. Having watched the Agency's growth from 
infancy to mature achievement over the past ten 
years, he felt it might be useful to try to foresee 
the character of its growth and responsibilities 
during the next decade. He had already outlined 
the great advances and promise of the Agency in a 
speech he had made on 31 August in Rochester, 
New York, copies of which would be made available 
to delegates in printed form. 
16. He considered that if even a significant fraction 
of his predictions on the future uses of energy 
were realized, and having regard to the international 
co-operation that was an essential factor in many of 
the developments mentioned previously, the Agency's 
programmes could reasonably be expected to grow 
in usefulness and importance and to become an 
integral part of the development and application of 
nuclear science and technology. 
17. For instance, the sizable growth in nuclear 
power that had already taken place was bound to 
lead to an increased demand on the Agency to assist 
Member States in assessing the role that nuclear 
energy could play in their economies. In addition, 
and to an increasing degree, the Agency would be 
called upon to advise nations on problems of 
reactor siting and safe operating procedures and to 
deal with the international implications of waste 
disposal. Those increased demands would have to 
be reflected in the Agency's future programmes for 
training, advisory services and equipment. 
18. As another example, he expressed the great 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

confidence of the United States in the progress and 
promise of the Agency's safeguards programme and 
stressed his Government's warm dedication to international 
safeguards, as a means of ensuring that 
peaceful nuclear activities did not contribute to the 
spread of nuclear weapons, and its policy of encouraging 
the widespread application of the Agency's 
Safeguards System. 

19. It was envisaged that the Agency should play 
an important part in connection with the proposed 
non-proliferation treaty. With the application of 
Agency safeguards to a number of its own reactors, 
including the Yankee Nuclear Power Station and the 
irradiated fuel reprocessing plant of Nuclear Fuel 
Services, the United States had demonstrated its 
conviction that those safeguards would not interfere 
with peaceful nuclear energy activities. 
20. He noted with pleasure that, as a result of 
the Agency's ten-year experience with safeguards, 
agreements had been signed whereby the Agency 
assumed responsibility for administering safeguards 
in relation to 16 United States bilateral agreements 
with other countries, and that the Board of 
Governors had very recently approved agreements 
transferring to the Agency the administration of 
safeguards in relation to United States bilateral 
agreements with the Republic of Korea, Colombia 
and Venezuela. 
21. He still believed there was a serious and increasing 
need for additional safeguards inspectors, 
a need which could most effectively be met by an 
expanded Agency training programme in international 
safeguards. The United States was prepared to 
co-operate fully with the Agency in that endeavour. 
22. His country's faith in the Agency's development 
was based on the greatly increasing direct and 
indirect benefits it expected all Member States to 
receive from participation in the Agency's programmes. 
The safeguards programme was a prime 
example, but there were many others, of which he 
could mention only a few. 
23. For instance, in connection with theproposed 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS), 
the United States foresaw an important role for the 
Agency in developing an international co-operative 
system for the collection, processing and distribution 
of nuclear information. It also felt there was a 
broader role to be played by national and regional 
organizations in collecting and analysing information 
such as that contained in Nuclear Science Abstracts 
and making it available to the Agency and through 
it to other countries, not least the developing 
countries. 
24. The Agency's scientific meetings not only 
resulted in the increased dissemination of scientific 
and technological data but provided individual scientists 
with the opportunity for invaluable personal 
discussion with their colleagues in other countries. 
25. The question of providing assistance to the 
developing countries covered a vast and complex 
field, in which the Agency was making a significant 
contribution, not least as regards the problem of 
adapting advanced techniques and equipment to the 
needs of developing countries. In his view, the 
provision of experts, equipment and fellowships 
was the most important direct way for the Agency 
to discharge its responsibilities to the developing 
countries, and the chronic lack of adequate funds 
to finance its technical assistance programme was 
one of the most serious problems the Agency faced. 
Requests for technical assistance would increase as 
nuclear techniques brought to bear more directly in 
helping the developing countries s olve their problems. 
If the Agency was to meet those increasing needs, 
the technical assistance programme must grow, and 
its failure to do so was due to the inadequate 
voluntary contributions. It was clear from the Review 
of the Agency's Activities [1] which the Board had 
carried out at the request of the General Conference 
[ 2] that, although a large proportion of the 
Agency's resources had in fact been devoted to 
meeting the needs of the developing countries, 
more could and should be done in future, but that 
the limiting factor would probably be the availability 
of funds. 
26. As he had previously indicated, his delegation 
foresaw increased demands on the Agency in many 
areas of its activity. It strongly supported the 
Budget for 1968 [3] and hoped that, when drawing 
up the programme for 1969-70, Member States 
would ensure that the Agency had the necessary 
resources in terms of funds, information and manpower 
to meet its increasing responsibilities. The 
United States would provide some 35 % of the 
total cash contributions made by Members to finance 
the Operational Budget for 1968 [4]. In addition, 
for the ninth consecutive year, it would make available 
up to $50 000 worth of special nuclear material 
for use in Agency projects in research and medical 
therapy. It would also continue to make available 
to the Agency on a cost-free basis the services of 
its experts, training opportunities in its institutions 
and certain items of equipment, whenever it could. 
Finally, it would continue to nominate outstanding 
people for the Secretariat and for technical assistance 
posts. 

27. The likely pattern of future developments, as 
he had attempted to project them, posed a challenge 
not only to the Agency but to all men, in whatever 
field of activity, of whatever country or condition, 
to strive with intelligence and goodwill to 
contribute their utmost to the betterment of the 
human condition. 
[1] 
GC(XI)/362. 
[2] 
ByResolutionGC(XI)RES/217. 
[3] 
GC(XI)/360. 
[4] 
For full details, see document GC(XI)/364/Rev.3,para.l, 
footnote c) to the table. 

112th PLENARY MEETING 

28. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said there 
was no need for him to dwell on Argentina's consistent 
and enthusiastic support of the Agency, 
which was a logical consequence of its complete 
identification with the Agency's ideals. From the 
establishment of the preparatory Commission down 
to the present, Argentina had contributed extensively 
to the work of the Agency, lending it moral 
support and contributing staff and money as best 
it could. 
29. In those circumstances he felt justified in 
expressing concern as to the relative importance of 
the goals that had been achieved, as viewed in the 
light of those which had been envisaged when the 
Agency was established, and in asking to what 
extent it had fulfilled its basic objective as defined 
in the Statute, that of seeking to "accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world". 
30. He did not think it was unfair to say that 
the work of the Secretariat, which had been very 
useful in other respects, had thus far made no 
appreciable progress in contributing to the peace 
and prosperity of the peoples of the world. It was 
in matters of health that it had doubtless made its 
most positive contribution — by drafting regulations 
and standards which were universally accepted and 
by promoting and popularizing the use of radiation 
and radioisotopes in research, diagnosis and therapy. 
31. He also wished to leave entirely aside the 
question of the responsibility of the Secretariat to 
contribute to world peace. As far as it could, it had 
so. contributed, by intensifying the exchange of 
ideas and information between various nations. It 
was the Member States which must bear the responsibility 
for the very limited achievements in that 
direction. For a number of reasons there had been 
a considerable delay in concluding a universal agreement 
on atomic disarmament, in which matter the 
Agency ought to exercise the main control function. 
32. In the absence of such an agreement it had 
been necessary to experiment with the only feasible 
alternative and develop a system of safeguards 
which, while providing adequate guarantees, would 
not impede development of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy or place an excessive financial burden 
on the countries that were applying it. Pending the 
conclusion of such an agreement on a world-wide 
scale, there were areas in which the system could be 
applied on a trial basis, particularly Latin America 
which, with its peaceful traditions, had concluded a 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. The 
reasons for its application on a trial basis were that 
all the guarantees requested of the nuclear Powers 
to enable the Treaty to come into force had not yet 
been given and the contribution to world peace 
would obviously be merely illusory if only the 
nations that did not possess nuclear weapons were 
subject to control. 
33. Nonetheless, Argentina was that very day 
signing the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America and, with regard to 
Article 28(1), wished to express its satisfaction 
with the inclusion of provisions safeguarding the 
peaceful development of nuclear energy. It was 
Argentina's understanding that those provisions 
ensured the use of atomic energy as an indispensable 
adjunct in the process of Latin American 
development and that they were therefore a basic 
prerequisite for achieving an acceptable balance of 
mutual responsibilities and obligations between the 
nuclear and non-nuclear Powers in so far as the 
spread of nuclear weapons was concerned. 
34. Argentina believed that the Agency should 
play an outstanding role in connection with the 
Treaty, not only so that it could realize one of the 
aims for which it had been established but also so 
that it could ensure that Member States would 
derive the maXImum benefit from its impartiality 
and experience in dealing with the staffing and 
financial problems involved in setting up a system 
of security and safeguards. 
35. As to contributing to the prosperity of nations, 
it had not been possible to achieve very much 
through technical assistance, the main instrument 
for the purpose. The basic idea that atomic energy 
should help reduce the gap between different 
countries in the matter of technical progress and 
living standards was still only an ideal. It should 
be realized that that was the crucial problem and 
the one to which first priority must be assigned if 
any tangible results were to be achieved, but it 
should also be realized that the sums made available 
to the Agency for carrying out such an ambitious 
programme were ridiculously low. It was 
imperative that financial support for the provision 
of technical assistance should be increased, both by 
larger contributions on the part of the Great Powers 
and by a change in the system of voluntary contributions. 
One other problem was the sceptical attitude 
— accompanied by a withdrawal of co-operation — 
which he understood had been taken by certain 
Member States. 
36. As far as the situation in Argentina was concerned, 
the level of activities and achievements in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy was such that it 
was already possible to formulate a clearly defined 
policy. A medium-term nuclear energy programme 
had therefore been drawn up aiming at (i) the 
development of nuclear raw materials of domestic 
origin; (ii) the use of atomic energy in solving the 
problem of increasing electricity requirements ; (Hi) 
promoting the use of large radiation sources to 
improve the health and well-being of the population 
and intensifying their use in medicine, biology, 
industry and agriculture; (iv) improving the production 
of basic materials by the large-scale use of 
techniques for food preservation, pest elimination, 
the optimum use of fertilizers and soil control. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

37. The past year had been a period of intensive 
work in Argentina and had been characterized by 
definite progress. Among the outstanding achievements 
had been the completion of a production 
and experimental reactor designed and built entirely 
in Argentina (like the three earlier reactors). The 
new reactor, which was located at the Ezeiza Atomic 
Centre and had become critical in May, would 
enable Argentina to produce new isotopes in greater 
numbers and -on a commercial scale and thereby to 
reduce its imports of them considerably. A building 
and installations for the group working on problems 
of safety, hazard prevention and radiation control 
had also been put into use at the Centre. 
3 8. Negotiations were also progressing satisfactorily 
with regard to the construction of the Buenos 
Aires nuclear power station. About a dozen bids 
had been received for the project even though 
firms had not been officially invited to render. All 
the bids provided for financing arrangements, some 
of which were very interesting, and the authorities 
were at present studying them before making a 
final decision. 
39. The interest that had been shown in that 
project by nuclear industrial centres all over the 
world and the opportunities for obtaining help in 
implementing it showed that the desire to use 
nuclear electric power in promoting the progress 
and development of Latin America was not an 
Utopian dream. He was confident that the first 
Argentine power reactor would become a reality 
within the scheduled period, and he hoped that 
the nations with power problems similar to those 
of Argentina would also be able to solve them in 
the near future. 
40. Argentina, reaffirming its policy in favour of 
international solidarity, would continue to make 
its own special contribution to the activities of the 
Agency. 
41. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) said that since 
the tenth regular session of the General Conference 
in the previous year, which had constituted a landmark 
in the Agency's activities, the Agency had 
continued its work with renewed vigour. That had 
been reflected, for example, in the review of the 
Agency's activities which had, to a large extent, 
been aimed at further promoting the uses of atomic 
energy in the developing countries. 
42. The Director General had appealed to Member 
States to increase their voluntary contributions to 
the General Fund to the level of their assessed 
contributions to the Regular Budget, with a view 
to enabling the Agency to overcome one of its 
major difficulties, namely its inability to fulfil its 
obligations with the limited funds available. He 
earnestly urged Member States to respond to that 
appeal. As the pace of development in the use of 
atomic energy increased, an ever-growing number 
of nuclear techniques would be perfected and the 
developing countries would need more and more 
assistance from the Agency in order to use those 
techniques to the best advantage. Thus it was 
regrettable that, despite the Director General's 
appeal, there had been little or no increase in the 
total value of the contributions to the General 
Fund, which was used to finance such assistance. 
Since 1961, when the delegation of Brazil and his 
delegation had jointly sponsored a resolution urging 
Member States to pledge contributions to the General 
Fund in the same ratio as their assessed contributions 
to the Regular Budget [5], South Africa had 
constantly acted in accordance with that resolution 
and was continuing to do so in respect of 1968. 

43. The more advanced Member States were also 
required to guide and assist those Members — and 
non-Members — in which the development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy was still at an early 
stage. Geographical considerations would inevitably 
play an important part, and South Africa fully realized 
that it was in a unique position to assist its 
immediate neighbours and other African States in 
many applications of atomic energy. On more than 
one occasion his Government had offered to consider 
requests for assistance, especially from other 
States on the African continent, and it now wished 
to reiterate that offer. In that connection, he was 
pleased to announce that his Government had 
decided to set aside an amount each year to form 
a fund which could be used to finance the provision 
of appropriate technical assistance to countries in 
the area of Africa and the Middle East. In that 
way it would, once again, be responding to the 
Director General's appeal in an effective, if indirect, 
manner since the Agency would not be involved 
in any expenditure. 
44. His delegation, consisting largely of scientists, 
had welcomed the Director General's suggestion 
that delegations should submit written statements 
on developments relating to nuclear energy in 
their countries, before the General Conference, for 
publication by the Agency, since the resulting document 
would be very detailed and extremely valuable 
to other Member States. Accordingly his delegation 
had submitted a summary of the most recent developments 
in South Africa for subsequent publication 
by the Secretariat and he hoped other delegations 
would do likewise. 
45. The application of safeguards should keep 
pace with the growth in the use of atomic energy 
to ensure that it was used only for peaceful purposes. 
He welcomed the expansion in the Division 
of Safeguards and Inspection, but pointed out that, 
in addition to having enough inspectors, the eXIsting 
high level of competence in the Division must 
be maintained. In that connection he recalled that 
Article VII.D of the Statute laid down that the 
Agency should "secure employees of the highest 
standards of efficiency, technical competence, and 
[5] GC(V)/RES/100. 

112th PLENARY MEETING 

integrity". It was undesirable that so many inspectors 
were employed on short-term contracts; such contracts 
did not provide a sound basis for efficient 
operation and their average duration should be 
considerably extended in future. 

46. With regard to the proposal for extending 
the Agency's Safeguards System to plants for processing 
or fabricating nuclear materials, it was essential 
to define what was meant by "processing or 
fabrication plants". Furthermore, care should be 
taken to ensure that safeguards were essential and 
that the Agency did not hamper the development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by applying 
them to all plants in the fuel cycle. 
47. His delegation warmly supported the recent 
proposals for setting up INIS, since there was little 
point in spending time and money on research if 
the results were not made readily available quickly. 
He believed the operation of INIS would be one 
of the Agency's most important tasks in future. 
48. The Agency was already playing a very valuable 
role in the dissemination and exchange of information 
through its scientific conferences, symposia 
and seminars. Those meetings were, however, necessarily 
restricted in scope and the number of participants 
was limited. He therefore suggested that the 
time had come for the Agency to consider the 
possibility of holding a fourth United Nations 
Conference on. the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, 
particularly as the matter was to be raised at the 
current session of the General Assembly and such 
conferences provided an opportunity for a comprehensive 
review of all atomic energy activities. 
Moreover, it was generally agreed that the United 
Nations should call on the Agency to play a much 
larger part in all such activities. One of the subjects 
requiring early consideration was the extent to which 
financial and other responsibilities should be shared. 
If the General Conference failed to agree on that 
subject, it should be referred to the Board of 
Governors. 
49. Turning to administration and finance, he 
said he strongly supported the Director General's 
proposals to implement the recommendations of 
the General Assembly's Ad Hoc Committee of 
Experts to Examine the Finances of the United 
Nations and the Specialized Agencies. Those recommendations 
were sound and would help to achieve 
uniformity of procedure within the United Nations 
family. 
50. His delegation thanked the Austrian Government 
for its generous offer to provide the Agency 
with a permanent headquarters at the Donaupark. 
51. He was sure many countries, like South 
Africa, while eager to embark on nuclear development 
programmes, were alarmed at the enormous 
cost of such programmes in the advanced countries. 
Many Member States had reached the stage at 
which they needed to undertake at least an 
embryonic research programme, and the Agency 
could play a vital part by providing guidance and 
assisting in the training of the initial group of 
scientists. While it was true that the cost of fully 
implementing such a programme might subsequently 
seem to be prohibitive, he would point out that 
South Africa had learned, over the past few years, 
that with determination and the help and guidance 
of more experimented countries and the Agency a 
surprising amount of progress could be made with 
very limited resources. 

5 2. Regardless of the fact that their views differed 
on many subjects, Member States must combine 
their efforts to achieve the Agency's main objective 
of promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy so 
as to contribute to the health and prosperity of all 
peoples throughout the world. The degree of cooperation 
between Member States would determine 
the extent to which they could jointly promote 
peace and the outcome of their efforts to help one 
another and thus achieve the Agency's objectives. 
53. Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 
wished to express his condolences on the death of 
Sir John Cockcroft, the great initiator of the age 
of the industrial and peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
54. At the tenth regular session of the General 
Conference, the MeXIcan Government had reported 
on the preparatory work for the drafting of a treaty 
for the prohibition of nuclear weapons in Latin 
America (known as the Treaty of Tlatelolco) and 
on the part that the Agency would play in applying 
its system of safeguards and inspection to ensure 
compliance with the Treaty [6]. It was a matter of 
of public knowledge that the Treaty had been 
approved in Mexico City on 12 February 1967 and 
opened for signature there on 14 February, on 
which date it had been signed by the duly authorized 
representatives of Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, 
Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay and 
Venezuela. It had subsequently been signed by 
Nicaragua, Paraguay, Brazil, Trinidad and Tobago 
and the Dominican Republic, and on the present 
day, 27 September, by Argentina. That meant that 
the Treaty had been signed by 20 of the 21 States 
that had been members of the Preparatory Commission 
for the Denuclearization of Latin America 
which had approved it in Mexico City. 
55. At the February meetings of the Board of 
Governors the Governor from Mexico had requested 
that the Board's agenda for its series of meetings 
in June should include an item dealing with the 
Treaty, at which time he had indicated that an 
approved text would soon be submitted officially 
to the Agency for distribution. 
56. At the June series of meetings, the Director 
[6] GC(X)/OR.103, paras 74 and 75. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

General had presented a memorandum setting forth 
clearly and concisely the relations between the 
Agency and the countries which had signed the 
Treaty of Tlatelolco, as far as safeguards and 
inspection were concerned. 

5 7. Article 13 of that Treaty provided that : 
"Each Contracting Party shall negotiate multilateral 
or bilateral agreements with the International 
Atomic Energy Agency for the application 
of its safeguards to its nuclear activities. 
Each Contracting Party shall initiate negotiations 
within a period of 180 days after the date of 
the deposit of its instrument of ratification of 
this Treaty. These agreements shall enter into 
force, for each Party, not later than eighteen 
months after the date of the initiation of such 
negotiations except in case of unforeseen circumstances 
or force majeure". 
58. On the same occasion the Governor from 
Mexico had proposed, and the Board had agreed, 
that the Director General should be given the 
responsibility of preparing a d raft agreement between 
Mexico and the Agency to cover the above-mentioned 
points, for consideration by the Government of 
Mexico and the Agency. That work would be carried 
out in the near future in accordance with the provisions 
of the above-mentioned Article 13. 
59. The MeXIcan Government, in accordance with 
the provisions of the MeXIcan Federal Constitution, 
had submitted the Treaty of Tlatelolco for consideration 
and approval by the Senate of the Republic 
during its meetings beginning on 10 September. 
The Treaty had been approved unanimously at the 
meeting of the Senate on 12 September. The instrument 
of ratification had been deposited by the 
MeXIcan Government on 19 September, and the 
Treaty had come into force for Mexico on the same 
date, the MeXIcan Government being depositary 
Government under Article 26 of the Treaty. As a 
result the MeXIcan Government would, in accordance 
with the above-mentioned Article 13, immediately 
start formal negotiations on conclusion of a 
bilateral agreement between Mexico and the Agency 
to cover the application of the Agency's system of 
safeguards and inspection to all nuclear activities 
taking place in the territory of Mexico. In that 
connection, the Governor from Mexico would request 
the inclusion in the agenda for the Board's 
series of meetings in February 1968 of an item 
relating to the Board's consideration of the said 
bilateral agreement. 
60. On 7 October 1965 an agreement had been 
signed in Washington between Mexico, the United 
States of America and the Agency for the establishment 
of a joint study group to consider the feasibility 
of a nuclear plant for producing fresh water 
and electric power in the arid areas of north-western 
Mexico and the south-western part of the United 
States. The joint study group had met three times 
(in 1965, 1966 and 1967). The MeXIcan members 
had presented, or would present, various studies on 
the climatology, oceanography and hydrology of 
north-western Mexico, on the electric power requirements 
in that area (from 500 to 2000MW(e)), 
and on the agricultural use of water with a flowrate 
up to 20 m3/s at a cost of from US$0,048 
per m3. Preliminary studies had also been carried 
out on the possibility of building the proposed 
plant in the arc of the coast of the Gulf 
of California between San Felipe (State of Baja 
California) and Puerto Pefiasco (State of Sonora). 

61. Work was continuing on the erection of buildings 
for the MeXIcan Nuclear Centre and on the 
purchase and installation of equipment. A substantial 
portion of the apparatus and equipment had been 
built in Mexico. 
62. In September 1966 the Reactor Group had 
moved to the new buildings in Salazar (State of 
Mexico) where the Triga III reactor was to be 
installed. It would have a power of 1 MW(th) in 
steady-state operation and of 3000 MW in pulsed 
operation, and was expected to become critical 
early in 1968. The reactor would be used for the 
production of radioisotopes, the consumption of 
which had multiplied sixfold within a period of 
three years, for activation analysis in industry and 
agriculture, and for the training of specialized staff, 
etc. 
63. With a view to meeting future requirements 
an analogue computer had been designed and built 
for solving problems relating to irradiation time in 
the production of radioisotopes, an experimental 
rig utilizing the Mossbauer effect had been installed 
and put into operation, and various studies had 
been published on the optimization of irradiation 
schedules for the production of radioisotopes as a 
function of demand. 
64. The tandem 12-Me V Van de Graaffaccelerator, 
now in the final installation and testing stage, would 
be able to accelerate heavy ions having energies of 
up to 54 MeV. It would be used mainly for 
experimental research on nuclear structure. 
65. In collaboration with the University of Mexico, 
work had been completed on the design and 
construction of the deflector and selector magnets 
of the accelerator laboratory, which would include 
systems for magnetic field stabilization that were 
not to be found in commercial magnets, and also 
on a magnetic spectrograph of very wide range and 
high resolution, capable of measuring particle polarization. 
66. In the instrumentation laboratory the staff 
was studying, designing, building and analysing 
instruments and devices which were either not 
available on the commercial market, or which could 
be produced in Mexico at greatly reduced cost. 
It had now become possible to grow sapphire and 

112th PLENARY MEETING 

ruby crystals and to control their chemical composition. 
Work was now under way on the developments 
of monocrystals of alkaline halides and silicon 
detectors with phosphorus diffused at high temperature. 


67. Research on theoretical nuclear physics, which 
was being done in collaboration with the University 
of Mexico, aimed at achieving an understanding of 
the fundamental phenomena of nuclear structure 
and reactions, for example of the elementary particles 
related to the origin of nuclear structure given at 
the Agency's International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics by the head of the MeXIcan theoretical 
nuclear physics programme. 
68. In close collaboration with the experimental 
group working with the Nuclear Centre's accelerator, 
an electronic computer programme had been drawn 
up for calculations on nuclides between oxygen-16 
and calcium-40, and a study was being made of the 
problem of analogous isobaric states. 
69. The National Nuclear Energy Commission 
organized regular training courses in nuclear techniques 
at various levels, beginning with the subprofessional. 
With a view to improving the practical 
training given in the courses organized or sponsored 
by the Commission, low-cost electronic equipment 
was being built for the handling and utilization of 
radioactive substances. The Commission had 
awarded 153 fellowships in the past year for specialized 
study, more than one third of them for study 
outside Mexico. 
70. Mexico had followed with interest and sympathy 
the Agency's project for the establishment 
of an international nuclear information and documentation 
centre and was prepared to support it. 
71. Mexico had made ample use of international 
technical assistance, under both the United Nations 
programme and that of the Agency, in the form of 
fellowships, provision of experts and equipment, 
and research contracts like that relating to the 
maize study. As a modest token of its appreciation 
Mexico had decided to raise its voluntary contribution 
to the Agency's General Fund to US$16 500 
for 1968. In that connection he viewed with satisfaction 
the decision to dissociate the sending of 
experts from the provision of equipment. That 
decision would undoubtedly increase the Agency's 
opportunities for providing technical assistance. 
72. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia) said the delegates 
present were directly responsible for the general 
policy governing the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in their respective countries and that task 
was very different in the developing countries from 
what it was in the advanced countries. The Agency 
had been established for the specific purpose of 
promoting the civil uses of nuclear energy throughout 
the world, particularly in those countries which were 
scientifically and economically less-developed. With 
its very limited financial resources, the Agency was 
meeting requests for technical assistance and in that 
connection he wished to thank the Director General 
for the excellent work he was doing. 

7 3. He wished to take the opportunity to describe 
some of the scientific activities being carried out at 
the Nuclear Institute in Colombia. 
74. The nuclear reactor at the Institute, donated 
by the United States Government, had been operating 
for two years without interruption, and was 
being used for research, training and the production 
of short-lived radioisotopes. 
75- Research had been carried out on power 
calibration and flux distribution with a view to 
establishing precisely neutron density at specific 
points where samples were irradiated. The sensitivity 
of the reactor and the correlation between its 
reactivity and temperature had been determined; 
its power had been increased from 10 to 20 kW 
with a view to reducing the irradiation time. It was 
hoped that the reactor would be operating at 50 kW 
by the end of the present year. A large number of 
students from Colombian universities had played a 
direct part in the research work. 

76. The possibility was now being investigated of 
modifying the reactor core with a view to achieving 
a maXImum flux density by providing an irradiation 
point in the centre of the core, without affecting 
the critical mass of uranium-235. 
77. Pneumatic systems were being designed for 
the transmission of the samples already irradiated 
to the various laboratories in the Institute within 
very short periods (tenths of a second). 
78. Work was now being carried out on the 
following subjects: (i) reactor pulsing (experiments 
to measure reactivity had been started with the 
reactor in a sub-critical state, using a Kaman 
14.3 MeV neutron generator); (ii) the dynamic 
behaviour of the reactor and determination of the 
transfer function; and (iii) spectrometry of epithermal 
neutrons. 
79. With regard to training, co-operation was 
being maintained with the universities through 
courses and seminars and by providing advice to 
people studying for degrees in chemistry, electronics, 
mechanics and civil engineering. Theoretical and 
practical courses were also being held in the Physics 
Faculty of the National University and similar courses 
would be held in the Engineering Faculty as from 
the beginning of the following year. 
80. A considerable amount of work was being 
carried out in agriculture, particularly with regard 
to the three staple food products in the national 
diet: maize, rice and kidney beans. 
81. A contract had been concluded with the 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

Agency to carry out research on: (i) the most 
suitable time for using nitrogen in maize cultivation; 

(ii) methods of applying nitrate fertilizer; (iii) the 
interaction between nitrogen and phosphorus; and 
(iv) the most suitable source of nitrogen for maize 
cultivation. 
82. At the "La Libertad" experimental farm in 
the eastern plains various types of research had 
been carried out with phosphorus-32 produced in 
the reactor in order to determine the most appropriate 
method of using phosphate fertilizers in rice 
cultivation; that work was being performed in conjunction 
with the National Federation of Rice 
Growers. 
83. The response of different varieties of kidney 
beans to neutron and gamma irradiation had been 
studied, and that had made it possible to obtain 
strains in which the shoots offered higher resistance 
to disease; preparations were being made to cross 
those strains with commercial varieties. 
84. The use of liquid fertilizers with fruit-tree 
grafts (peach, plum and apple trees) had also been 
studied in the field for the purpose of observing 
the movement of 3 2P-labelled phosphates within 
the stock and determining the extent to which the 
grafting and cicatrization had been successful when 
different polyethylene materials were used to protect 
the graft. Other activities being carried out in agriculture 
were irradiation of foodstuffs, the eradication 
of the cotton worm by the sterile male technique 
and the irradiation of seeds in order to obtain 
beneficial genetic mutations. 
85. Valuable work had been, and was being, done 
for the metallurgical industry with the Institute's 
industrial gamma-radiographical equipment. Help 
had been given to the electrical industry by investigating 
welds in high-pressure tubing, and also to 
the oil and brewing industries. In February 1968 
such services would be extended to the road 
construction and surfacing companies, with-a new 
unit for studying soil density and humidity. 
86. In the case of biochemistry, studies were in 
progress on possible goiterogenic factors in food 
from areas with a high incidence of goitre. More 
specifically, investigations were being made of the 
effect of yuca on various parameters of the thyroid 
function, including thyroid weight, radioactive iodine 
uptake, iodine combined with proteins andtheintrathyroidal 
metabolism of iodine. As to the problem 
of radiological safety, the Institute had for several 
years being carrying out systematic sampling of air, 
milk, water, green fodder, vegetables and fish in 
order to determine the radionuclides which could 
be increasing environmental radioactivity and to be 
able to formulate the necessary safety provisions at 
the appropriate time. 
81. Five sampling and analysis units were now 
operating in the country, the most important of 
which was the one at the Institute, which was working 
with equipment donated by the French Government. 
The others were being operated by students 
and university professors in four towns. As part of 
an expansion of the national environmental radioactivity 
monitoring programme, it was intended to 
establish ten further units. 

88. The Institute was co-operating closely with 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission in 
preliminary studies relating to the opening of a 
new inter-oceanic canal. 
89. With regard to neutron activation analyses, 
work had been done to determine traces of selenium 
and tellurium in sulphur, copper and potassium, 
of manganese and zinc in barley and wheat 
seeds, of vanadium in Colombian oil, and of arsenic 
in tobacco leaves. 
90. Prospecting for radioactive ores was in progress 
throughout the country, and preparations were 
being made for carrying out analyses of uranium 
ores by detection of delayed fission neutrons. 
91. In view of the non-availability of particle 
accelerators or nuclear reactors for the frequent 
production of short-lived nuclides, the Institute 
was studying the possibility of using what were 
called "radioisotope generators" or, more descriptively, 
using a literal translation of the original 
English term, "radioactive cows", in which a shortlived 
daughter nuclide was separated from a longlived 
parent. 
92. Of particular interest was the fact that much 
of the research carried out at the Institute was 
being performed with equipment received from the 
Agency and was being conducted by Colombian 
staff trained abroad under the Agency's fellowship 
programme. 
93. In conclusion, he drew special attention to 
the obvious disproportion between the rapid 
scientific and technical progress being made in the 
modem world on the one hand and the moral 
development of man on the other. He expressed 
the hope that, under the Agency's auspices, nuclear 
energy would be directed exclusively towards the 
promotion of human welfare, the enrichment of 
intellectual experience, the search for truth, and the 
achievement of international solidarity and a rapprochement 
between all races and creeds. 
94. Mr. TETENYI (Hungary) said that the 
eleventh session of the General Conference was 
being held at a time when nations were paying 
close attention to the negotiations for a nuclear 
weapons non-proliferation treaty, which had now 
reached a crucial phase. The Hungarian People's 
Republic deeply desired a successful outcome to 
those talks and it would be among the first States 
to give its assent to such a treaty should it be 
concluded. His delegation considered that the Agency 

112th PLENARY MEETING 

ought to express its readiness to ensure effective 
supervision of the treaty, and it agreed with the 
Director General that the Agency was capable of 
performing the control function [ 7]. 

95. Hungary was fully aware of the proposals put 
forward by the Soviet Union to the Board 
of Governors with a view to perfecting the Safeguards 
System. The proposals were of importance 
and ought to be adopted. 
96. Before agreement on non-proliferation could 
be reached, a number of obstacles preventing an 
effective solution to the problem in Europe must 
be overcome. Hungary had carefully studied the 
statements made by representatives of the Governments 
of the Polish People's Republic and the 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic at the tenth session 
of the General Conference. The Governments of 
those two countries had, it would be recalled, 
expressed their readiness to place their atomic 
installations under Agency safeguards if the Federal 
Republic of Germany would do the same [8]. However, 
the Federal Republic of Germany had made no 
response. It had stubbornly refused to recognize 
the situation that had evolved after the Second 
World War. Many States noted with anXIety the 
continued growth in the production of fissionable 
materials in the Federal Republic and at the same 
time the absence of effective international ontrol. 
The German Democratic Republic, the other 
German State, whose Government had on many 
occasions shown its devotion to the cause of peace 
and its desire to remove the atomic threat, had 
joined with the Polish and Czechoslovak Governments 
in expressing readiness to place its atomic 
installations under Agency safeguards, on the same 
condition [9]. 
97. The Hungarian Government considered that 
an extension of Agency safeguards to Central and 
South-East Europe would be of major significance 
in preserving peace and lessening the atomic threat. 
It could be an important step forward and might 
even serve as a catalyst in bringing about a general 
treaty on non-proliferation. The Hungarian Government 
was accordingly prepared to place installations 
producing fissionable materials in Hungarian 
territory under Agency safeguards, on condition that 
the Federal German Government followed its 
example. Hungary hoped that the Federal German 
Government would study the situation that had 
arisen, in which its stand remained the sole serious 
obstacle to agreement on non-proliferation, and that 
it would draw appropriate conclusions. 
98. Turning to the Agency's work during the 
preceding year, he noted that the number of 
Member States had grown and welcomed Sierra 
[7] GC(XI)/OR.lll, para. 36. 
[8] GC(X)/OR.103, para. 56, and GC(X)/OR.104, para. 14. 
[9] See document GC(X)/INF/91-
Leone as a new Member. However, he observed 
that a situation continued to eXIst where, for political 
motives, obstacles were placed in the way of 
certain countries wishing to join the Agency. He 
cited as an example the German Democratic Republic, 
which had made great progress in the peaceful 
application of atomic energy. On many occasions 
the Government of the German Democratic Republic 
had expressed its desire and willingness to utilize 
all its achievements in the application of atomic 
energy solely for peaceful purposes. The fact that it 
could play no part in the work of the Agency could 
only be regarded as abnormal. 

99. More attention should in his view be given 
to the applications of atomic energy in developing 
countries and in that connection he supported the 
idea of sister laboratories in different countries, as 
suggested by the Director General. 
100. In June 1967 the Institute of Isotopes of the 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences had expressed its 
readiness to use the good offices of the Agency to 
conclude an agreement on joint work with any 
institute or corresponding organization in a developing 
country, the country to be selected in conjunction 
with the Agency. Within the framework of such 
an agreement the Institute of Isotopes would render 
assistance in the production of isotopes andlabelled 
compounds, in the use of isotopes in industry and 
research, and in the use of large radiation sources, 
by sending information and experts and by providing 
places for research students and trainees. He hoped 
that an agreement of the kind proposed could soon 
be concluded and that laboratories and institutes 
in other countries would find it possible to sign 
agreements of a similar nature. 
101. He noted the growing degree of co-operation 
between Hungarian laboratories and the Agency and, 
in particular, the continued research on radiation 
sterilization and radiopharmacology in line with a 
complex plan suggested by Hungary three years 
previously. In June 1967 a symposium on radiation 
sterilization had been held in Budapest. Research 
into the disposal of radioactive waste was making 
steady progress. 
102. In his opinion there was still considerable 
scope for a further extension of the Agency's activities 
and for enhancing its role in international 
relations. At the same time it should not be forgotten 
that the work of the Agency was greatly 
dependent on the mutual relations between its 
Member States. In that connection, one was bound 
to feel alarm at the worsening international situation 
caused by the filthy colonial war being waged by 
the United States of America against the Vietnamese 
people. 
103. The number of States and international organizations 
denouncing that war was growing. The 
Hungarian Government demanded an unconditional 
withdrawal of American troops from Viet-Nam and 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

a halt to aggression. That was the main prerequisite 104. The Hungarian Government attached great 
to any improvement in the international situation, importance to the Agency's work and hoped that it 
which all countries and all international organiza-would continue to execute the tasks it was 
tions, including the Agency, had an interest in entrusted with and to serve the high ideals 
seeing brought about. enshrined in its Statute. 

The meeting rose at 12.50p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XI)/OR.113 
8 February 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER- 2 OCTOBER 1967) 

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 27 September 1967, at 3.25 p.m. 


President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1966-67 (continued) 
1 — 135 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Viet-Nam 1—10 
Spain 11— 26 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 27 — 74 
Italy 75— 84 
Poland 85 — 103 
Belgium 104—115 
El Salvador 116— 120 
Philippines 121 — 135 

Closing date of the session 
136 — 138 

GC(XI)/368. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE System would not have met with such striking 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1966-67 success. In that connection, regional co-operation 
[GC(XI)/355, 355/Corr.l, 366] (continued) had also contributed to an intensive use of nuclear 
techniques in the solution of problems peculiar to 

1. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI(Viet-Nam)congratulated the different areas of the world. 
the Director General for having succeeded in maintaining 
the purely scientific character of the Agency's 2. It would be unfair not to mention the 
activities despite the troubled political atmosphere Agency's own contribution to the application of 
that weighed so heavily on the world and for having radioisotopes, its work on the standardization of 
intensified international co-operation in placing the radiological protection measures and its efforts to 
atom at the service of man. Without close co-opera-modernize the system for exchange of nuclear informtion 
between the advanced countries no progress ation. It was a source of satisfaction that the 
would have been made in the various domains of Agency's activities were being directed towards exnuclear 
technology, and the Agency's Safeguards tending the benefits of the peaceful uses of fission 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

to an ever-increasing number of developing countries. 
The Agency should continue that policy, thereby 
ensuring that the benefits of atomic energy would 
become increasingly available to the least-favoured 
nations, above all in the two spheres most closely 
bound up with their standards of living: medicine 
and agriculture. 

3. In that connection, an important, if not crucial, 
role was undoubtedly played by technical assistance, 
because the developing countries lacked everything. 
Only through enlightened, attentive and long-term 
support would the Agency be able to achieve 
positive and satisfying results in its technical assistance 
programme. It was not enough to recommend 
the utilization of a particular nuclear technique: 
the State receiving aid ought also to be given 
opportunities to benefit from any advantages to be 
gained from it. The Agency should therefore lend 
the developing countries every possible assistance 
in overcoming their shortages of research workers 
and their lack of material resources. 
4. The advice and opinions of the Agency on 
nuclear legislation were being increasingly sought. 
Viet-Nam wished to express its satisfaction with the 
well-conceived aid that had enabled it to adopt 
regulations which were in conformity with the 
Agency's radiological protection standards. A further 
cause for satisfaction was the Agency's plan to 
organize legal training courses in Vienna during 1968 
to familiarize administrators and government legal 
experts with the various practical problems relating 
to nuclear legislation. 
5. As regards the training of scientific personnel, 
the provision of fellowships was considered to be 
very useful. However, as the number of fellowships 
was limited the best solution would be to promote, 
through concerted efforts, the establishment in developing 
countries of suitable courses in nuclear science 
designed to provide training not only for research 
scientists but also, and most important, for research 
assistants. The Agency should also consider the 
provision of systematic assistance to enable developing 
countries to hold introductory courses in new 
nuclear techniques for workers in different fields 
who were implementing national programmes. 
6. The developing countries had to cope with 
another and no less serious difficulty: the virtual 
absence of nuclear research materials on the local 
market. Very often such a situation was an obstacle 
to research and sometimes even a threat to the 
continuation of work. Perhaps the Agency could 
consider setting up a department responsible for the 
rapid procurement of scientific supplies for countries 
that urgently needed them. 
7. Another important point was the spur given 
to research in developing countries by research projects 
on a regional basis, assisted by the Agency by 
means of research contracts. The Agency had done 
much in that sphere, but its grants were not always 
allocated equitably among the Member States. The 
Agency's regional representative ought to play a more 
important part in such matters; through his direct 
and frequent contacts with those in charge of 
nuclear programmes in the countries of the area, 
he was the person best qualified to work out common 
denominators for joint research programmes in 
the interests of all. 

8. In the matter of regional co-operation, Viet-
Nam was also in favour of the plan to set up a 
nuclear research centre in tropical medicine in South-
East Asia. Likewise, the establishment of a centre 
for nuclear research in agriculture in the same area 
would serve eminently practical needs and would 
meet the wishes of many countries in the area. 
9. Despite its difficult situation, which was only 
too well known, Viet-Nam had not lost sight of 
the over riding importance of the economic and 
social problems that would shape its future. It was 
therefore already making every effort, day after day, 
with sweat, blood and tears, to establish the guidelines 
for the technical and technological work to be 
done in years to come for the well-being of all its 
people. 
10. Bearing in mind Viet-Nam's unrelenting efforts 
to achieve the objectives of the Agency, he hoped 
the Agency would reciprocate by paying constant 
attention to his country's problems and by granting 
it appropriate assistance. 
11. Mr. BUXO-DULCE (Spain) after congratulating 
Malaysia on its accession to membership of the 
Agency, said that during the past year Spain had 
continued to collaborate with the Agency in the 
financing of fellowships for scientists and technicians 
from various countries, and in Agency research 
contracts. 
12. As he had pointed out on other occasions, 
it was to be hoped that that collaboration would 
extend to the recruitment of staff members of 
Spanish nationality for scientific and technical posts 
in the Secretariat, since an excessive number of 
those posts were still allocated to certain countries 
and geographical areas. Over the last five years 
only one Spanish scientist had worked briefly with 
the Agency, and he had now departed. 
13. In December 1966 the administration of 
safeguards relating to the bilateral agreement on the 
civil uses of nuclear energy between the United 
States of America and Spain had been transferred 
to the Agency [1] and work concerning the application 
of the safeguards had begun. The role played 
by safeguards would be enormously increased if the 
agreement on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
at present under discussion at Geneva were 
concluded. 
[1] See document INFCIRC/92. 

113th. PLENARY MEETING 

14. As he had intimated the previous year, it 
was desirable that the system of safeguards, whether 
negotiated directly by the Agency or applied as a 
consequence of present or future agreements, should 
acquire world-wide scope as soon as possible, without 
discrimination between countries with and 
countries without nuclear armaments; as long as 
that discrimination eXIsted, the countries suffering 
it would have great difficulty in developing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
15. Spain was very interested in nuclear power, 
which was already an economic proposition and 
would contribute to the rapid growth in the demand 
for electricity. Spain had consequently launched a 
large-scale nuclear power programme. 
16. Progress was being made in the construction 
of the pressurized-water nuclear power station at 
Zorita, to the east of Madrid, and although some 
delays had occured, the station —with a capacity 
of 153 000 kW— would go into operation at the 
beginning of 1968. 
17. The building of the Santa Maria de Garona 
station in the north of Spain (460 000 kW, with 
a boiling-water reactor) was proceeding according 
to plan and the station would go into operation 
in 1970. 
18. The contract had been signed for the construction 
of the Vandellos station in Catalonia, as had 
also the agreement between the Governments of 
Spain and France pertaining thereto. Its capacity 
would be 480 000 kW and the project would extend 
to the nuclear sphere the collaboration already 
eXIsting between Electricite de France and the Spanish 
electricity undertakings. It would also represent a 
milestone in the co-operation between the French 
and Spanish atomic energy authorities, a co-operation 
which would be considerably reinforced by means 
of research and development agreements. 
19. Tenders would shortly be invited for the 
erection of a fourth power station of 500 000 kW 
at Peni'scola. 
20. Furthermore, the Spanish nuclear power programme 
envisaged the erection of a 500 000 kW 
station each year until 1975 and of two 500 000 kW 
stations annually between 1976 and 1980. By 1980 
Spain would thus have an installed capacity of the 
order of 8 to 8.5 million kW. 
21. Characteristic of the technical progress made 
in recent years had been the strengthening of cooperation 
between the Junta de Energia Nuclear 
(JEN) and private industry, with a view to promoting 
the use of nuclear energy in Spain. Negotiations 
were nearing completion for the construction 
of a uranium ore concentrating plant with a capacity 
of 1000 tons of ore per day, which, in conjunction 
with the eXIsting capacity, would make Spain the 
second largest uranium producer in Western Europe. 
At the Moncloa National Research Centre large 
pilot plants for the refining of fuel element material 
and fuel element fabrication and reprocessing were 
in operation. The fuel elements would be marketed 
by a nuclear fuel manufacturing company with the 
financial participation of the JEN, as a result of 
which it would be possible to supply the 
fuel elements required for the Spanish programme 
and to reprocess irradiated fuel in future. The position 
of Spain as a producer of source materials and 
the demands of its technological and industrial 
development called for more extensive and sustained 
co-operation with the executive and advisory 
bodies of the Agency. The JEN was also 
engaged in work on the desalting of sea water. 
Mention should be made in that connection of the 
work being done on electrodialysis and inverse osmosis, 
also in collaboration with Spanish industry. 

Studies were likewise under way on the subject of 
a dual-purpose plant to desalt water and generate 
electricity; they were conducted by the JEN in 
association with Spanish and foreign industrial undertakings. 
Desalting was of great importance for 
Spain, and it would be gratifying if the Agency 
were to continue, intensify and expand its activities 
in that connection. 

22. Promotion of the use of radioisotopes and 
radiation sources, the demand for which had increased 
by about 30 %, together with the start of 
work on irradiation of foodstuffs under the auspices 
of a special inter-ministerial committee and in close 
co-operation with industry, represented further basic 
aspects of the technical activities in which the JEN 
was engaged in association with industry. 
23. Finally, in order to meet the country's nuclear 
engineering requirements, the Jen had continued its 
work in that field and was at present in a position 
to provide advice on various subjects to interested 
Spanish undertakings. To improve the effectiveness 
of that activity, close co-operation was maintained 
with Spanish engineering companies, which regarded 
the JEN as their extension into the sphere of 
nuclear energy. The JEN was also concerned with 
fast reactors. The CORAL project, in which the 
Agency had actively co-operated as regards the supply 
of fuel and the solution of safety problems, was 
nearing completion and was about to become operational. 
24. Research in molecular biology had been 
another of the most important activities in recent 
years, as had also fresh research on radioisotopes, 
medical applications, solid-state physics, and the 
physics of elementary particles. 
25. The JEN had signed bilateral agreements with 
its counterparts in various countries, and was conducting 
negotiations with a number of others. 
26. Spain was a party to bilateral agreements 
with the United States of America, the United Kingdom, 
Canada, India, Italy, Pakistan and Argentina, 
and was at present negotiating such agreements 
with Egypt, Brazil and Peru. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

27. Mr. MOROKHOV ( Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said that the Agency did not eXIst in a 
vacuum, and its activities could not fail to be 
affected by the course of the world events. The 
origin and eXIstence of the United Nations and die 
setting up of the Agency were an expression of the 
efforts of nations to ensure peace and to attain 
international collaboration in various fields, including 
the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
28. It was, however, readily apparent that certain 
aspects of the present state of the world were 
unfavourable to fruitful international co-operation. 
The eleventh session of the General Conference 
was being held in conditions of increased international 
tension, which had an adverse effect on 
the Agency's activity. 
29. The intensification of the United States' 
aggression against the Vietnamese people was continuing 
; the barbaric bombing of towns and industrial 
targets in the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam was 
increasing, and the blood of completely innocent 
people was being shed. Together with other peaceloving 
States, the Soviet Union demanded the unconditional 
cessation of United States aggression in 
South-East Asia. A new imperialist attack had recently 
been launched by Israel, directed against the 
Arab States. The sympathies of the Soviet Union 
were on the side of the Arab States as the victims 
of aggression. In accordance with its policy of 
assisting States fighting to liberate themselves, the 
Soviet Union firmly supported the Arab States and 
demanded the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops 
from the occupied territories. 
30. Any act of aggression intensified the danger 
of war and inevitably led to a stepping-up of the 
arms race, including the development and improvement 
of nuclear weapons, all of which seriously 
impeded the general and widespread use of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes, hindered the development 
of international co-operation between States in 
the field of atomic energy, including co-operation 
through the Agency, and made it impossible for all 
nations to enjoy the benefits of the use of atomic 
energy. 
31. The nuclear arms race gave rise to the danger 
of thermonuclear war, and for that reason the Soviet 
Union and the other socialist countries consistendy 
advocated the prohibition of nuclear weapons and the 
destruction of all stockpiles. The Soviet Union had 
accordingly proposed the inclusion in the agenda 
for the twenty-second session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations of the important 
and urgent question of concluding an agreement 
to forbid the use of nuclear weapons and had put 
forward a draft for such an agreement. 
32. The danger ofnuclear war would be immeasurably 
increased by the spread of nuclear arms 
throughout the world and by placing that terrible 
weapon within the reach of the forces of aggression, 
militarism and revanchism. To prevent such a development 
it was essential to conclude an international 
treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
and the Soviet Union was firmly in favour of concluding 
such a treaty. 

33. Certain positive developments had recently 
taken place in the work of the Eighteen-Nation 
Committee on Disarmament. The Soviet delegation 
had submitted to the Committee a draft treaty on 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and an 
identical draft had also been submitted by the 
United States delegation. 
34. The draft solved the main problem concerning 
non-proliferation, i.e. the prohibition of both 
direct and indirect access to nuclear weapons. The 
important problem of international control to verify 
that the obligations laid down by the treaty were 
being fulfilled still awaited solution. Such control 
was necessary in order to ensure that the treaty 
was effectively applied. 
35- The Soviet Union and many other countries 
felt that the best way of ensuringthe treaty's application 
was to use the Agency's Safeguards System, 
which had been developed and approved by the 
Agency's Member States and had proved itself in 
practice. 

36. At the previous session of the General Conference 
the Polish People's Republic and the Czechoslovak 
Socialist Republic had again manifested their 
faith in the Agency's Safeguards System by declaring 
themselves ready to submit their nuclear facilities 
to Agency inspection if the same was done by the 
Member States of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO) which did not possess nuclear 
weapons, and in particular by the Federal Republic 
of Germany [2], The Soviet Union had supported 
that initiative on the part of the two socialist 
countries, and also welcomed and supported the 
similar declaration of the Hungarian People's 
Republic made at the previous meeting by the head 
of the Hungarian delegation [3]. The Soviet Union 
supported the statement of the Government of the 
German Democratic Republic on the subject of 
application of the Agency's safeguards, which had 
been brought to the notice of delegates at the tenth 
General Conference [4]. His Government also felt 
the justice of the legitimate desire of the German 
Democratic Republic to become a Member of the 
Agency, and was convinced that the Agency could 
only gain from such a move, since the achievements 
of the German Democratic Republic in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy were well known. 
37. Unfortunately, neither the Federal Republic 
of Germany nor the other West European Member 
[2] See documents GC(X)/OR.103, para. 56, and GC(X)/ 
OR. 104, para. 14. 
(3] GC(XI)/OR.U2, para. 97. 

[4] GC(X)/INF/91. 

113th. PLENARY MEETING 

States of NATO had yet responded to the constructive 
initiative of the socialist States. They continued 
to insist on the application not of the generally 
accepted international safeguards system of the 
Agency but of the control system established by the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
a narrowly regional organization which was in fact 
a closed group of States inspecting and controlling 
each other. That showed yet again the real attitude 
of the revanchiste forces of Western Germany regarding 
the solution of the problem of non-proliferation 
of nuclear arms. 

38. If the Agency was entrusted with the enforcement 
of the treaty for the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, it would acquire new responsibilities. 
It was therefore necessary to embark 
immediately on a study of all aspects of the 
organization and functioning of the Agency's control 
and inspection machinery, in order to be in a 
position to institute effective controls at short notice. 
For that reason the Soviet delegation had proposed 
at the Board meetings in June 1967 the setting up 
of a special committee to study all problems 
connected with reorganizing the Agency's control 
and inspection machinery in the light of the abovementioned 
new responsibilities. 
39- The present practice of the Agency's inspectorate 
was still not satisfactory. In the inspection of 
facilities under Agency safeguards insufficient use 
was made of inspectors from socialist countries, 
and the principle of equal representation of the 
three groups of States eXIsting in the world was not 
adequately applied in selecting the inspectors. 

40. The Soviet delegation felt that it was time to 
develop procedures and methods for applying Agency 
safeguards to plants for separating uranium isotopes, 
which were an important part of the nuclear fuel 
cycle. It had therefore proposed that the Secretariat 
should study the problem and present its views to 
the Board in June 1968. The Board had agreed 
with that proposal and had passed a resolution to 
that effect. 
41. His delegation was convinced that the Eighteen-
Nation Committee on Disarmament would bring its 
work on a non-proliferation treaty to a successful 
conclusion. The signing of that treaty would undoubtedly 
serve to decrease international tension and lessen 
the threat of nuclear war; it would also open the 
way to a solution of the problems of nuclear disarmament. 
His delegation was convinced that the Agency 
would cope successfully with the problem of enforcing 
the treaty. That conviction was strenghtened by the 
Director General's statement at the 111th plenary 
meeting. The Soviet delegation therefore felt it 
important for the General Conference to come out 
in favour of rapid conclusion of the treaty and state 
that the Agency would be ready to take whatever 
steps were laid down in the treaty to ensure that 
it was enforced. In its view, the Director General 
[ 5 ] See document GC( XI)/ OR. 111, paras 33-36. 
should then communicate the Conference's resolution 
on the subject to the General Assembly of the 
United Nations and the Eighteen-Nation Committee 
on Disarmament. 

42. It gave him special pleasure to speak about 
the achievements of the Soviet Union in the peaceful 
use of atomic energy on the threshold of the 
celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Soviet 
State, the first socialist state in the world, which, in 
the period of its eXIstence, had achieved great success 
in many branches of nuclear science and technology, 
and had trained scientists and other atomic 
specialists who were making an important contribution 
to nuclear science and whose names were 
known throughout the world. . 
43. In 1949, when the ominous mushroom cloud 
from the atomic explosions over Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki had scarcely cleared, the Soviet Union had 
begun to develop a project for the first nuclear 
power station in the world, which had gone into 
operation on 27 June 1954. In 1958, the first 
section of the Siberian power station, with a capacity 
of 100 MW(e), had gone into operation, using 
a uranium/graphite reactor, and the present overall 
capacity of the station was more than 600 MW(e). 
In 1963 the first block of the Beloyarsk power 
station, with a design capacity of 100 MW(e), using 
a uranium/graphite reactor, had gone into operation. 
The second block, with a similar reactor of 
200 MW(e), was being built. The reactors of the 
Beloyarsk station had been the first in which superheated 
steam had been produced directly in the 
reactor; its parameters (90atmamd500°C)ensured 
an efficiency of about 37 % and allowed the use of 
modern standard thermal power equipment. 
44. In 1964 the first block of the Novovoronezh 
power station, with a design capacity of 210 MW(e), 
had begun to produce power. The station used 
pressurized water reactors, which had become widely 
used in the Soviet Union and in other countries. 
In February 1965 the capacity of the first block had 
been raised to 240 MW(e), and the power station 
had shown itself to be reliable and consistent in 
operation. It had so far produced about 3000 million 
kilowatt-hours of electrical power. The construction 
of the second block with a capacity of 
365 MW(e) would be completed in 1967. 
45. In 1965 a power station with a capacity of 
50 MW(e) had gone into operation in Melekess, 
using a boiling water reactor. Such reactors might 
be somewhat cheaper than two-circuit types, and 
plans were therefore being drawn up for power 
stations using them. 
46. A study of the prospects for the industrial 
use of fast neutron reactors had begun in the Soviet 
Union in 1949, and had necessitated the construction 
of a series of experimental reactors. The first 
such reactor, the BR-1, had been built and started 
up in 1955; in 1956 the BR-2, with a thermal 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

capacity of 100 kW, had been built, and in 1958 
the BR-5, with a thermal capacity of 5000 kW and 
using plutonium dioXIde and sodium cooling. 

47. On the basis of the experience obtained with 
the experimental reactors, work had been started on 
the construction of large power stations with fast 
neutron reactors; in particular, the industrial power 
plant in Shevchenko was nearing completion. Apart 
from producing electrical power [150 MW(e)], the 
station would provide steam for water desalting and 
produce up to 120 000 ta'5 of fresh water a day. 
48. The BOR-60 experimental reactor with a 
thermal capacity of 60 MW was being built in Melekess. 
Increasing the average power density of the 
core to 900-1000 kW/1, the sodium temperature at 
the outlet to 600° C and the burn-up of the nuclear 
fuel to 1 million MWd/t would, according to calculations, 
make for much more economic operation of 
power stations. The reactor was the prototype for 
the first series of economic power stations using fast 
neutron reactors. 
49. Work to construct power stations of low and 
relatively low capacities was also being developed. 
50. In 1961 the TES-3 mobile power station with 
an electrical capacity of 1500 kW had gone into 
experimental operation. It was the prototype of 
low-capacity power stations, and used pressurized 
water. Its operation over a period of time had 
confirmed its reliability, good handling qualities and 
ease of servicing. 
51. Another type of low-capacity power station, 
specially developed for remote regions, was the 
ARBUS (750 kW), with a vessel-type reactor. An 
experimental model had gone into operation in the 
summer of 1963. 
52. To meet industrial and domestic requirements 
for electricity and heat in one of the remote regions 
of the Soviet Union, a typical unit with a capacity of 
12 MW (e) was being built in the Far North to 
serve as an autonomous atomic thermal-electrical 
power station, which would use a uranium/graphite 
reactor. 
53. At almost the same lime as the construction 
of the first atomic power stations in the 
Soviet Union, work had been undertaken on the 
use of atomic power for various forms of transport.. 
In the spring of 1960 the nuclear-powered icebreaker 
"Lenin" had made its first Arctic voyage; 
operation of the vessel over a lengthy period in 
the difficult conditions of the Arctic Ocean had 
shown its excellent qualities and the reliable running 
of the atomic power plant. In the light of the 
results obtained, it had been decided to build two 
new nuclear-powered ice-breakers, taking into 
account the experience gained in operating the 
"Lenin". 
54. The Soviet Union now had an adequate and 
up-to-date basis in design and experimental work 
which would allow it to undertake extensive and 
far-reaching development work with a view to introducing 
atomic energy applications into the national 
economy Already, the national economy was saving 
about 200 million roubles a year solely through 
the introduction of radioisotope techniques. 
55. The Soviet Union's plans for the peaceful 
use of atomic energy were extensive, and with every 
year nuclear power would play an increasingly 
important role in the total power production of 
the country, especially its European part. 
56. Methods of applying radiation to various 
materials in order to produce materials with new 
qualities and increase the efficiency of eXIsting 
technological processes were going beyond experimentation 
and assuming a place in industrial production, 
while instruments based on the use of 
ionizing radiations were becoming the basis for 
the equipment and automation of production. Medicine, 
which already made wide use of ionization 
techniques in diagnosis and treatment, was now using 
them as an efficient means of caring for people's 
health. 
57. With reference to the practical use of atomic 
energy, he wished to dwell on fundamental research, 
and pointed out that the world scientific community 
was well aware of the outstanding achievements of 
Soviet scientists in theoretical nuclear physics; their 
experimental work, which served to supplement and 
develop the theoretical studies, had led to a large 
number of very remarkable discoveries. 
58. The high specialized instruments used in 
physics were an essential part of the equipment of 
all Soviet research centres. A symbol of current 
developments in nuclear physics was the very powerful 
proton accelerator being completed close to 
Serpukhov near Moscow. Producing protons with 
an energy of 70 000 MeV and a beam intensity of 
1012 particles per pulse, the instrument was built 
on a grandiose scale. The diameter of the accelerator 
ring was almost half a kilometre, its magnet 
weighed 20 000 tons, and the hall containing the 
experimental equipment was large enough to hold 
a very modern stadium. The main structural work 
on the Serpukhov accelerator had been completed, 
and installation and start-up work was proceeding 
successfully. 
59. Work on controlled nuclear fusion had 
developed further in recent years. The research 
centres of the country (the Kurchatov Atomic Energy 
1 
Institute, the Novosibirsk Nuclear Physics Institute, 
and the Physico-Technical Institutes at Sukhumi 
and Kharkov) were developing and studying new 
methods of controlling the thermonuclear process 
(high-frequency, turbulent, impact, and ion-cyclotron 
heating of the plasma, among others). While it had 


113th. PLENARY MEETING 

not yet been possible to achieve in a single thermonuclear 
device simultaneous fulfilment of all the 
conditions necessary for fusion to occur (high temperature, 
high particle density and a sufficient plasma 
retention time), further success in solving the very 
complex problems would probably be attained in 
the near future. 

60. Fifty years ago a new type of State had been 
born, the socialist State, which had achieved enormous 
social reforms and technical progress. Its people 
were firmly resolved to do everything necessary to 
make it an example to the whole of mankind. It 
needed peace, and the whole history of the Soviet 
State was a history of the fight for peace. One of 
the first decrees of the Soviet Government had been 
a decree about peace. The Soviet State had been 
one of the first to begin international collaboration 
in the peaceful use of the atomic energy, by concluding 
an agreement with the socialist and developing 
countries to grant scientific, technical and 
industrial assistance in the use of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes. It had also taken the lead 
in arranging an exchange of information with 
other countries on controlled thermonuclear reactions. 
61. Realizing that the construction and use of 
powerful modern accelerators required international 
collaboration, the Soviet Union had in 1956 given 
over the use of the Joint Institute for Nuclear 
Research, which brought together scientists from 
the socialist countries, the largest proton synchrotron 
available at that time, with an energy of lOOOOMeV. 
Successful co-operation between Soviet scientists and 
those of the socialist countries was still continuing 
in the Institute, and had led in 1966 to the discovery 
of the 104th element, which had been named 
kurchatovium in honour of the outstanding Soviet 
scientist, Academician Kurchatov. 
62. The Soviet Union had invited scientists from 
the socialist countries (the Joint Institute for Nuclear 
Research at Dubna), France and the European 
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) to participate 
in the work with the accelerator at Serpukhov, 
and agreements for collaboration had been concluded. 
63. Together with scientists from the other socialist 
countries, Soviet scientists were successfully solving 
common problems within the standing committee 
on the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes 
set up by the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(COMECON). The use of atomic energy was 
becoming ever more important to the economies 
of those countries, especially for the production of 
electrical power. For that reason COMECON had 
developed and was carrying out an extensive programme 
to co-ordinate scientific and technical investigations 
in the field of nuclear power. Successful 
work was also being performed in other branches 
of nuclear science and technology. 
64. Recently, the Soviet Union had concluded 
agreements with the German Democratic Republic, 
Bulgaria, Hungary and Czechoslovakia for the construction 
of nuclear power stations with a total 
capacity of about 4 million kW. It was still collaborating 
extensively with a number of developing 
countries and was giving technical assistance and 
help in the peaceful applications of atomic energy, 
through bilateral agreements. The Soviet Union was 
helping such countries to create national scientific 
centres and train indigenous experts. The equipment 
of two X-ray radiological centres in Morocco and 
Pakistan was nearing completion, as part of the 
Soviet Union's contribution to the Agency's technical 
assistance programme for developing countries. 

65. The Soviet Union was active in many international 
bodies — not least in the Agency, in whose 
scientific and technical conferences, symposia and 
other scientific activities Soviet scientists and experts 
were participating. 
66. The Soviet Union received scientists from 
many countries, placing at their disposal facilities 
for scientific and technical meetings of the type 
organized by the Agency. In 1966, a group of 
experts from developing countries which were 
Members of the Agency had visited the Soviet 
Union to study the industrial applications of radioisotopes 
and irradiation. Agreement had been reached 
to organize another study tour in the Soviet Union 
during 1968 on the subject of radiation protection, 
and also to organize a regional course on medical 
radiology for experts from developing countries, to 
be held in Moscow in June 1968. In May 1967 the 
International Nuclear Data Committee had met in 
the Soviet Union. During 1968 his country was 
also prepared to offer the Agency facilities for holding 
a regional meeting on the use of research reactors 
at Tbilisi as well as a symposium on plasma 
physics in Novosibirsk. 
67. Referring to the Board's annual report to the 
General Conference [GC(XI)/355 andCorr.l, 366], 
he said that the Agency had achieved certain 
positive results not only in activities on which it had 
been engaged since its inception but also in the 
preparation of new ones which by virtue of the 
Board's decision would start in 1968. He had in 
mind, particularly, the creation of an International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS). His delegation 
was in favour of the proposal that the Agency 
should become an international centre for the exchange 
of information on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, thereby better discharging one of its 
main functions under the Statute. The proposal, if 
implemented successfully, would benefit all Member 
States. Some thought should be given to the possibility 
of incorporating in the proposed system 
work on processing nuclear data. The Soviet Union 
intended to play its part in establishing the system. 
68. The Governor from the Soviet Union had 
already stated in the Board that the funds needed 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

for new activities could be found by better distribution 
of available resources and by reducing certain 
appropriation sections, particularly that for laboratories. 
The Regular Budget submitted to the General 
Conference provided for an increase of 10.4 % ; the 
Soviet delegation regarded that figure as excessive 
and could not accept it unless it were modified. 

69. It had already been rightly pointed out at 
meetings of Agency bodies that it should follow the 
practice of national finance ministries, which planned 
their budgets on the basis of the available resources, 
and if necessary cut the allocations for less 
important types of activity in favour of priority 
activities. That practice had unfortunately not yet 
become a guiding principle in drawing up the budgets 
of international organizations, and in particular 
that of the Agency. 
70. He appealed to the Director General and to 
the Secretariat as a whole for a more realistic approach 
to the new six-year programme, with regard 
both to policy decisions governing the Agency's 
activities and to the financial consequences of the 
programme. His delegation felt that with regard to 
the essence of the new long-term programme it 
would be possible to benefit considerably from the 
Review of the Agency's Activities [6] by suitably 
applying the recommendations contained therein. 
The value of that review was that it analysed almost 
all the basic activities of the Agency, with emphasis 
on the fact that they should correspond more closely 
to the needs and interests of the developing countries. 
It also emphasized that the Agency should, 
to an equal extent, carry out activities of interest 
to all Member States, both developing and developed. 
In particular, the Secretariat should pay 
more attention to problems of nuclear power in 
order to ensure that they occupied a prominent 
place in the new long-term programme. 
71. With regard to the Agency's success in training 
specialists in the use of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes, especially for the developing 
countries, he felt that a new approach was required, 
since responsibility for training was at present dispersed 
throughout various departments, not to 
mention the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste, the Seibersdorf Laboratory, States 
offering fellowships and the organizers of various 
regional courses. There was no general plan or 
uniform policy, and the training programme inevitably 
suffered therefrom. He felt that the new sixyear 
programme might well find room for the development 
of a new approach. The Hungarian proposal 
for collaboration between laboratories in the developed 
and developing countries [7] was interesting 
and deserved attention, as also did that of the 
United Arab Republic for the joint training of 
groups of specialists for a specific country with a 
view to operating an atomic facility [8]. 
[6] GC(XI)/362. 
[7] GC(XI)/OR.112para. 99. 
[8] GC(XI)/362, Annex A, United Arab Republic, para. 9. 
72. On the subject of technical assistance, he 
felt that the funds available for the purpose should 
be more rationally used. In particular it was necessary 
to meet the desires of the developing countries 
by spending more on equipment and on fellowships 
for scientists rather than on paying the salaries of 
experts who were not always needed. His delegation 
was also unable to accept that the Agency, disregarding 
political circumstances and taking refuge 
in the legal subterfuge that it was a purely technical 
organization, provided aid to, for example, South 
Korea, which had sent 50 000 mercenaries to South 
Viet-Nam. Nor could he omit mention of the aid 
to the puppet regimes in South-Viet-Nam and 
Taiwan, which were pursuing the purely political 
aims of certain Powers. 
73. The Soviet Union had always supported the 
provision of technical assistance to developing countries, 
financed on the basis of voluntary contributions. 
The voluntary contribution of 100 000 roubles 
made by the Soviet Union for that purpose in 1966 
had achieved practical results. It was, however, 
impossible not to be dissatisfied with the fact that 
no use had yet been made of the 20 one-year 
fellowships at a value of approXImately 80 000 roubles 
which had been offered at the same time, 
principally for the purpose of giving specialists and 
scientists from developing countries training in the 
Soviet Union. He hoped that the Director General 
would take the necessary measures to see that those 
fellowships were soon used. 
74. Wishing to co-operate further in the Agency's 
technical assistance programme, the Soviet Union 
was again making a contribution of 100 000 roubles 
in national currency for the provision of technical 
assistance to developing countries. That sum could 
be used by the Agency to buy in the Soviet Union 
instruments, equipment and materials for technical 
assistance projects. 
75. M. SALVETTI (Italy) said that the review of 
the Agency's activities, carried out by the Board 
and its Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, had confirmed 
the sound foundation on which those acti* 
vities had been based. Despite the numerous difficulties 
of all kinds which the Agency had continually 
faced, there could be no doubt that it had made a 
considerable contribution to the development of 
nuclear energy activities in the world. 
76. The review of activities in the past year had 
shown that in addition to the rational development 
of eXIsting programmes, new initiatives had been 
undertaken, and he particularly welcomed the proposal 
regarding INIS. That proposal merited full 
attention, since documentation constituted an ideal 
subject for co-operation and was of fundamental 
importance in the development of nuclear energy 
activities. 
77. In view of the compleXIty of the technical 
and financial problems involved in the co-ordinated 

113th. PLENARY MEETING 

use of the eXIsting regional and national documentation 
centres, a pilot project on the lines of the one 
envisaged would be most valuable, as it should 
make it technically and financially possible to undertake 
a large-scale co-operation project. 

78. The activity to which the Agency had continued 
to devote its main efforts was technical assistance. 
It had been the subject of numerous discussions, 
analyses and studies at all levels in the search for 
better solutions to some of the main problems, 
one of which was how the rapid and impressive 
progress of nuclear energy activities could be accompanied 
by a corresponding increase in the Agency's 
technical assistance activity. So far, that had been 
impossible because the Agency's technical and financial 
resources had not substantially increased, whereas 
requests for assistance had multiplied. Thus, in 
the space of a few years the situation had changed 
from one where almost all requests for technical 
assistance had been met, to one where only 30 % 
could be fully met. 
79. Although the technicalassistanceproblemwas 
becoming increasingly serious, it would be very 
difficult to solve it completely solely by better use 
of personnel or of the means available to the 
Agency. In addition, technical assistance for nuclear 
energy activities differed from assistance for other 
purposes in that the development of such activities 
presupposed the eXIstence of a certain level of economic 
development. What contribution could nuclear 
energy make to the economic development of a 
country which was not in a position to exploit that 
source of energy ? The greatest need was for educational 
and training courses, fellowships, etc., which 
could include theoretical research. Italy was 
not opposed to theoretical research — on the contrary, 
it believed that it could be of considerable 
importance to developing countries in building up 
a nucleus of research workers to form the cadres 
on which the sound development of nuclear science 
and technology would subsequently depend. 
80. The results of the research and studies conducted 
in co-operation with FAO were of great value 
to all countries with an essentially or largely agricultural 
economy. 
81. Italy was very interested in such research and 
in that connection was particularly pleased with the 
excellent and fruitful co-operation which had eXIsted 
for some time with the Agency. The work carried 
out in co-operation with the Agency included the 
cost-free research contract of the National Committee 
for Nuclear Energy to study methods of increasing 
harvests by means of beneficial mutations, and the 
Committee's participation in the Near Eastern Barley 
Improvement and Production Project. Eradication of 
the fruit fly in Ischia and Capri by the sterile male 
technique was another valuable activity. 
82. The Agency's congresses and symposia had 
been of the highest value from the standpoints of 
subjects dealt with and scientific standard. 

83. The Italian delegation also appreciated the 
authority granted by the Board to the Director 
General to conclude a new agreement with Italy 
for the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste and it was hoped that the final negotiations 
could be concluded shortly. He was certain 
that the Centre would continue to add lustre to 
the excellent reputation which it had already gained 
in the scientific world. 
84. Italy would again place 20 fellowships, amounting 
to a total of 160 months of training, at the disposal 
of the Agency in 1968, through the National 
Committee for Nuclear Energy. In addition, its 
experts would be at the disposal of the Agency for 
panels and working or consultative groups. 
85- Mr. BILLIG (Poland) said that the preceding 
year had been marked by further development of 
valuable international collaboration within the framework 
of the Agency and by great progress in many 
of its activities. That was sufficiently exemplified by 
the Review of the Agency's Activities undertaken 
with a view to increasing the assistance to developing 
countries, the strengthening and improvement of 
the safeguards and inspection system, by the action 
taken to organize INIS, by the proposed further 
development of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste, by the progress made in 
the exchange of information on scientific and technical 
achievements, etc. 

86. However, the preceding year had also seen an 
increase in international tension and a further intensification 
of the aggressive war conducted by the 
United States of America in Viet-Nam, poisoningthe 
international atmosphere and involving the risk of 
extension of the conflict; also, as a result of Israeli 
aggression, a new theatre of war had been 
established and new tensions had worsened the 
international situation. That, of course, was bound 
to affect the Agency's activities. 
87. Under those circumstances any step taken to 
ease international tension, reduce the risk of new 
conflicts and avert the atomic threat was of extreme 
importance. One such step which was now in the 
centre of attention of the world community, and 
was directly connected with the Agency's work, 
was the conclusion of an international treaty on 
the non-proliferation of atomic weapons. 
88. In 1966 the Polish delegation had expressed 
its willingness to place Polish atomic installations 
under Agency safeguards if other countries, in particular 
the Federal Republic of Germany, would do 
the same. It had in that way expressed its conviction 
that the Agency was the most appropriate and 
indeed the only international body capable of applying 
safeguards and controls in order to ensure that 
the atom was used only for peace. His delegation 
thought the General Conference was the right forum 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

for considering the importance of that treaty in 
attaining the Agency's main goal, i.e. to ensure that 
nuclear energy was used only for peaceful purposes 
in the service of mankind. 

89. However, as the Conference was aware, there 
were still people opposed to the conclusion of a 
non-proliferation treaty and to the implementation 
of safeguards and controls by the Agency. After the 
bitter experiences Poland had undergone in the not 
so distant past, it was particularly concerned by the 
present attitude adopted by the Federal Republic 
of Germany. For Poland as well as for other European 
countries, a guarantee that the Federal Republic 
would not have direct or even indirect access to 
atomic weapons was of prime importance. 

90. He noted that the German Democratic Republic 
had immediately accepted the proposal to place 
its atomic installations under Agency safeguards and 
that recently it had unreservedly supported the proposal 
presented in Geneva for non-proliferation of 
atomic weapons. Unfortunately, the Federal Republic 
of Germany's position was the complete opposite. 
91. Opponents of the treaty and provisions for 
control offered as the main argument in support of 
their views the fallacious idea that such a treaty 
would hold up the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. In point of fact, safeguards 
to ensure that fissile materials and nuclear facilities 
were used exclusively for peaceful purposes, 
as opposed to military ones, actually contributed to 
the development of atomic energy activities, as was 
clearly shown, albeit in microcosm, by the work of 
the Agency. Moreover, the Safeguards System had 
been approved unanimously even by those who 
now opposed it. 
92. He cited as an example the experience of 
Poland, where, as was well known, nuclear energy 
was being utilized solely for peaceful purposes. In 
Poland the results obtained from the practical application 
of nuclear energy were more than sufficient 
to cover all expenditure on research and experimentation. 
93. In connection with the work of the Committee 
set up by U Thant, the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, Poland had made hypothetical 
calculations of what roughly the consequences would 
have been for the Polish economy, had Poland 
chosen to acquire even the most elementary stockpile 
of nuclear weapons. The results obtained from 
the calculations were as follows: over the 10-years 
period needed to obtain the most elementary form 
of nuclear armament, Poland would have had to 
spend 150 000 million zlotys, i.e. 15 000 million 
zlotys per annum. Such an amount would have 
demanded from Poland a cut in per capita consumption 
of 4 % or a drop in capital investment of 24 %, 
or almost a quarter. That would have halted the 
growth of productivity, employment and, naturally, 
the national income, which was planned to increase 
by approXImately 6 % per annum. Figures of that 
kind were eloquent testimony to the fact that for 
even such an averagely developed country as Poland, 
let alone for developing countries, an attempt to 
acquire stock-piles of atomic weapons not only 
shackled and hampered the development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy but even undermined 
the whole economy. 

94. It therefore followed that the conclusion of 
a treaty on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
the application of safeguards and controls to ensure 
observance of such a treaty could not but have a 
favourable effect on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. In his opinion the signing of a non-proliferation 
treaty and the establishment of safeguards and 
controls on the use of fissile materials and nuclear 
facilities would contribute towards the development 
of international co-operation, and particularly international 
trade in such materials and facilities. 
95. The Polish delegation considered that the 
Agency should prepare to carry out the functions of 
the body responsible for ensuring observance of the 
treaty. The Agency's Safeguards System ought to be 
extended and adapted to the new situation so that 
it would be capable of carrying out the new tasks it 
was faced with. 
96. Accordingly, the Polish delegation wholeheartedly 
endorsed and supported the Soviet proposal to 
set up an ad hoc working group which would draw 
up proposals for extending and improving the Safeguards 
System with a view to obtaining maXImum 
effectiveness, while causing the minimum possible 
inconvenience to the State under inspection and 
respecting its sovereignty. 
97. In connection with the speech made by the 
Soviet delegate, who had noted the great achievements 
made by the Soviet Union in the 50 years 
since the October Revolution, he himself would 
like to acknowledge with gratitude that the development 
of nuclear energy in Poland owed much to 
Soviet assistance. Fraternal co-operation amongst 
the socialist countries was making a significant 
contribution to the development of their nuclear 
science and technology; that was also reflected in 
their collaboration in COMECON's standing committee 
on the use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. 
98. The Polish delegation considered that 
although at the present moment the Agency did not 
possess sufficient funds to set up new regional 
centres for training in the use of atomic energy, it 
should be possible, with modest resources, to use 
the centres, institutes and laboratories which already 
eXIsted in different countries to help the developing 
countries. The Agency could sponsor such centres 
and send to them fellows, professors, experts and 
equipment so that they could serve many countries, 
particularly the countries of each region. Poland 
would be ready and willing to place at the Agency's 

113th. PLENARY MEETING 

disposal for such a purpose one of its institutes 
engaged mainly in the use of isotopic and other 
nuclear techniques in industry. 

99. Poland attached great importance to the 
Agency's activities in rendering aid to developing 
nations and would make a contribution of 
150 000 zlotys to the General Fund. In addition, as 
in preceding years, it would place at the disposal of 
the Agency five fellowships for one year's study in 
Poland. Asistance given by the socialist countries 
through the Agency, in the form of radiological 
laboratories for diagnosis and treatment and experts 
sent out under Agency auspices to various projects, 
had proved extremely necessary and effective. 
100. In line with the obligations they had taken 
upon themselves, Poland and Bulgaria were jointly 
prepared to dispatch another laboratory of that kind 
in accordance with the decision of the Board of 
Governors. 
101. The Polish delegation fully realized that the 
10.4 % increase in the Budget for 1968 [9] over the 
previous year was chiefly due to the new spheres of 
activity undertaken by the Agency — for example, 
INIS —, to the necessity of extending work on safeguards, 
to the increased number of full-time inspectors 
and to rising costs, but nevertheless it 
considered that certain administrative expenditure 
could be cut down, over and above those economies 
already made by the Director General and approved 
by the Board, and that that should be taken into 
account in future. 
102. Atomic energy, he recalled, that new sphere 
of science and technology on which mankind placed 
such high hopes, had been born in a small and 
primitive laboratory where that great scientist, Marie 
Sklodowska-Curie, and her husband Pierre Curie had 
done their epoch-making work. 
103. Celebrations in connection with the centenary 
of Marie Sklodowska- Curie's birth had already begun. 
In a month's time the occasion would be officially 
celebrated. A museum would be opened in 
the house of her birth, and an international symposium 
on future prospects for nuclear physics and 
chemistry, physics of elementary particles and radiochemistry 
would take place. One hundred and seventy 
scientists from all over the world would take part 
in the symposium. Pursuant to the joint Polish-French 
resolution adopted at the previous session of the 
Conference with reference to the centenary celebrations 
[10], the Agency had given Poland great help 
in organizing the symposium, and in that connection 
he wanted to thank the Agency and in particular 
its Director General. 
104. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) saidthattheAgency's 
General Conferences every year gave Member States 
[9] GC(XI)/360. 
[10] GC(X)/RES/216. 
an opportunity to examine their conscience and to 
determine whether the efforts made and the results 
obtained had been what they had intended. It also 
provided an opportunity for discussing events which 
had occurred during the period under review and 
which were certain to have an appreciable impact on 
the Agency's future activities. 

105. In its annual report the Board emphasized the 
problems confronting the Agency in connection with 
the implementation of safeguards,as regards both the 
increase in the number of countries voluntarily placing 
their installations under safeguards and the extension 
of the Safeguards System itself. It also referred to 
the fact that the Treaty for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America provided, among 
other things, for the application of Agency safeguards 
to all activities relating to atomic energy in the 
countries it covered. In the future, perhaps, still 
other international treaties might call on the Agency 
to implement the controls provided for. 
106. To cope with such new responsibilities, both 
present and future, which were not all expressly 
provided for in the Statute, the Agency would have 
to set up a budget covering control expenditure, 
which would be altogether distinct from that covering 
all its other services. Moreover, in the face of what 
might be called a future inflation of expenditure for 
control services, there might be a temptation — as a 
means of remaining within accep table budget limits— 
to mask the real cost of safeguards by financing 
certain items of expenditure under other headings. 
He had in mind, for example, the proposal to create 
a post at the Seibersdorf Laboratory for a 
specialized analyst for safeguards work, or to use 
services of inspectors from other Departments on an 
ad hoc basis. Such expenditures should be carried 
on the safeguards budget; if they were not, other 
Agency activities were likely to be curtailed little 
by little, since some of the funds allocated to them 
would in fact be going to maintain safeguards. 
107. As far as the establishment of INIS was concerned, 
Belgium would watch the Agency's plans 
with interest, but not without some misgivings. It 
was stated in the introduction to the annual report 
of the Board that the system it was proposed to 
establish would be co-ordinated and partially operated 
by the Agency. The Agency's Budget for 1968, 
however, although it recognized that good documentation 
systems already eXIsted (including that 
developed byEURATOM), indicated that the Agency 
was proposing to start a pilot project of its own. He 
wondered whether the Agency intended to start its 
pilot project from scratch or whether it would be 
guided by one of the systems already developed. 
108. The Agency could not embark on the pilot 
project unless certain conditions were fulfilled: (a) 
all the countries capable of making a useful contribution 
to the system, in the form of information, 
should agree to participate; (b) the project should 
not duplicate other, similar projects, in respect of 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

either documentation or information; (c) the standardization 
of indeXIng should first be studied and 
accepted by the participants before the project was 
put into operation; (d) the operating staff necessary 
should be recruited exclusively from among the 
holders of scientific diplomas in chemistry, physics, 
etc. The staff would obviously need to be trained 
for the new projects, as would also the nationals of 
the Member States who would represent for their 
respective countries the terminal points in the documentation 
and information network. Actually, hardly 
any industrial or scientific laboratories were at present 
capable of using the information in the form in 
which it was released. The Agency's project would 
be of real interest only if that were made possible. 

109. Meanwhile, the Agency should be able to 
obtain certain data, such as the unit cost of the 
projected information, the cost of the reproductions, 
delivery times for the information, etc., whichwould 
give a good indication of the economic value of 
the project and the advisability of introducing it. 
The Agency should therefore, in any event, work 
with already established regional centres (EURA-
TOM, United States Atomic Energy Commission, 
Saclay, National Lending Library ) and should become 
a clearing-house of nuclear information, passing on 
information from all parts of the world. 
110. He recalled that he had on several occasions 
already referred to Belgium's concern regarding 
duplication between the Agency's work and that of 
various specialized agencies. In that connection, 
whilst the Agency should be congratulated on the 
co-operation it had established with FAO, he found 
it difficult to understand the reason for the great 
difference in the financial support supplied by the 
Agency and by FAO to the Joint FAO /IAEA Division 
of Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture: 
the Agency contributed three quarters of the funds 
and FAO one quarter. Since the atom was placed 
at the service of agriculture in the Joint Division, 
it was up to the Agency to see that the contribution 
ratio was reversed. Efforts were being made in that 
direction, but they were not adequate. 
111. Regarding its present and future work on the 
utilization of nuclear power in the industrialized 
countries and in various developing countries, the 
Agency should try to destroy the taboos which had 
done much to divorce the problems connected with 
nuclear energy from those related to other sources 
of energy. The Agency had a role to play to ensure 
that the nuclear industry could develop in a healthy 
atmosphere of competition with other industrial 
sectors, so as to make available to energy users 
the cheapest sources of power in their particular 
regions. As far as its staffing and budgeting allowed, 
it should promote the development of well-tried 
reactor types, the development of breeder reactors, 
the study of fuel cycles, etc., by holding meetings 
at which it would be possible to evaluate the work 
devoted to those subjects throughout the world. 
The interest aroused by the Symposium on the Use 
of Plutonium as Nuclear Fuel —which Belgium 
had had the honour of jointly sponsoring with the 
Agency— showed the extent to which countries 
were now concerned with the technology of fabrication 
and chemical processing of nuclear fuels and 
the economic aspects of their utilization. 

112. He wanted, once again, to draw the Agency's 
attention to the problem of special financing arrangements 
which the Agency would have to study, 
together with the competent organs of the United 
Nations, for countries with limited financial means 
which desired to purchase large nuclear facilities. 
New solutions should be thought out so that the 
future purchasers could obtain adequate guarantees 
and long-term loans necessary for carrying out 
their plans, which unfortunately called for particularly 
heavy outlay in the case of nuclear energy 
activities. If that major problem could be solved, 
the untrammelled economic development of many 
countries undergoing industrialization would be 
greatly facilitated. 
113. Finally, he wanted to refer to problems associated 
with the Seibersdorf Laboratory. It was realized 
that steps had been taken to rationalize some 
of the Laboratory's activities and to go further 
towards sub-dividing the budget into categories 
corresponding to individual operations. If they were 
effective, all those steps should result in a budget 
reduction, assuming the same amount of work; 
that was not the case, however, since there was an 
increase of 11 % for that item. 
114. No action had yet been taken to give effect 
to the Belgian proposal, repeated at intervals over 
a number of years, to establish a committee composed 
of administrators and industrialists to 
examine the Laboratory's proposals regarding its 
work from the industrial and budgetary standpoints 
and in the light of the Agency's general policy. 
Such a committee would certainly produce good 
results. 
115. In conclusion, he was glad to say once more 
how much the Belgian authorities had appreciated 
the generous offer of the Austrian Government to 
provide a site and buildings for the Agency's permanent 
headquarters. 

116. Mr. CONTRERAS CHAVEZ (El Salvador) 
said that, during the present year, El Salvador had 
been able to implement the project on medical 
applications of radioisotopes, worked out with the 
Agency's advice. The Agency's expert had stayed 
six months in El Salvador, and had worked in 
co-operation with the Department of Radioisotope 
Applications. 
117. The radioisotopes section of the Rosales 
Hospital had reorganized its facilities and had 
received technical assistance equipment to the value 
of $4000. The staff of the Rosales Hospital was 

113th. PLENARY MEETING 

extremely satisfied with the hard and very efficient 
work of the expert, Dr. Farran. 

118. The success obtained provided encouragement 
to continue in the same direction, and the Rosales 
Hospital had earmarked funds for fresh applications 
on the lines laid down by the expert; to speed up 
that activity it had requested that the Agency should 
continue its support by providing expert services 
for a further six months and equipment to the 
value of about $2000. That assistance had been 
charged to the Operational Budget for 1967, but 
on technical or budgetary grounds it had been 
impossible to grant it in respect of the present 
year. For that reason it had been decided not to 
request technical assistance under the 1968 Operational 
Budget until the expert had arrived, after 
which the current project would be continued in 
agreement with him. The Government of El Salvador 
hoped that the expert and the equipment 
would be provided during the first half of 1968, 
as otherwise the development of the project would 
be prejudiced. In general, his delegation highly 
appreciated the technical assistance provided, particularly 
as regards its scientific effectiveness. 
119. The Government of El Salvador welcomed 
the Agency's interest and co-operation in the General 
American regional project to eradicate the Mediterranean 
fruit fly using the sterile-male technique. 
120. The six countries in Central America were 
endeavouring to create an integrated region so as 
to make more effective and rapid progress in various 
directions. In the economic field, a common market 
had been established, with free movement of 
manufactured goods and a notable increase in interregional 
trade. Similarly, integration was being 
pushed forward in the cultural and banking sectors, 
etc., and the Agency might investigate the possibility 
of arranging technical assistance on a regional 
basis as a contribution to such integration. 
121. Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) welcomed the 
latest Member of the Agency— Malaysia. The growth 
in membership was no doubt a manifestation of 
deepening faith in the Agency's effectiveness. He 
also welcomed the understanding shown with regard 
to the problems of the developing countries. 
122. During the 1966 General Conference, his 
delegation had reported on the completion of the 
United Nations Special Fund pre-investment study 
of power, including nuclear power, in Luzon, the 
main island of the Philippine archipelago [11]. The 
results of the continued efforts of all concerned, 
with the Agency acting as executing agency, were 
distilled and crystallized in an eight-volume final 
report. There could hardly have been a more propitious 
time and setting for the formal presentation 
[11] GC(X)/OR.104, paras 21-23. 
of the report to the Philippine Government by the 
Director General himself and the United Nations 
Development Programme Representative than when 
the technical representatives of developing countries 
in the region were gathered in Manila for the Study 
Group Meeting on Problems and Prospects of Nuclear 
Power Applications in Developing Countries. 

123. He liked to think that apart from the intrinsic 
value of the findings, plans and recommendations 
arising from the pre-investment study, the final 
report served to focus well-deserved attention on 
the growing impact of nuclear power in developing 
States like the Philippines. In an unprecedented 
gesture bespeaking his personal concern for and 
cognizance of the important role that nuclear power 
was bound to play, the President of the Philippines 
had entertained the Director General and Mrs. 
Eklund and all the participants at luncheon, in order 
to meet them and exchange impressions with them. 
124. The report had been used as one of the 
basic documents for electric power planning in 
the Philippines, and the implementation of some of 
its recommendations had been started. It had been 
assumed that nuclear power would be competitive 
in meeting power needs within ten years from the 
start of the study, and plans for the expansion of 
power production by the Manila Electric Company 
included nuclear power plants. 
125. In furtherance of its policy of supporting 
regional undertakings, his Government had agreed 
to act as host to one study group meeting and two 
training courses during the past year. The Study 
Group Meeting on Problems and Prospects of Nuclear 
Power Applications in Developing Countries, 
held in Manila from 27 October to 2 November 
1966, had attracted 50 participants from 12 countries 
and the Economic Commission for Asia and 
the Far East. Significantly, discussions during the 
meeting had shown that the prospects for nuclear 
power in the region were promising, despite critical 
financial problems and the lack of trained manpower. 
126. In addition to the Director's General's visit, 
eight other officials of the Agency had visited Manila 
on official matters on seven occasions, and he 
believed that personal contacts through Agency 
missions and official visits made for closer understanding. 
127. His country had also acted as host to the 
FAO/IAEA Inter-Regional Training Course on the 
Use of Radioisotopes in Soil and Plant Investigations, 
from 3 October to 23 November 1966. The 
course, which had been attended by 19 trainees 
fom nine Asian countries, had permitted profitable 
exchanges of information and experience between 
agricultural scientists of the region. 
128. From 2 to 13 October 1967, the Philippine 
Government would be host to another Agency 

 GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

regional training course, devoted to planning for 
the handling of radiation accidents, to be held 
within the Greater Manila area, mostly in the Philippine 
Atomic Research Centre. The course would 
be the first of its kind to be held under the auspices 
of the Agency. 

129. The Philippines felt that, under Agency guidance, 
it was successfully developing a practical and 
effective pattern of regional co-operation and selfhelp, 
which might be well worth the attention of 
countries in a similar situation. 
130. The India-Philippines-Agency training and 
research programme using a neutron crystal spectrometer 
[12], now in its third year of operation, had 
received additional Agency support in the form of 
a research contract. A fourth Indian scientist had 
arrived to serve as expert in nuclear physics and the 
fifth foreign participant had completed training. In 
line with the symbiotic nature of that five-year 
research and training programme, a second Philippine 
scientist had gone to the Bhabha Atomic 
Research Centre in Bombay to do advanced scientific 
work on neutron spectrometry. The Philippine 
Government sincerely appreciated India's interest 
in its atomic energy programme. 
131. His delegation greatly appreciated the increasing 
importance attached to research contract 
projects by the Agency. The soundness of the philosophy 
of forging a formal, albeit temporary, partnership 
with established researchinstitutionsonalumpsum, 
cost-sharing basis was perhaps exceeded only by 
its practicability and usefulness. He therefore welcomed 
with great pleasure and in a spirit 
of humility the four new research contracts drawn 
up between the Philippine Government and the 
Agency, in addition to the five old contracts which 
had been renewed, representing a total contribution 
by the Agency of $37 850. The fact that four of 
those projects were part of the co-ordinated agricultural 
programmes reflected the earnest desire of 
the Agency to assist in resolving major problems 
afflicting developing countries as a whole and to 
encourage co-ordinated research efforts in particular 
— a practice which his Government wholeheartedly 
endorsed. 
132. Previous Philippine delegations had repeatedly 
stressed the pressing need for continued — if not 
increasing — technical assistance for developing 
countries, where scientific projects often competed 
hopelessly for the meagre funds available with other 
projects more urgently required to meet basic national 
needs. At the same time, they had always been 
aware that the Agency was continuously handicapped 
by the inadequacy of its resources. It was 
with profound gratitute, therefore, that he acknowledged 
the various forms of assistance that his 
country had received from or through the Agency 
during the past year. 

133. The first refuelling operations on the Philippine 
research reactor would take place late in 1967. 
The replacement fuel elements, in two batches of 
ten, had been made from enriched uranium supplied 
through the Agency under the United States Government's 
yearly gift offer, and he was most grateful 
for the assistance from the United States. 
134. The Philippines would continue its voluntary 
contribution to the Agency's General Fund for 1968, 
to the full amount for which it was assessed under 
the Regular Budget. 
135. Representing a typical developing country 
with barely enough time or resources to solve its 
acute and urgent problems, his delegation regretted 
the time spent on criticism and recriminations regarding 
political activities, which were of no concern to 
the Agency or the Conference. The Great Powers 
should set an example and sincerely endeavour 
to reach faster agreement and take action on longpending 
proposals for the control and eventual 
elimination of nuclear armaments. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

136. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure the General Conference 
had to fix a closing date for the session, on the 
recommendation of the General Committee. 
137. The General Committee had considered the 
question the day before and had authorized him 
to recommend on its behalf that Monday, 2 October, 
be fixed as the closing date, subject to all business 
having been disposed of by then. 
138. The General Committee's recommendation was 
accepted. 
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m. 

[12] See document INFCIRC/5 6. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XI)/OR.114 
8 February 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER - 2 OCTOBER 1967) 


ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 28 September 1967, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the 
Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1966-67 (continued) 
1 — 97 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Bulgaria 1 — 18 
Yugoslavia 19 — 27 
Australia 28 — 46 
France 47— 62 
Israel 63 — 73 
India 74 — 85 
Austria 86 — 89 
Denmark 90 — 97 

GC(XI)/368. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE recommendations of Member States submitted at 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1966-67 the request of the Director General [1] that the 
[GC(XI)/355, 355/Corr.l, 366] (continued) Agency's main activity was, and should continue 
to be, to provide technical assistance to developing 

1. Mr. GANEV (Bulgaria) said that over aperiod countries and to enable all Member States to enjoy 
of ten years, the Agency had been actively pursuing the benefits of atomic energy. 
its lofty goal of making atomic energy available for 
the well-being of mankind. It was a source of 3. That activity took the form, mainly, of awardsatisfaction 
to note the efforts made by the Agency ing fellowships, supplying equipment and materials, 
to enable a larger number of nations to utilize the sending out experts, organizing scientific visits, etc. 
positive achievements of atomic science. All those things undoubtedly demanded great 
financial expenditure and the Agency was right in 

2. It was obvious from the Review of the 
Agency's Activities and from the comments and [1] GC(XI)/362 and Add.1 and 2. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

directing its efforts towards finding the necessary 
funds for meeting more fully the developing countries' 
needs. In that connection he announced that 
his Government would make a contribution of 
5000 leva to the Agency's General Fund. 

4. For 1967 a sum of $597 000 would be spent 
on the services of experts but only $378 000 on 
the provision of equipment and other materials. At 
the present stage his delegation considered that such 
a ratio was incorrect and it therefore supported the 
opinion expressed by a number of countries that 
there was a disproportion between the amount of 
assistance provided in the form of equipment and 
material and that consisting of the provision of 
experts. 
5. The Bulgarian delegation was in no way 
inclined to underestimate the assistance rendered 
by experts, particularly when it was provided in 
response to requests by a given country, but it did 
consider that a larger percentage of funds should 
be set aside for supplying equipment and materials. 
6. He noted with approval the good work done 
by the Agency in the applications of radioisotopes 
in agriculture, industry, hydrology and food preservation, 
and also in health protection and in the processing 
of radioactive wastes. He was convinced that 
in future the Agency would endeavour to intensify 
its assistance to those countries needing it. In that 
connection he suggested that the Agency should 
pay greater attention to the solution of problems 
of practical interest to developing countries. 
7. Bulgaria was following the Agency's activities 
along those lines with great interest, particularly 
the work on the application of radioisotopes in 
industry and agriculture — with special reference 
to the irradiation of food products. Evidence of that 
interest was provided by the establishment in Bulgaria 
the year before of a special organization known as 
"IZOTOP", mainly for the purpose of introducing 
radioisotope techniques and nuclear technology to 
industry and agriculture, and by joint research with 
the Soviet Union and Hungary, within the framework 
of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(COMECON), into problems connected with the 
use of irradiation for the preservation of food products. 
8. Another promising form of Agency activity 
was the solution of a number of practical problems 
connected with the technological and administrative 
aspects of nuclear energy. The number of nations 
including nuclear power in their electricity generating 
plane was constandy rising. Bulgaria had also begun 
to tackle that problem and was ready to co-operate 
on a bilateral or multilateral basis in the interest of 
a more rational utilization of the technological and 
economic possibilities available. During the coming 
yeat it would, with the help of the Soviet Union, 
start to build a high-capacity nuclear power plant 
to generate electricity. 
9. He welcomed the Agency's action in setting 
up an international nuclear information system 
(INIS) and his country would co-operate to the best 
of its ability in that work, the success of which 
would depend primarily on the goodwill of the 
developed nations. 
10. On a number of occasions his delegation 
had pointed out that it was opposed to any expansion 
of the Laboratory's activities, since they were 
already very extensive and beyond the scope of the 
Agency. It felt bound to express, once again, its 
concern at the constant increase in expenditure 
under that heading and trusted that it was not the 
Agency's intention to turn the Laboratory into a 
scientific institute, since it ought to be primarily 
a consultative and co-ordinating centre for solving 
problems of a more general nature, such as standardization, 
measurement of low-level radiation, 
development of intercomparison systems and so 
forth. Moreover, despite the provisions of the Statute, 
laboratory activities continued to be financed improperly, 
75 % of the funds coming from the 
Regular and not from the Operational Budget. The 
elimination of that state of affairs would enable the 
Agency to make certain economies necessary for 
balancing its budget. 
11. He wished to touch briefly on the conclusions 
of the General Assembly's Ad Hoc Committee of 
Experts to Examine the Finances of the United 
Nations and the Specialized Agencies [2], which 
showed that an ever greater proportion of funds 
was being used to defray increasing administrative 
expenditure. It was well known that the main 
explanation for the increase in the Agency's budget 
was the steady rise in administrative expenditure. 
The Secretariat ought to seek a solution to that 
problem primarily in a fuller and more rational 
use of the eXIsting set-up without increasing it 
further. The Bulgarian delegation considered that 
the proposed budget increase of 10.41 % for 1968 
was very considerable. It would not lead to a real 
expansion in the Agency's activities, but would 
mainly be used to cover administrative expenditure. 
For that reason he could not support it. 

12. The Agency was a humanitarian organization 
and he wished to use it as a forum for reiterating 
the protest of the Bulgarian people and its Government 
against the increasing intensification of the 
barbaric war being waged by the United States in 
Viet-Nam and the bombing of the peace-loving 
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. He expressed the 
fear that what was now happening in that country 
could be a prelude to a conflict which would bring 
incalculable disasters to mankind. 
13. At the same time, the Organization of American 
States was being used as a cover for preparing 
provocative acts against Cuba. World public opinion 
continued to be centred on the Israeli aggression 
[2] See United Nations document A/6343. 

114th. PLENARY MEETING 

against the Arab countries, which was categorically 
condemned by Bulgaria. With a view to elminating 
the after-effects of that aggression, Bulgaria was 
lending the Arab people brotherly aid. 

14. Against that background the Eighteen-Nation 
Committee on Disarmament, of which Bulgaria was 
a member, was working on the conclusion of a 
non-proliferation treaty whose main objective was 
to render the dissemination of nuclear weapons 
impossible, thereby contributing to a lowering of 
world tension and creating a firmer basis for nuclear 
disarmament. A treaty would enable non-nuclear 
States to concentrate all their scientific, technological 
and material resources on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and would create favourable conditions 
for extensive international co-operation in that field. 
15. The Agency and its Safeguards System (1965, 
as Provisionally Extended in 1966) [3] could make a 
positive contribution to solving the inspection problem 
in the implementation of any such treaty. His 
Government would do its utmost to contribute to 
a positive solution of that problem and would 
welcome any steps which would lead to such a 
solution. 

16. The Government of Bulgaria supported the 
action that had been taken by Czechoslovakia [4], 
Poland [5], the German Democratic Republic [6] 
and Hungary [ 7] and considered it useful and constructive; 
furthermore it was itself prepared to 
place the IRT-1000 reactor of the Physics Institute 
of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences under Agency 
safeguards if the non-nuclear Members of EURA-
TOM, and in particular the' Federal Republic of 
Germany, would agree to undertake similar obligations. 
17. It was essential to consider the question of 
the admission to the Agency of sovereign States 
which had expressed a desire to become Members 
and which could contribute to the attainment of its 
lofty goals. The Agency should consider the admission 
to membership of the German Democratic 
Republic, a sovereign State with highly developed 
industries and an enviable record of achievement in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, which had 
even aroused interest in the Agency itself. 
18. He was confident that the present session of 
the General Conference would take decisions that 
would help consolidate the Agency's role as an 
organization whose activities were directed towards 
using the atom for the good of mankind. 
19. Mr. GUZINA (Yugoslavia) said that, since 
the success of the Agency's work depended on 
[3] INFCIRC/66/Rev.1. 
[4] See document GC(X)/OR.104, para. 14. 
[5] See document GC(X)/OR.103, para. 56 
[6] See document GC(X)/INF/91. 
[7] See document GC(XI)/OR.112, para.97. 
world peace and harmonious international relations, 
it was highly regrettable that the United States of 
America was intensifying its military action in Viet-
Nam. Another example of the growing tendency to 
use force was the recent Israeli aggression directed 
against the Arab countries. In accordance with the 
basic principles of the United Nations Charter and 
his Government's policy of peaceful co-eXIstence, 
Yugoslavia had taken an active part in trying to find 
a just political solution to the Middle East problem. 

20. The fact that the Soviet Union and the 
United States of America had, however, achieved 
considerable progress in drafting a treaty on the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was a welcome 
development which would help to prevent nuclear 
war and would probably involve the application of 
Agency safeguards. Some countries, however, were 
opposed to the present draft of the treaty on the 
grounds that the Powers possessing nuclear weapons 
would not be obliged to enter into any commitment. 
21. The Agency had already gained sufficient 
experience to enable it to administer the safeguards 
provided for in the treaty and in that connection he 
agreed with the Director General that, to be effective, 
a safeguards system must be international [8]. 
As a result of the extension of its safeguards system 
to all stages in the fuel cycle and the growth in the 
number of installations subject to its safeguards, the 
Agency had gained the confidence of many countries. 
It should now further expand its safeguards activities 
and try to solve the financial problems involved, 
while ensuring that its other activities were 
not adversely affected. 
22. The extraordinary extent to which certain types 
of reactors and nuclear power stations were becoming 
commercially available led to a high degree of 
competitiveness, and consequently the financial 
resources available should be employed in a more 
rational manner to enable the poorer countries to 
enjoy the benefits offered by nuclear energy. 
23. The Agency should study the latest scientific 
and technological developments in national nuclear 
energy programmes, since they had a bearing on its 
work. It should also do more to help the developing 
countries in carrying out work requiring an 
advanced scientific knowledge and wide technological 
and manufacturing experience. 
24. Because of the rapid growth in the number 
of nuclear power plants the Agency should devote 
more attention to the safety evaluation and economic 
and technological aspects of nuclear power, 
and to the construction and development of nuclear 
power plants and their integration into national 
power systems. It should constantly undertake 
studies of the fuel cycle, industrial infrastructure, 
siting and waste disposal. It should also play a 
[8] GC(XI)/ OR.III, para. 32. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

more active part in co-ordinating work on breeder 
reactors. 

25. His delegation had always done its utmost 
to contribute to the solution of problems relating 
to technical assistance. The inadequacy of the resources 
available to meet the ever-growing number 
of requests for assistance from developing countries 
was a major difficulty, which could be overcome 
only partially by reducing the amount of money 
spent on administration. An effort must be made 
to find more funds for technical assistance, and the 
requests received should be carefully evaluated. 
26. The Agency's work in the collection, processing 
and distribution of scientific and technical 
information was a valuable activity, and he therefore 
welcomed the establishment of INIS. In that 
connection, account should be taken of the wide 
differences in the stages of economic and technical 
development in Member States, geographical considerations, 
etc. 
27. There were, of course, many other problems, 
which the Agency could solve only with the full 
support of its Members. He welcomed the spirit of 
co-operation evinced by delegations to the General 
Conference and hoped that Member States would 
do their utmost to promote the expansion of the 
Agency's work under the able direction of the 
Board of Governors and the Director General. 
28. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) expressed 
his delegation's deep regret at the death of Sir John 
Cocker oft; Sir John had been closely associated 
with Australia and his loss would be keenly felt 
there. 
29. He thanked the Austrian Government for its 
generous offer of a new headquarters building for 
the Agency which, he was sure, would greatly facilitate 
its work. 
30. He proposed to restrict his remarks to technical 
and economic matters which fell within the 
area of interest and responsibility of the Agency. 
He would not follow die example which had, unfortunately, 
been set by some speakers at the Conference 
and use that forum to air a variety of political 
opinions which, however real the situation to which 
they referred might be, were outside the area of 
competence of the Agency and irrelevant to its 
business. That there were deep and important differences 
of opinion between the nations of 
the world on a number of issues and policies was 
known to all, and the positions which were taken 
up were equally well known. Most would agree that 
' such positions 
were sincerely held, even though 
they did not coincide with their own. The United 
Nations was the place created for discussion of 
those matters, and their intrusion into the Agency's 
work contributed nothing to their solution, while 
it made co-operating in dealing with the technical 

and economic problems which the Conference was 
called upon to solve that much more difficult. 

31. There was no urgent need in Australia to 
use nuclear power for industrial purposes since 
black and brown coal were plentiful and cheap, 
and significant amounts of oil and gas had recently 
been discovered with the promise of more to come. 
In the main industrial States in Australia power 
costs below 4 mills, per kWh were not unusual. 
The demand for power was doubling every seven 
to eight years and it was expected that 500-MW 
plants would be in operation from about 1975. 
32. The research done on nuclear power, which 
had commenced in 1956, was primarily based on a 
high-temperature ceramic-fuelled, gas-cooled reactor 
using beryllium oXIde as a moderator. The 
programme provided opportunities for research in 
practically all branches of science and engineering 
relating to nuclear power and, since it did not 
duplicate work done elsewhere, it provided a basis 
for exchanging and collaborating with other countries 
under bilateral agreements. A substantial new 
technology had been established, increased knowledge 
had been gained in the fields of materials 
science and reactor physics and, finally, conceptual 
engineering design studies had been prepared, from 
which reliable cost estimates could be made. The 
programme had provided Australia with an excellent 
team of nuclear scientists and engineers, on 
whose work future developments would be based. 
33- When it had become apparent a year previously 
that nuclear power could be used economically 
in the main industrial areas in the mid-1970's, 
a further study had been made of the various systems 
in use throughout the world and the conclusion 
had been reached that the operation of 
the high-temperature beryllium-oXIde- moderated 
reactor would not be so economic by comparison 
with certain other types of reactor as to warrant 
the high expenditure required for industrial operation. 
That conclusion had, of course, been based 
on the assumption that large fast reactors would 
displace converters towards the end of the century. 
It had accordingly been decided to cease work on 
that reactor system, after completing some scientific 
studies of general application, and to work 
with the type of reactor chosen as most suitable 
for general introduction in Australia in the next 
decade. The choice had been made taking into 
account, first, that the cost of power had to be 
competitive with alternative fuels and alternative 
nuclear systems, secondly, that the system chosen 
had to be proven industrially but still be as advanced 
as possible in design, and thirdly, that it was essential 
that natural uranium should be used, since 
his country did not wish to buy enriched fuel with 
foreign exchange or to be dependent on imported 
fuel which was obtainable only from a limited 
number of sources. Thus heavy-water-moderated 
natural-uranium-fuelled systems had been chosen 
and the choice of coolant had been left open. 


U4th. PLENARY MEETING 

Australia was now devoting serious attention to 
reactor systems and was carrying out joint studies 
with the United Kingdom and Canada. 

34. When nuclear power became economic in 
Australia in the next decade, an increasing number 
of nuclear stations would be built and major new 
industries were expected to result. 
35. Australia noted the expansion of the Agency's 
safeguards activities, and had recently had its own 
facilities inspected by Agency inspectors, who had 
performed their work efficiently and with courtesy. 
Because of the importance of safeguards and the 
high level of expert knowledge required to implement 
them, he believed inspectors should be 
employed for a period of not less than five years. 
The safeguards policy should be decided by the 
Board of Governors, and nothing would be gained 
by convening for that purpose a small committee, 
which might inaccurately reflect the composition 
of the Board. The development of safeguards had 
shown that the technical procedures involved needed 
to be simplified, particularly in the case of research 
reactors and nuclear research and development facilities, 
since the primary purpose of safeguards would 
not be achieved if excessively detailed and largely 
irrelevant inspections and procedures were carried 
out. 
36. He agreed in principle with the proposal 
to establish INIS. First of all, a few highly qualified 
experts should develop a rational and efficient 
system for the storage, retrieval and dissemination 
of information to ensure that as many Member 
States as possible, particularly the developing countries, 
would benefit. In view of the high level of 
specialization that was necessary and the need for 
continuity in the work involved, the professional 
staff required should be appointed for longer periods 
than the staff in other Departments. 
37. He was particularly gratified by the work of 
the International Nuclear Data Committee, which 
enabled many countries, including Australia, to 
contribute to and benefit from the collection, collation 
and evaluation of nuclear data. 
38. Australia was experiencing an expanding demand 
for radioisotopes for medical, scientific and 
industrial purposes. The isotopes were produced in 
the Australian Atomic Energy Commission's research 
reactor Hifar and almost 5000 consignments, 
valued at about $180 000, had been sold in the 
last financial year. The Commission could supply 
hospitals with all the radioactive cobalt used in 
teletherapy, and orders for cobalt-60 had been 
received from foreign countries, including a substantial 
order from the United Kingdom. 
39. Fluorescence analysis techniques developed 
in Australia offered very promising possibilities for 
routine analysis of ores and on-stream process 
control in the mineral industry; radioisotope sources 
were used and the techniques were already in use 
in several industrial plants. 

40. The Commission's gamma-irradiation facilities 
were widely used in hospitals and in industrial 
and scientific organizations. The study of food 
preservation by irradiation was continuing in conjunction 
with the Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organization. He welcomed the 
proposal to hold an IAEA Regional Study Group 
Meeting on Isotope Production in 1968 since it 
would be of considerable value to Member States 
in the area of South East Asia and the Pacific. 
41. He supported the resolution arising out of 
the review of the Agency's activities conducted during 
the past year, but believed that the rule requiring 
equipment to be accompanied by experts should 
not always be applied, since many countries already 
had competent technical personnel. 
42. During the past year Australia had sent experts 
in radioisotope production and radiation chemistry 
to Taiwan and an expert in nuclear instrumentation 
to the Congo. It had also provided 
Agency fellows with training in reactor operations 
and isotopes production. A course in nuclear technology 
and three radioisotopes courses had been 
held in the Australian School of Nuclear Technology 
and had been attended by 10 students from countries 
in the region. A course in nuclear technology 
and radioisotopes courses for graduates and nongraduates 
would also be held in 1968. 
43. The 1967 edition of the Agency's Regulations 
for the Safe Transport of RadioactiveMaterials [9] was 
very valuable. In that connection he hoped uniform 
international and national regulations covering land, 
sea and air transport would be adopted, and he 
strongly urged the Agency to co-operate closely in 
the co-ordination of standards with the International 
Air Transport Association, the Intergovernmental 
Maritime Consultative Organization and the International 
Organization for Standardization. 
44. The Agency should restrict its activities to 
those provided for in its Statute. For example, the 
Seibersdorf Laboratory should only perform work 
which was proper to the Agency, but unfortunately 
some of its work in agriculture and medicine did 
not fall into that category. The time might come 
when the Laboratory's primary task would be to 
solve technical problems resulting from the expansion 
in the Agency's safeguards work. He believed 
the Agency should confine itself to the development 
and teaching of new nuclear techniques, since otherwise 
it would find itself competing with other organizations 
in the provisions of technical assistance, 
training and research contracts. On the other hand, 
he welcomed the increased co-operation with the 
specialized agencies, and he hoped that would eliminate 
duplication in the case of technical assistance. 
[9] STI/PUB/148. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

45. Subject to parliamentary approval, Australia 
intended to raise its voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund to the amount assessed according to 
the United Nations formula. The contribution would 
consist, first, of $20 000 in cash, and secondly 
$8400 in Australian currency for the purchase of 
equipment, materials or services in Australia. 
46. Finally, he supported the adoption of the 
annual report of the Board of Governors to the 
General Conference[GC(XI)/355, 355/Corr.l, 366] 
and thanked the Director General and his staff for 
their assistance during the past year. 
,47. Mr. HIRSCH(France)recalledthattheAgency 
was entering on its second decade of activity. Whilst 
it was difficult to note outstanding changes and a 
marked evolution from one year to the next, the 
Agency's accomplishments were much clearer when 
viewed over a period of several years. It was 
obvious that the Agency's work was possible only 
with the technical and financial participation of all 
Member States. Those contributions might appear 
limited in the case of each country viewed by itself 
and taken for any one year, but in the long run 
they constituted a fairly large fund which had 
enabled the Agency to extend its activity into many 
fields. 

48. During the first ten years, a total of about 
$86 million had been made available to the Agency, 
which had endeavoured to apportion that sum as 
reasonably among the various tasks entrusted to it. 
The French contribution to the Agency's Regular 
Budget in ten years amounted to over $4 million to 
which had to be added voluntary contributions 
totalling $300 000. 
49. In an effort to compensate for its restricted 
voluntary contributions, France had provided the 
Agency with equipment for its laboratories or the 
development of research work in developing countries 
chosen by the Agency. That equipment consisted of 
electronic apparatus or apparatus for radioisotope 
applications or neutron studies and represented a 
value of F.Fr. 1 million or $200 000. Whenever 
possible, experts had carried out missions to install 
the equipment and train staff in its use. For that 
and other purposes, France had made available 
about 60 experts for technical assistance missions. 
In addition, it had admitted to its research centres 
and university institutes more than 300 Agency 
fellows for training. 
50. From the very beginning, French specialists 
had taken an active part in many symposia and panels 
organized by the Agency and had presented 
papers on their most recent work. In the matter of 
information, France provided all scientific documents 
requested from it as well as films and documentation 
for the general public. 
51. In summing up the position, he wished to 
emphasize his Government's interest in the activities 
of the Agency, the authorities of which had 
always enabled it to express its opinion and participate 
satisfactorily in the taking of decisions. 

52. He would not dwell on technical assistance 
problems. He was aware of the scale of requests 
and of the Agency's endeavours to meet them as 
best it could with the funds available. Nor would he 
comment in detail on the impressive development 
throughout the world of nuclear power plants. However, 
he did wish to mention that the most interesting 
development for France during the year had 
been the hopes which had arisen in regard to fastneutron 
reactors. 
53. Such reactors played an increasingly large 
part in the French nuclear programme, a trend that 
was justified by their very favourable economic 
prospects and also by the fact that they permitted 
the fullest possible use of fissile material resources. 
Fast-neutron reactors involved the use of structural 
techniques different from those required for thermalneutron 
reactors and for that reason, in the initial 
stage, the CommissariataPEnergieAtomique— with 
the collaboration of EURATOM — had installed a 
large number of experimental rigs in its Cadarache 
Nuclear Research Centre. 
54. The start-up of the MASURCA installation 
in December 1966 had made it possible to devise 
critical mock-ups with which to carry out experimental 
neutron and reactor physics studies. That 
installation was supplemented by a reactor source, 
HARMONIE, supplying a stable fast-neutron flux 
for the development and calibration of the measuring 
instruments used in the critical mock-ups. The 
year's most important stage had been reached when 
the 20-MW thermal, sodium-cooled, experimental 
reactor RAPSODIE went critical. The advance to 
rated power had taken place extremely rapidly and 
the reactor was now operating under optimum 
conditions. 
55- The progress of those operations had shown 
that fast-neutron reactors could be constructed and 
started up according to plan, and that the 
techniques involved could be mastered. It had therefore 
been decided to construct a fast-neutron, 250-
MW industrial prototype to be called PHENIX at 
Marcoule Nuclear Centre. It would be constructed 
in 1969 and would go critical five years later. Its 
main function would be to supply the basic technical 
and economic data needed for industrial reactors 
of the future. 

56. The Agency's Budget for 1968 [10] showed a 
very marked increase. France appreciated the 
Agency's effort to carry out the tasks entrusted to 
it to the best of its ability but was aware of the 
difficulties with which Member States were faced if 
the budget grew too rapidly. In that connection, a 
[10] GC(XI)/360. 

114th. PLENARY MEETING 

choice had to be made between the various items 
of expenditure and the choice had to be reviewed 
objectively each year, taking into accountnewrequirements 
but also attempting not to continue activities 
which the Agency could no longer undertake. 

57. The work of the Department of Safeguards 
and Inspection had shown a definite increase during 
the year and the increase was likely to continue 
rapidly with the growth in the use of nuclear energy 
in the world and the extension of the Agency's 
activities and responsibilities that was certain to 
occur. The French Government's views regarding 
the financing of safeguards was well-known: they 
could be financed from the Agency's Regular Budget 
so long as research reactors, certain types of power 
reactors and some reprocessing plants were concerned 
since it could be considered that the development 
of methods of control and the acquisition 
of the experience essential for future operations were 
involved. On the other hand, as a result of the 
transfer to the Agency of the administration of 
safeguards in relation to bilateral agreements, a 
large number of power reactors would soon be 
subject to Agency safeguards and the relevant expenditure 
would tend to constitute a large fraction 
of the budget. There could be no question of such 
expenditure remaining a drain on the Agency's budget. 
The costs of safeguards, like those of normal 
accident insurance, should be borne by the sellers 
and users concerned; that would mean, in the long 
run, including them in the cost per kWh. 
58. France continued to believe that the Agency's 
laboratories performed useful task and that they 
were staffed by highly qualified scientists. It appreciated 
the Agency's technical assistance work and 
was in favour of a reasonable increase in the funds 
which the Agency devoted to it. The French Government 
had decided to donate to the Agency a second 
loop for low-temperature irradiation in a research 
reactor. The loop, representing a value of 
F.Fr. 200 000, or $40 000, was identical with the 
first one donated and would make it possible to 
perform numerous experiments in basic research 
on solid state physics. It was to be offered to a 
developing country and it was for the Agency alone 
to choose the beneficiary from amongst the countries 
best able to use it in a suitable plant. France was 
also prepared to send experts to the centre in which 
the equipment was to be used, give training in its 
operation and ensure the best possible use of it. 
59. For some months, there had been considerable 
development of nuclear power on the industrial 
scale. The Agency's role in exchanges between 
advanced countries was limited for the time being 
to organizing very interesting symposia, such as the 
one which had recently been held in Vienna on 
heavy-water power reactors. 
60. It was obviously the developing countries 
which could best benefit from the Agency's work, 
and the Agency had already been able to play a 
useful role, made all the more difficult by the fact 
that it had to be adapted, as well as possible, to 
the potentialities of each country. It was important 
not to repeat prestige operations for which many 
countries had allocated sums which were disproportionate 
to their general scientific and technical 
effort. 

61. France hoped that the Agency would be able 
to continue its activities and that, whilst facilitating 
meetings of experts from the advanced countries on 
the more important subjects, it would endeavour 
to provide information for countries wishing to forecast 
future requirements and to help them in 
establishing nuclear programmes, whose effectiveness 
would be all the greater if they were adapted 
to the capacities of such countries. 
62. The Agency would thus continue to play its 
international role and contribute to the harmonious 
development of nuclear energy activities throughout 
the world. 
63. Mr. DOSTROVSKY (Israel) congratulated 
the Board, the Director General and his staff on 
the excellent document on the review of the 
Agency's activities. The review clearly showed that 
the available funds were insufficient to enable the 
Agency to carry out its task, and consequently, 
priorities should be established and a programme 
developed which would yield the maXImum benefit 
with the funds available. 
64. He thought it likely that the applications of 
isotopes and radiation in agriculture, medicine and 
hydrology would prove to be of most immediate 
benefit to the developing countries. Such applications 
included agricultural research using isotopes, 
crop preservation through irradiation, yield enhancement 
through seed irradiation, pest eradication, 
especially by the sterile male technique, medical 
research using isotopes, radiation therapy and radiosterilization 
of medical supplies. Furthermore, scientists 
in developing countries had the necessary 
training to enable them to play a part in such 
activities. 
65. Since work relating to nuclear power was of 
a long-term character and was already being carried 
out successfully in the more advanced countries, the 
Agency should concentrate on the dissemination'of 
information, the provision of advice and guidance 
and the objective evaluation of the need for nuclear 
power and of the type of plant which would be 
most suitable. 
66. Israel had been actively engaged in all the 
activities he had mentioned; it had made an intensive 
study of the use of irradiation in crop preservation, 
and the Ministry of Health had recently approved 
the use of irradiated potatoes and was 
expected to approve the use of irradiated onions in 
the near future. The extended storage life of the 
crops in question would have important economic 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

implications. The commercial use of irradiation 
techniques and the sterilization of medical supplies 
by irradiation was planned. The use of the sterile 
male technique to eradicate the Mediterranean fruit 
fly had been studied in Israel and large-scale breeding 
and sterilization facilities had been set up. Israel 
was also participating in a joint project with the 
Government of Italy, the Agency and FAO to 
eradicate the fruit fly on the island of Capri. 

67. The use of isotopes in agriculture, medicine 
and industrial research continued to increase and a 
growing proportion of the isotopes had labelled 
compounds required was produced locally. For 
example, a new phosphate calcination kiln had 
recently been brought to maXImum operating efficiency 
through the use of radiolanthanum tracer. 
68. Progress had been made in research on desalting 
processes, some of which would probably be 
more effective than the eXIsting processes, and the 
possibility of setting up a major dual-purpose plant 
was being studied. 
69. He agreed with those delegates who had said 
that the Agency should provide equipment and supplies 
to developing countries which had the necessary 
trained personnel without insisting on the provision 
of an expert. 
70. The extension of co-ordinated research 
projects was a welcome development and the Agency 
should give priority to such projects, particularly if 
they involved research centres in several countries 
since the results would then probably be more 
satisfactory than those achieved by establishing regional 
centres. 
71. Since the Agency was a technical and scientific 
body, all staff appointments should be based primarily 
on technical and scientific qualifications, and 
geographical distribution should be taken into 
account only when the applicants for posts were 
equally well qualified. Unfortunately, however, that 
practice, although laid down in the Statute, was not 
followed, and the circular letter sent out by the 
Agency suggested that in certain circumstances possible 
candidates should refrain from sending in 
applications. 
72. Israel took an active part in the practical work 
of the Agency, e.g. panels, symposia, research projects, 
fellowship awards, provision of experts, etc. 
Yet in all the years of it membership it had never 
been given the opportunity— on grounds which were 
quite irrelevant in a body such as the Agency — of 
serving on the Board or in any of the elective 
offices in the General Conference. 
73. In conclusion, he announced that Israel would 
continue to make its voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund and also continue to support the 
training programme by awarding Type II fellowships. 
74. Mr. SARABHAI (India) expressed his regrets 
at the death of Sir John Cockcroft, under whom he 
had been privileged to study. 
75. The recent dramatic decline in the cost of 
generating electric power in nuclear reactors offered 
developing countries an excellent opportunity of 
transforming their economies. The establishment of 
high-capacity nuclear reactors to supply cheap power 
both to industries which were heavy consumers of 
electricity and for irrigation or desalting appeared to 
be a feasible plan. Managerial and technical skills of 
a high order would be necessary for the implementation 
of such a plan, and they could best be acquired 
through contact with nuclear energy and other 
advanced technologies. Within that context the 
Agency had an important part to play. 
76. The review of the Agency's activities provided 
a valuable basis for future work. However, care 
should be taken to ensure that any future expansion 
of the Agency's activities did not entail an undue 
increase in the assessed contributions of Member 
States, since the developing countries might thereby 
be faced with an excessive drain on their foreign 
exchange reserves, which they needed for their own 
national atomic energy programmes. That could be 
achieved only by ensuring that the annual increase 
in the Agency's budget did not exceed 5 %. Deserving 
activities such as INIS and the Agency's laboratories 
might have to be sacrificed to that end. 
77. He was particularly disturbed by the fact that 
the long-term budgetary implications of INIS had 
not been thoroughly studied. He wished also to 
point out that the main financial impact of administering 
safeguards had yet to be felt. One method 
of raising funds to meet the cost of administering 
safeguards might be to impose a levy on the installed 
nuclear power generating capacity of Member States. 
He suggested that a study be made of the costs of 
carrying out inspections in a number of representative 
cases. 

78. Expenditure on the Seibersdorf and Monaco 
Laboratories and on the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics had been increasing at a disproportionate 
rate, with the result that expenditure 
on technical assistance had remained relatively static. 
In that connection, he considered it worth pointing 
out that the overall cost of maintaining a research 
staff member at the Agency's laboratories was about 
four times the figure for a developing country. 
79. With regard to the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics, he had assumed that, when the 
Board had authorized the Director General to seek 
sponsors other than the Agency and the Government 
of Italy, it had not intended that Member States 
should be approached for financial support, which 
might merely be reflected in a commensurate reduction 
in voluntary contributions to the General Fund. 
80. In the light of his comments on the review 

114th. PLENARY MEETING 

of the Agency's activities he suggested that the 
Board, assisted by its Committee of the Whole, 
study and report on the financial and budgetary 
implications of the review. 

80. In the technical assistance field, he considered 
that programmes should be tailored to the individual 
requirements of each receiving country. For example, 
where sufficient expertise was already available in a 
country requiring a certain type of equipment, the 
Agency should be prepared to supply that equipment 
without insisting that it should be accompanied 
by an Agency expert. 
82. The role of the Agency in establishing regional 
training centres and similar institutions should, 
he felt, be a purely catalytic one and should not 
entail continued financial support. 
83. In that connection, he expressed the hope 
that further candidates from Member States would 
receive Agency sponsorship for training in power 
reactor operation at the Tarapur Atomic Power 
Project, where the reactor was expected to become 
critical within a few months. Another project which 
might develop into a regional training centre was 
the Food Irradiation and Preservation Facility established 
at Trombay in collaboration with the Government 
of Canada. 
84. Referring to the problem of the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, he pointed out that India 
had certain reservations regarding the draft treaty 
under consideration in Geneva. However, his country 
had supported the establishment of the Agency's 
safeguards system and it commended the proposal 
that the Agency should devise procedures for the 
inspection of uranium-235 separation plants. 
85. In conclusion, he said that India was again 
making a voluntary contribution of $35 000 in 
national currency and pledged his country's continued 
support for the Agency. 
86. Mr. HAYMERLE (Austria), after welcoming 
Malaysia and the other new Members of the Agency 
and expressing Austria's sense of personal loss at 
the death of Sir John Cockcroft, said that the 
annual sessions of the General Conference provided 
an extremely valuable opportunity to reassess progress 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy During 
the past year increasing emphasis had been laid on 
the Agency's responsibility for extending technical 
assistance to developing countries. Taking into 
account the Agency's own programme and that of 
the Technical Assistance Component of the United 
Nations Development Programme, the amount of 
assistance afforded in 1967 was quite impressive, 
even though it represented only 37% of the assistance 
requested and additional cash contributions to 
the General Fund were therefore urgently required. 
He welcomed the increased emphasis that was being 
laid on practical service to Member States during 
the early stages of nuclear power projects. In his 
view the Agency, including the Seibersdorf 
Laboratory, should be increasingly concerned in the 
development of applied nuclear technology. The 
number and capacity of nuclear power plants was 
growing rapidly, and during 1967 alone new orders 
equivalent to about 23 000 MW had been placed. 
Austria particularly appreciated the Agency's interest 
in new ways for the production of electrical power, 
including magneto-hydrodynamic electrical power 
generation, and regarded the symposia held on that 
and other subjects as one of the Agency's most 
valuable contributions towards the achievement of 
its paramount goal. Austria also warmly supported 
the work of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste and the efforts made to develop 
INIS. 

87. Turning to the Budget for 1968, he pointed 
out that the 10% increase in the estimates was 
largely due to the real growth of the Agency's activities 
by nearly 6 %. Compared with a corresponding 
figure of 11/2% for 1967, tha.t suggested that the 
Agency was entering a new period of dynamic 
growth. Austria would therefore support in principle 
the budget estimates submitted by the Board. 
88. The Board's estimate that between $150 000 
and $200 000 would be required over the next five 
years to provide additional office space illustrated 
the necessity of a permanent headquarters which 
would meet the Agency's needs for the foreseeable 
future. He therefore welcomed the fact that 
the Board had decided to accept the Austrian 
Government's offer to erect at its expense an appropriate 
building on the so-called Donaupark site. 
Detailed planning work still lay ahead, but given the 
goodwill of the Austrian authorities and the 
competent advice of the Agency's staff, he was sure 
it would be possible to solve all problems that 
might still arise. 
89- During the past year most significant developments 
had taken place in the field of safeguards. 
The increasing number of safeguards agreements 
approved by the Board and of nuclear facilities 
covered by such agreements was very encouraging, 
and the improvement of safeguards techniques, 
together with the proposed extension to processing 
plants and fuel fabrication plants, would make the 
system still more effective. His delegation welcomed 
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America, and was glad that in providing 
for the application of Agency safeguards the Treaty 
contributed towards general adoption of a universal 
safeguards system. His Government had followed 
with the closest interest theprogress achieved towards 
the conclusion of a general treaty on non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, and sincerely hoped that 
if it came into being that treaty would not remain 
an isolated step of limited importance but would 
form a starting-point for further progress towards 
general and complete disarmament under effective 
international control. For the Agency, such a treaty 
would undoubtedly bring new functions and new 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

responsibility, but the Agency's record for the past 
10 years clearly showed that it was capable of 
meeting all the new challenges opening before it. 

90. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) expressed his deep 
sorrow at the death of Sir John Cockcroft, who had 
always lent a helping hand to Danish scientists and 
had been awarded the Niels Bohr medal for his 
achievements in nuclear physics. 
91 • During the past year, Denmark had had the 
privilege of serving on the Board and thus had been 
able to play a part in determining the Agency's 
policy. In that connection, he wished to thank the 
Director General and his staff for the excellent 
documents presented to the Board and their constant 
readiness to assist it in its work. 

92. While the review of the Agency's activities in 
order to find ways and means to increase its asistance 
to developing countries had undoubtedly been 
useful, the Agency and its Member States, including 
the developing countries, should constantly strive 
to make the provision of technical assistance as 
efficient as possible with the limited funds available. 
Furthermore, all the Member States which could 
afford to do so should make generous voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund. His Government 
had always been happy to discharge that obligation 
and, in the current year, it would make a voluntary 
contribution and provide a number of cost-free 
fellowships at the Danish Atomic Energy Commission's 
Research Establishment at Riso'. 
9 3. His Government was following with considerable 
interest the work of the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. It believed the 
Centre had been a scientific success. The Centre 
had also given scientists from developing countries 
an opportunity to meet and work with colleagues 
from other countries and to keep in constant 
contact with them after their return to their home 
countries, which in turn had enabled them to keep 
abreast of recent developments. Accordingly, his 
Government intended, in response to the Director 
General's request, to make a special contribution 
to the Centre in 1968. 

94. He believed the Agency should promote fundamental 
science and research, and his country was 
pleased that it would have the opportunity to act as 
host for the Agency's Symposium on Inelastic Scattering 
of Neutrons in May 1968. The Agency 
should also consider the possibility of carrying out 
joint projects with other international organizations. 
In that connection, his Government believed that 
the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in 
Food and Agriculture was doing very valuable work. 
95- Turning to safeguards, he said his delegation 
supported the establishment of a working group to 
consider the extension of the safeguards system to 
plants for processing and fabricating nuclear material 
and would participate in its work. Danish facilities 
had been subject to Agency safeguards for some 
time, and the system had worked smoothly and 
efficiently and had entailed a minimum of extra 
work for the staff of the facilities in question. 
However, in order to improve inspection techniques, 
the Research Establishment at Riso' had, with the 
Agency's approval, started to carry out research on 
control methods, with particular reference to safeguards 
instrumentation. 

96. It was generally realized that, if the present 
discussions on a treaty for the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons were successfully concluded, the 
Agency might be required to assume new responsibilities. 
He was sure the Director General would 
bear that contingency in mind and that the Member 
States and the Secretariat would willingly shoulder 
those responsibilities, if they were required to do so. 
97. In conclusion, he thanked the Austrian Government 
for its generous hospitality and for its kind 
offer to the Agency of a new headquarters building 
at the Donaupark. He interpreted that offer as an 
indication of the Austrian Government's faith 
— which was shared by all — in the future of the 
Agency. 
The meeting rose at 12.45p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(XI)/OR.115 
13 February 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER- 2 OCTOBER 1967) 

ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 29 September 1967, at 10.45 a.m. 


President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 
later: Mr. NABAVI (Iran) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the 
agenda * 
Paragraphs 
10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1966-67 (continued) 1 — 111 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United Arab Republic 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
Romania 
Congo 
Japan 
Indonesia 
Greece 
Republic of Korea 
China 
1— 12 
14— 25 
26— 48 
49 — 58 
59— 70 
71 — 77 
78 — 85 
86— 99 
100—111 

GC(XI)/368. 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE would always be very grateful to them for their 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1966-67 kindness. 
[GC(XI)/355, 355/Corr.l, 366] (continued) 


3. The enthusiastic desire of many countries to 
1. Mr. TOHAMY (United Arab Republic) con-promote a speedy conclusion of a treaty on the 
gratulated the Director General on his work and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was a remarkexpressed 
gratification at the Agency's achievements able example of the desire to co-operate in the 
and growing prestige as an organization which made interests of peace. The United Arab Republic wela 
practical contribution to world peace and pros


comed that enthusiasm and continued to be a 

perity. 

member of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament. 
To be effective the treaty would call for 

2. He thanked those colleagues who had expres-an adequate safeguards system. In that connection, 
sed tlieir support and deep sympathy for his country the United Arab Republic considered that certain 
and assured them that the United Arab Republic changes should be made in the organization and 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


 GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

administrative structure of the Agency's Inspectorate, 
the method of assigning inspectors and the 
application of safeguards before if could fully accept 
the Inspecorate as a body whose findings were 
binding on the international community. 

4. The Board of Governors and the Committee 
which had conducted the review of the Agency's 
activities during the past year, in co-operation with 
the Director General [1], had spared no effort in 
carrying out their task. The Guiding Principles and 
General Operating Rules to Govern the Provision 
of Technical Assistance [2] should be made more 
fleXIble with a view to meeting the needs of the 
developing countries and, where necessary, preference 
should be given to requests for equipment; 
the General Conference could best achieve that 
objective by adopting the resolution set out in 
document GC(XI)/COM. 1/105. He still hoped 
that the technical assistance provided would be 
wider in scope and was particularly in favour of 
training groups of scientists collectively to enable 
them to operate an installation in their home 
country. He attached major importance to the 
establishment of reactor centres and institutes in 
which reactors were used for desalting sea water. 
5. The Agency's participation in the Regional 
Radioisotopes Centre for the Arab Countries in 
Cairo would terminate in 1968. In view of the 
Centre's achievements and the experience gained 
during the six years of its operation, the participating 
Member States intended to expand its 
activities to cover applied research and developments 
of an economic character and solve problems 
relating to hydrology, agriculture, entomology and 
industry. He hoped the Agency would continue to 
support the Centre, e.g. by awarding research contracts 
and providing technical assistance. The governing 
body of the Centre had approved the establishment 
of radioisotope units in Member States and 
the provision of training in applied research in addition 
to the conventional training courses. Membership 
would be extended to African States in which 
the scientific problems requiring a solution were 
similar to those dealt with in the Centre, and the 
latter would consolidate its co-operation with the 
Agency and other international organizations. 
6. The Atomic Energy Establishment in the 
United Arab Republic was now concentrating on 
research and development relating to nuclear power 
and desalination, with special emphasis on heattransfer 
of reactor coolants and moderators, the 
behaviour and structural changes in reactor materials 
under irradiation and high-temperature conditions 
and the development of reactor control equipment 
and instrumentation. In the case of the 150-MW(e) 
and 20 000 m3/day dual-purpose plant and its 
associated pilot agricultural scheme, economic analyses 
and engineering studies were being carried out, 
[1] See document GC(XI)/362, 362/Add.1 and 2. 
[2] GC(IV)/RES/65, Annex. 
using various water costing methods, and different 
economic parameters had been used in feasibility 
studies. The results obtained so far had shown that 
the prospect of using desalted sea water for agricultural 
purposes was promising. 

7. In the current year, the first group of 41 
nuclear engineers had graduated from the University, 
which welcomed nuclear engineering students from 
abroad. 
8. He was, unfortunately, unable to present the 
results of work done with the research reactor 
since it had been shut down for reasons of safety. 
Similarly he could not state whether the Agency's 
regulations for the safe transport of nuclear materials 
could usefully serve as guiding principles for Member 
States since the Suez Canal was partly destroyed 
and had been completely blocked for some months. 
9. It was important to bear in mind that 
Member States and all connected with the Agency 
were certainly more aware than any other international 
community of the importance of nuclear 
energy and the delicate issues and danger which its 
use entailed. For that reason Member States had 
always emphasized the importance of co-operating 
in order to ensure that the use of nuclear energy 
was not diverted to military purposes. The Agency 
had therefore established an effective safeguards 
system, which had been extended to nuclear facilities 
capable of extracting plutonium from irradiated 
fuel, and it was now trying to extend it to 
the whole fuel cycle. He had interpreted the unanimous 
approval of the revised safeguards system by 
the General Conference two years previously as 
indicating that Member States were fully aware of 
"their moral responsibility to safeguard world peace. 
10. Article III.A. 5 of the Statute authorized the 
Agency to establish and administer safeguards 
designed to ensure that special fissionable and other 
materials, services, equipment, facilities and information 
made available by the Agency or at its request 
or under its supervision or control were not used in 
such a way as to further any military purpose. 
Article XI.F.4 provided for undertakings by Member 
States submitting projects that the assistance provided 
would not be used in such a way as to further 
any military purpose. Article XII.A.5 was designed 
to ensure that reprocessing plants would not 
lend themselves to diversion of materials for military 
purposes and that special fissionable materials 
recovered or produced as a by-product were used 
for peaceful purposes under continuing Agency 
safeguards. It also required deposit with the Agency 
of any excess of any special fissionable materials in 
order to prevent stock-piling of such materials. 
Safeguards were also dealt with in Article XII and 
XX. It was clear that all Member States providing 
or receiving assistance were obliged to comply with 
those articles of the Statute in order to ensure that 
the world was not exposed to nuclear hazards. In 
that connection he also quoted paragraphs 1, 2 

115th. PLENARY MEETING 

and 15(a) of the document on the Agency's Safeguards 
System (1965, as Provisionally Extended in 
1966) [3] and referred to paragraph 7 of the Annex 
thereto in relation to the extension of safeguards 
to reprocessing plants. 

11. Since there was a close link between the techniques 
employed in using nuclear energy for peaceful 
and military purposes, the Agency's safeguards 
system, which had been accepted as a model by the 
United Nations, was designed to ensure that assistance 
provided by the Agency was used for peaceful 
purposes only. In November 1964, the UnitedArab 
Republic had been obliged to enter into a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency as a condition 
for obtaining a quarter of a gram of uranium-235, 
purchased from the United Kingdom. On the other 
hand, another Member State of the Agency in the 
Middle East had acquired bilaterally, and through 
the Agency, a considerable amount of equipment, 
materials, and the services of an expert paid by 
the Agency, which had enabled it to build a facility 
capable of handling irradiated fuel. 
12. He then made the following statement [4]: 
(1) "This facility was constructed since 1962 
under circumstances which should have obliged 
all the parties concerned to undertake an arrangement 
for safeguarding it and the nuclear material 
contained therein. Yet no assurances of this 
type were ever given, nor did the Agency, while 
making available its assistance, equipment, knowledge 
and expert experience, discharge its responsibility 
to comply with the statutory obligation 
by undertaking a safeguards agreement widi 
the country concerned similar to the agreement 
with the United Arab Republic for the provision 
of one quarter of a gram of uranium. This is 
only one example of what we want to present 
to our Agency community. I am positively sure 
that the revealing of such situations can only 
be for the good of our international co-operation 
by guiding the organs of our Agency to take 
appropriate steps towards consolidating peace 
and ensuring the peaceful uses of installations 
provided by the Agency or through the Agency, 
or even between Member States of the Agency, 
as a statutory obligation, and in many cases by 
encouraging voluntary action by the Member 
States which are more aware of the dangers 
in allowing such assistance to lend itself to 
diversion for military purposes. 
(2) "We feel that the Agency, in co-operation 
with its Member States and the Board of 
Governors, should attempt to take appropriate 
action in this particular case, and in similar 
cases where assistance is provided through the 
[3] INFCIRC/66/Rev. 1. 
[4] 
The stetement in paragraph 12 is reproduced verbatim at 
the speaker's request under Rule 92(b)of the Conference's 
Rules of Procedure. 
Agency, or bilaterally, for principal nuclear facilities, 
which should be subject to bilateral safeguards 
or, more advisedly, under the Agency's 
safeguards. 

(3) "There is a particular need for safeguards 
in the area of Africa and the Middle East. Africa 
was declared a denuclearized continent in 1964, 
a status which does not eXIst in the Middle 
East. On behalf of the delegations of Saudi 
Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, Kuwait, Lebanon and 
Iraq as well as my own delegation I declare 
that we do not want any atomic explosions in 
the Middle East, with all their disastrous results 
and consequences." 
13. He reaffirmed his country's confidence in 
the Agency, which was now assuming additional 
responsibilities and needed the constant support 
of Member States. The United Arab Republic would 
eagerly play its part in bringing to a successful 
conclusion the important work which had yet to be 
done, such as the conclusion of an agreement on 
emergency assistance in the case of radiation accidents 
and the consolidation of the safeguards system 
and its practical application. He hoped more 
fruitful results would be achieved in the coming 
years and that Member States would co-operate 
more closely with one another and with the 
Agency's able Director General and Secretariat in 
the interest of world peace. 
14. Lord PENNEY (United Kingdom) thanked 
delegates for the warm tributes paid to the late 
Sir John Cockcroft, who had contributed so much 
to the development of science and atomic energy 
in the United Kingdom and throughout the world. 
15. He thanked the Director General and the 
Secretariat for their co-operation, which had contributed 
to the useful work carried out during the 
year. He also wished to thank the Austrian 
Government for its generous offer of a new headquarters 
building for the Agency. 
16. His delegation shared the general satisfaction 
reflected in the document on the review of the 
Agency's activities, which had been conducted during 
the past year. 
17. He shared the hopes expressed by several 
delegates that the negotiations on a treaty on the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, in which his 
Government was taking an active part, would be 
successfully concluded, and he had no doubt that, 
if called upon to do so, the Agency would readily 
accept the task of administering safeguards under 
the treaty, and that its Inspectorate would be in a 
position to assume the wider responsibilities that 
would entail. 
18. Two days previously it had been his pleasant 
duty to sign, on behalf of the United Kingdom, 
a Transfer Agreement under which the Agency would 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

apply safeguards to the Tokai Mura reactor; that 
reactor, together with the Bradwell and Yankee 
reactors, would now be one of the biggest facilities 
under Agency safeguards. 

19. He welcomed the proposal to establish the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS), 
and thought it should be closely co-ordinated with 
the eXIsting national and regional abstracting 
services. 
20. His delegation supported the Agency's Budget 
for 1968 [5]. It noted, however, that the increase in 
the Regular Budget —10.4% over 1967— was 
substantial, and hoped the Agency would do its 
best to exercise economy. Member States themselves 
could of course bring aboutan appreciable reduction 
in expenditure by agreeing to hold shorter sessions 
of the General Conference in alternate years; they 
might then be willing to contribute more to other 
Agency activities, particularly technical assistance, 
the demand for which was rapidly increasing. The 
Agency had already provided a considerable amount 
of technical assistance; it had awarded 2500 fellowships, 
held 62 training courses, and provided individual 
developing countries with direct aid to the 
value of $ 30 million. In addition to its contribution 
to the Regular Budget, the United Kingdom proposed 
to donate $110 000 to the General Fund for 
1968, and it would also provide experts for shortterm 
missions free of charge. Many Agency fellows 
received training in universities, scientific and technical 
institutes and other organizations in the United 
Kingdom. In order to meet the increasing demand 
for training, it had been decided to raise to 7 the 
number of training places for Agency nominees at 
the Central Electricity Generating Board's nuclear 
power stations and laboratories. With regard to the 
differences of opinion regarding the proper scope 
of technical assistance, in particular the extent to 
which it should be confined to a transfer of knowledge 
through the provision of experts rather than 
the supply of equipment, he considered that the 
limited funds available could be used to benefit 
the maXImum number of Member States by providing 
experts, together with those items of equipment 
which they required to carry out their work. 
21. The codes of practice for health and safety 
and for the transport of radioactive materials had 
proved very valuable in promoting international 
collaboration and exchange. He wished to pay a 
tribute to the late George Appleton, who had contributed 
so much to that work; his sudden death 
was deeply deplored by all who had been closely 
associated with him in Vienna and elsewhere. 
22. He would now enumerate some of the main 
achievements listed in the document on developments 
in his country's atomic programme during 
the past year [6], which his delegation had sub[
5] GC(XI)/360. 
[6] GC(XI)/INF/97, section F. 
mitted to the Secretariat in response to the Director 
General's invitation. The United Kingdom gascooled 
reactors now had an installed nuclear capacity 
of almost 3500 MW, and a further 600-MW 
gas-cooled reactor would be in operation within a 
few months. There was complete confidence in the 
gas-cooled system and in its potential for further 
development in the years immediately ahead. The 
construction of the 250-MW(e) fast reactor was 
proceeding successfully and on time, and the steamgenerating 
heavy-water nuclear power station had 
gone critical a few days previously. Satisfactory 
progress was being made with the Vulcain project, 
in which Belgium and the United Kingdom had 
co-operated successfully. The work with radioisotopes 
was also providing successful and their 
use for all purposes was increasing at the rate of 

15 % per annum. 

23. In the United Kingdom, as in most other 
countries, there was a constantly growing demand 
for more money for scientific research and development, 
and at least as high a proportion of the 
gross national product as in most of the other 
leading industrialized countries was allocated for 
that purpose. In making that allocation, judgement 
had to be exercised and priorities chosen. Ten years 
previously it had seemed that a shortage of energy 
would lead to an increase in cost, and consequently 
research and development in energy generation had 
been given very high priority. It now seemed that 
the supply of energy would be much greater than 
expected, and the problem was to make a balanced 
choice between the various possibilities available. 
Nuclear power would make a large contribution to 
electricity generation, and the efficient use of uranium 
by fast reactors would add greatly to the 
energy reserves. In determining priorities for the 
various branches of scientific research and development, 
the United Kingdom AtomicEnergy Authority 
and the Government had decided to try to reduce 
by 50 % during the next five years the work done 
on plasma physics and fusion research, since its 
practical application would not become economic 
for a considerable time. That decision could 
of course be revised if developments so warranted. 
A total graduate staff of about 100 would continue 
to be engaged in plasma physics and fusion research 
at Culham, and he believed that with the excellent 
facilities available the laboratory would continue to 
make a valuable contribution to such research. 
24. He was addressing the Conference in his 
present capacity for the last time, and he wished 
to take the opportunity to express his gratification 
at the steady growth in the statute of the Agency 
since the time of its inception. It was now universally 
accepted as an important and authoritative 
agency of the United Nations, and it was unique 
in that it was concerned solely with one branch of 
science and technology. While it was true that many 
Governments had decided to develop atomic energy 
in certain directions and their support had resulted 
in rapid progress, there was a danger that the 

115th. PLENARY MEETING 

pattern of commercial development might be 
distorted. The need for a specialized agency and 
for intensive national programmes devoted to the 
applications of atomic energy was quite clear, since 
those applications could, on the one hand, be 
extremely dangerous and, on the other , highly 
benedal to mankind if they were directed towards 
the production of power and the promotion of 
medical, agricultural and scientific research. Thus 
the success of the Agency depended in large 
measure on its ability to steer a course between 
political and industrial considerations, which to some 
extent coloured the attitudes of Member States. In 
view of the divergent character of atomic energy 
programmes in different countries, the Agency could 
also play a particular useful role by enabling 
countries to exchange knowledge and experience 
and discuss their future plans. The Agency should 
also be sufficiently fleXIble to meet the demands 
of the international community and cope with the 
rapid developments in the use of atomic energy. 

25. He would always remember with pleasure 
his association with the Agency during its formative 
years, and expressed the hope that, under the 
able leadership of the Director General, it would 
continue to flourish and successfully discharge its 
important task. 
26. Mr. HULUBEI (Romania) said the Conference 
was meeting at a time when there was, on the one 
hand, a tendency towards increased co-operation 
between States in the interest of peace and international 
security and, on the other hand, a tendency 
to act in a manner contrary to the vital interests 
of nations, their aspirations and their multilateral 
development. At a time when unprecedented scientific 
progress offered unlimited possibilities to improve 
living conditions, the persistent tension and 
conflict in certain parts of the world were very 
disquieting since, apart from resulting in loss of 
life and destruction of property, they directly 
hindered the normal development of international 
relations, prevented people from living their own 
lives without interference, impeded progress in lessdeveloped 
countries and perpetuated colonialism and 
neocolonialism. 
27. If international problems were to be solved, 
States must, first of all, fully respect the principles 
of national independence and sovereignty, equal 
rights and non-interference of internal affairs and 
undertake to eschew military action. 
28. The aggression commitedby the United States 
of America against the Viet-Namese people 
constituted a grave danger to peace and prevented 
the improvement of international relations. The 
immediate and unconditional cessation of aerial 
bombardment and hostilities and respect for the 
right of the Viet-Namese people to decide their 
own destiny were urgently necessary. 
Middle East. Since the beginning of hostilities 
there Romania had advocated a peaceful settlement 
which would take into account the interests of all 
the countries in the area and thus create the conditions 
necessary to enable those countries to enjoy 
the benefits of democracy and achieve national, 
economic and social progress. 

30. Since general disarmament and, above all, 
nuclear disarmament would contribute to the improvement 
of international relations and promote 
security and peace, Romania strongly urged that 
concrete steps should be taken to prohibit the use 
of nuclear weapons and their production, to destroy 
the nuclear weapons already in eXIstence, put an 
end to military alliances and remove all military 
bases from foreign territory. The conclusion of a 
treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
would be very valuable if it were one of a number 
of steps designed to achieve nuclear disarmament. 
Such a treaty should garantee the safety of all 
States, without discrimination, and should ensure 
that all States would be enabled to use atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes, provided its use was 
subject to reasonable inspection and that national 
sovereignty was respected. In that connection the 
Agency was called upon to play an important part 
by contributing to the efforts being made to ensure 
that nuclear energy was used to promote economic, 
technological and scientific development rather than 
for destructive purposes. Its safeguards system would 
enable it to perform that task. In order to meet the 
urgent need of all States for national security, the 
system used to inspect nuclear energy activities and 
facilities must be accepted by all the States 
concerned. The provisions and procedures laid down 
must be clearly formulated, equitable and in keeping 
with the principle of national equality and must 
exclude the possibility of interference in the internal 
affairs of States. Accordingly the Agency's safeguards 
system must permit all States, without discrimination, 
to carry out nuclear research and develop nuclear 
science and technology for peaceful purposes. 
31. All States should try to promote the development 
of conditions which would facilitate mutual 
co-operation, which was so necessary in the interests 
of progress and civilization. In that connection, 
valuable work could be done by die various international 
organizations, which should act in a realistic 
manner, bearing in mind the fundamental 
interests of all nations. 
32. The exclusion from membership oftheAgency 
of the People's Republic of China, the Democratic 
Republic of Germany and other socialist countries 
was abnormal, inadmissible and contrary to the 
fundamental principle of universality. 
33. His delegation welcomed Malaysia as a new 
Member of the Agency and was sure it would play 
a valuable part in the Agency's work. 
29. There was a further threat to peace in the 34. The Report ofthe Board for 1966-67 [GC(XI)/ 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

355, 355/Corr.l, 366], in which the achievements 
of the Agency were set out, revealed an appreciable 
growth in the spirit of collaboration which was so 
important for the successful functioning of an international 
organization. The Director General and the 
Secretariat deserved congratulations for their highly 
capable and efficient work. 

3 5. Progress had been made in technical assistance, 
in the organization of scientific meetings, in the 
training of experts and in the exchange of scientific 
and technical information, thanks to co-operation 
in scientific and technical work and to a closer 
relationship between the Agency and other international 
organizations such as FAO. He also wished 
to congratulate the Board on its decision regarding 
the INIS, which demonstrated a resolve to stress 
the important aspects of the Agency's future work. 
36. Nuclear power was bidding fair to take first 
place among the Agency's concerns. The studies 
carried out by the Secretariat concentrated on the 
essential aspects of nuclear power work, and the 
scientific meetings on the subject had tackled problems 
which, both technically and economically, 
were of real interest for the near future. 
37. In view of the importance of nuclear power 
and the interest which Member States were showing 
in it, a substantial increase in the scope of the 
Agency's technical assistance seemed inevitable. 
From the Board's report it was apparent that the 
share of technical assistance devoted to nuclear 
power during the past year had declined appreciably . 
in relation to the average of earlier years. 
38. The long-term programme [7] had done much 
to stimulate the Agency's work in certain sectors of 
particular importance to Member States. That was a 
development on which the Agency could congratulate 
itself. 
39. Romania, engaged in a vast programme of 
economic development, was giving close attention 
to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, particularly 
in connection with the development of power. While 
pursuing their activities in fundamental and applied 
research for the benefit of industry, agriculture, 
biological science, medicine, petroleum prospecting, 
hydrology and so on, Romania's research workers 
and engineers, together with representatives of the 
country's industry, had undertaken concerted and 
sustained action in the interests of the future nuclear 
power programme. 
40. Romania wished to reaffirm the importance 
that it attached to the Agency's activities, and its 
resolve to support them. 
41. Since 1965 Romania had offered 15 fellowships 
to the Agency. It had also pledged a sum of 
$6200 for the 1968 Operational Budget, 10% in 
[7] INFCIRC/50. 
convertible currency and the balance in national 
currency — an offer similar to the one it had made 
in 1967. 

42. He wished to take the opportunity to put a 
number of suggestions to the General Conference on 
behalf of the Romanian delegation. 
43. The Agency had obtained good results in the 
training of experts, and the Secretariat deserved 
warm congratulations for that. Its efforts should, 
however, be intensified in view of the vital 
importance of technical training. The number of 
Type II fellowships, the usefulness of which had 
been amply demonstrated, should be increased, and 
greater attention should be given to study trips. 
44. The Agency should co-operate even more 
closely than in the past with international organizations 
such as ILO, WHO, UNESCO, and so on, 
particularly in the training of experts and 
technologists for nuclear energy work. 
45. It would be desirable to supplement the 
Agency's scientific and technical documentation by 
an increased number of publications on various 
aspects of nuclear power reactors, including general 
technology, economics and problems of operation. 
Similarly, it would be extremely useful to prepare 
manuals for nuclear power technologists. 
46. The supply of equipment for technical assistance 
projects should not be made subject to the 
provision of experts' services. If experts were in 
fact requested by countries soliciting assistance, 
their missions should not exceed one to three 
months. The short missions that were required 
could be carried out by the Secretariat's own 
experts; in that way the drain on the technical 
assistance budget could be reduced. 
47. In die research contract programme one could 
discern a praiseworthy tendency to tackle practical 
problems of interest to all Member States, and 
particularly to the developing countries. That was a 
type ofcollab oration which could usefully be enlarged. 
48. Finally, the Agency should continue to support, 
with UNESCO, the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste, the great scientific 
value of which had already been demonstrated. 
49. Mr. MASSANGU (Democratic Republic of 
the Congo) stated that, since scientific research had 
become one of the driving forces of economic life, 
one could no longer conceive of a modern, powerful 
and efficient economy which did not draw on its 
results. Modern research, however, posed serious 
problems of finance and co-ordination. Old ideas of 
research work, dating from a time when small 
numbers of workers toiled on their own with limited 
means and within the dearly-defined frontiers of 
their disciplines, had to be revised. Nowadays, many 

115th. PLENARY MEETING 

scientists often worked together as a team, equipped 
with costly apparatus, on subjects which frequendy 
involved the use of data relating to several 
sciences. In other words, the various sciences were 
complementary to one another, requiring resources 
on what was virtually an industrial scale, and 
necessitating the organization of a body of highlyskilled 
workers. 

50. As regards training and research in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, it should be realized that 
the majority of African countries were not in a 
position to solve the problems posed by contemporary 
scientific research. At a time when the exceptionally 
rapid growth in the need for training and 
research neccesitated an ever-increasing supply of 
manpower and capital, that situation was dangerous. 
The present structural and organizational state of the 
scientific set-up in Africa gave ground for fear that 
the resources available for science in general, and 
nuclear science in particular, would be exhausted 
before basic needs had been satisfied, unless resolute 
steps were taken towards regional and international 
co-operation at the three levels of planning, training, 
and implementation of research, and in financing 
that research. 
51. That was what Africa had realized at Kinshasa. 
At its fourth session, held at Kinshasa from 11 to 
15 September 1967, the Conference of the Heads of 
State of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) 
had in effect adopted the text of a resolution for 
co-operation between OAU and the Agency. The 
Conference had also adopted the following resolution: 
"The Conference of the Heads of State .. ., 

'Having discussed the proposal made by the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo on the 
establishment of a regional centre for the 
utilization of radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture 
and biology at the Trico Nuclear 
Centre at Kinshasa, 

"Recalling the provision of the OAU Statute on 
co-ordinating efforts of Member States towards 
scientific research, 

"1. Recommends the Member States to further by 
all appropriate means the extension and efficient 
running not only of this Centre, but also of 
other African centres engaged in the same work; 

"2. Requests the Secretary-General to see that this 
project is carried out in the interests of scientific 
research in Africa." [8] 

52. Those actions showed that Africa not only 
recognized the growing importance of atomic energy 
in all branches of science and engineering, but 
furthermore that it could not reasonably further the 
[8] Unofficial translation. 
use of such energy in Africa other than on a regional, 
or international, basis. That was what the Congo 
had told the Agency in the course of the review of 
the Agency's activities. In essence, it had stressed 
that, in order to increase the effectiveness of assistance 
furnished by the Agency, that assistance had to 
be thought of in regional terms. It was regrettable 
to note that the Agency had not applied itself 
resolutely to that principle. Since its foundation, 
the Agency had been presented with six proposals 
for regional centres; to date, however, one single 
regional and one international centre had been 
set up. 

53. In that connection he recalled that the Board 
of Governors had laid down a number of principles 
which would have the unfortunate effect of discouraging 
any efforts to promote regional cooperation 
with the Agency's assistance. 
5 4. He thought the development of nuclear energy 
in the Congo would benefit if the decision of die 
Heads of State in OAU to convert the Trico Centre 
in Kinshasa into a regional centre for Africa were 
adopted. 
55. To improve the facilities available to other 
African countries the Congolese Government had 
started to convert the Triga Mark I reactor at the 
Trico Centre. 
56. His Government was also planning to construct 
a new building at Lovanium University to 
house the departments of radiobiology, radiochemistry 
and radioagronomy along with die converted 
reactor. 
57. In 1968 his country would organize a symposium 
in collaboration with OAU on die peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy in Africa and it wanted to 
thank the Agency in advance for any assistance it 
might offer in the organization of that symposium. 
58. He thanked the Agency for the help it had 
given the Congo in 1967, and especially for the 
results obtained by the two Agency experts at the 
Trico Centre. His country hoped it could count 
on the continued assistance of the two experts and 
that it would benefit from the development of 
nuclear energy in Africa. 
59. Mr. HOGEN (Japan) referred to the growing 
importance of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency as it entered a new decade in its history. 
He pointed out that since the attainment of 
economic power generation from atomic energy die 
practical use of nuclear power had been extensively 
developed, and that many countries, including Japan, 
were planning an ambitious construction programme 
for nuclear power stations. He warned that, in step 
with this development,*'there was a growing danger 
of misuse of nuclear power and said it was hoped 
that the Agency would play a substantial part in 
controlling die situation. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

60. He referred to Japan's rapidly growing contribution 
to, and investment in, nuclear research and 
development and stressed that such work was much 
more effective if it was carried out in close collaboration 
with other countries. He believed that the 
Agency should play an active part in the exchange 
of technical information on the new types of reactor 
being developed. 
61. The Agency should extend as much assistance 
as possible to developing countries planning their 
nuclear power programme, particularly by advising 
them on reactor siting. His country was prepared to 
help, for example, by placing experts at the Agency's 
disposal and holding panel meetings. Hementioned, 
in particular, that research on aseismic reactor design 
had reached a comparatively advanced stage and that 
many Japanese experts had taken part in the Agency 
panel meeting on that subject in June 1967. 
62. He stressed the need for a co-ordinated, longterm 
supply of nuclear fuel, and suggested that the 
Agency consider the possiblity of acting as a 
clearing-house for plutonium until such time as that 
element became commercially avalable. Since it was 
also expected that the demand for uranium and 
thorium would increase, a world-wide investigation 
of resources was essential. At present, the Agency 
was carrying out such an investigation with the 
European Nuclear Energy Agency, and it was hoped 
that the East European countries would furnish the 
necessary information on those resources. 
63. He pointed out that the expansion in nuclear 
power generation also raised the question of radioactive 
waste disposal. His country believed that in 
such matters as waste disposal into the sea and 
processing of highly radioactive liquid wastes the 
Agency's assistance would be very valuable in establishing 
standards and securing the exchange of 
information. 
64. It was envisaged that before long nuclearpowered 
ships would handle quite a large share of 
world maritime transport. It was feared, however, 
that the lack of standardized legal provisions covering 
the operation of a nuclear-powered ship would 
have an unfavourable effect on construction programmes, 
especially since the International Convention 
on the Liability of Operators of Nuclear Ships, 
adopted in Brussels in 1962, had still not entered 
into force. He hoped that the Agency would try to 
clear up that confusing situation. 
65. The question of how the Agency's budgetary 
resources could best be allocated gave rise to difficulties 
which hindered its work for the developing 
countries. In that connection he thought it was 
opportune to remind Member States of the resolution 
on voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund adopted at the fifth regular session of the 
General Conference [9]. 
66. He recalled the suggestion, made in the 
Review of the Agency's Activities, that the Agency 
organize regional meetings to study the relevant 
problems of each area [10], and mentioned that 
the Study Group on Research Reactor Utilization 
in the Far East would be held in Japan in October. 
67. He referred to the modest but steady results 
achieved by the Agency's Safeguards System and expressed 
his confidence that, with suitable improvements, 
it would play an important role in the 
future, especially in connection with the projected 
non-proliferation treaty. He pointed out that the 
administration of all safeguards under his Government's 
bilateral agreements had been transferred to 
the Agency, and emphasized that in order to further 
die aims of the Statute all countries should solemnly 
undertake not to divert their peaceful nuclear activities 
to military purposes and should accept the 
application of safeguards to those activities. 
68. He agreed that safeguards should cover the 
whole nuclear fuel cycle, but hoped that the extension 
of the system to cover fabrication plants, which 
was proposed, would not hamper the development 
of nuclear industry and would cover only the minimum 
requirements necessary to prevent diversion 
to military purposes. To that end, safeguards procedures, 
especially those for power reactors, should 
be simplified so that safeguards would not be uniformly 
applied to the entire fuel cycle but according 
to the characteristics of each nuclear facility. He 
believed that if protection of industrial secrets and 
simplification of safeguards procedures could be 
achieved, the system would become more acceptable 
to a greater number of Member States, and 
urged the Agency to make a greater effort 
to develop and simplify inspection techniques. 
69. He then spoke briefly of recent developments 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy in Japan, of 
which a detailed account had been circulated [11]. 
For example, it was planned that the total capacity 
of nuclear power plants in Japan would reach 
1 300 MW(e) by 1970; furthermore, the Power 
Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation, 
consolidating co-operation between governmental, 
academic and industrial circles, was to 
implement a "national project" for a fast breeder 
reactor and an advanced converter reactor. In addition, 
Japan's first nuclear-powered ship was scheduled 
for completion by 1971. 
70. In conclusion, he referred to the new economic 
and political situation created by recent rapid progress 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and the 
new responsibilities thus devolving on the Agency, 
and pledged the co-operation of the Japanese Government 
in all future activities aimed at harnessing that 
tremendous energy and promoting the well-being 
of mankind. 
[10] GC(XI)/562, paras 43-48. 
[9] GC(V)/RES/100. [11] GC(XI)/INF/97, section B. 

115th. PLENARY MEETING 

71. Miss ROESAD (Indonesia) welcomed 
Uganda, Sierra Leone and Singapore to membership 
of the Agency. Her delegation had always believed 
that the principle of universality should apply and 
that the addition of new Members could not but 
strengthen the Agency. 
72. During the past year extensive political and 
economic transformations had taken place in Indonesia 
; inflation had been restricted to a manageable 
level, and the outlook for the future was promising. 
In the field of atomic energy, the austerity 
programme had made it necessary to discontinue the 
construction of several buildings started in previous 
years, but it had proved possible to draw up a programme 
which was in line with the policy of stabilization 
now being pursued by the Government. 
Radioisotope production with the Triga reactor had 
been established on a regular basis, a number of 
research activities had been begun to make use of 
the isotopes so produced, and a research programme 
on gamma irradiation had been embarked upon; a 
gamma irradiation plant was soon to be purchased 
and installed near Djakarta. The reactor had also 
been used for activation analysis in chemistry, pharmacy 
and geology. Attention was thus focused more 
on research than on constructional work, and it 
might be said that 1967 was the year in which the 
research programme had got under way. 
73. Indonesia was aware of the progress being 
made in atomic energy activities in other parts of 
the world, culminating in the commercial application 
of nuclear power. She believed that it would still 
be some years before such a stage was reached in 
Indonesia, but the picture might well be changed 
by future improvements, and her Government would 
follow closely, for instance, the development of 
nuclear desalting plants and the progress made in 
more advanced countries in solving the scientific 
and technical problems of large-scale application 
of nuclear energy. 
74. Her delegation endorsed the statement made 
by the Director General that, in view of the progress 
they had made, the advanced countries had an 
obligation to assist the less-developed countries 
on a more extensive scale [12]. It had frequently 
stated its belief in the importance of technical assistance, 
and had always maintained that it was one of 
the most necessary activities of the Agency. She 
therefore felt some concern that since 1962 there 
had been no increase in the resources available 
for technical assistance, and believed that steps 
should be taken to change that situation, if necessary 
by amending the Agency's Statute. In the 
light of the recommendation of the Board of 
Governors that "every effort should continue to be 
made to obtain voluntary contribution from Member 
States" [13], she was pleased to announce that 
her delegation was ready to pledge an increase of 
[12] 
GC(XI)/OR.lll, para. 39. 
[13] 
GC(XI)/362, para. 15(a). 
about 50% over its previous contribution to the 
General Fund. 

75. Her delegation also felt that the supply of 
equipment as technical assistance should be made 
independent of the services of an expert. Although 
it welcomed the fleXIbility in that respect recommended 
by the Board [14], it would still be only 
in exceptional cases that equipment could be provided 
without experts. That was not entirely satisfactory, 
and she therefore supported the draft resolution 
of Australia, Brazil, Ceylon, Ghana, India, 
Pakistan, Poland, Thailand, Tunisia and the United 
Arab Republic, aimed at removing that restriction 
[15]. She also felt that fellowships providing 
training up to doctorate level would help to meet 
the urgent need of developing countries for an 
increase in their skilled manpower. 
76. She strongly endorsed the observation made 
in the Review of the Agency's Activities referring to 
the terms of Articles III.A.2 and III.B.3 of the 
Statute [16]. Article III.A.2 authorized the Agency 
"To make provision, in accordance with this Statute, 
for materials, services, equipment, and facilities to 
meet the needs of research on, and development 
and practical application of, atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes, including the production of electric 
power, with due consideration for the needs of the 
under-developed areas of the world", and Article 
III.B.3 laid down that it should "Allocate its resources 
in such a manner as to secure efficient 
utilization and the greatest possible general benefit 
in all areas of the world, bearing in mind the special 
needs of the under-developed areas of the world". 
In endorsing those remarks, her delegation wished 
to remind all Member States that its special responsibility 
with regard to developing countries should 
take priority over all other activities which the 
Agency was required by its Statute to undertake 
in the interest of all its Members. 
77. Her delegation supported the Budget for 
1968, with certain reservations. With reference to 
INIS, the Indonesian Government accepted the 
importance of mechanizing information storage and 
retrieval, but felt that care should be taken that in 
doing so no extra burden was placed on the developing 
countries and no funds were taken from 
projects which were a special responsibility of the 
Agency. The most important issue of the day was 
the proposed non-proliferation treaty; her delegation 
was profoundly satisfied with the results achieved, 
and looked forward to the time when agreement 
would also be reached on the subject of safeguards. 
On the question of inspection, she agreed with 
Mr. Spinelli, Representative of the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations that, whatever the final 
[14] 
Ibid., para. 20. 
[15] 
For the final text of the resolution, see document 
GC(XI)/RES/230. 
[16] 
GC(XI)/362, para. 8. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

decision on the subject of inspection, it was inconceivable 
that the Agency would not have an 
important part to play in nuclear disarmament [17]. 

Mr. Nabavi (Iran) took the Chair. 

78. Mr. DEMOPOULOS (Greece) said that the 
progress made during the eleven years since the 
Agency had been set up justified its eXIstence, as 
also did the increasing number of States applying 
for membership. His delegation was always ready 
to welcome the admission of new Member States, 
especially from among the developing countries. 
One of the Agency's main objectives was to assist 
in the development of those countries, and it was 
his hope that they would soon be able to rival 
the progress made by the more advanced countries. 
79. Greece was committed to the rapid development 
of its economy, an aim which called for 
increased knowledge, particularly in the new 
branches of science and technology. The Agency's 
technical assistance could therefore be of great 
benefit to Greece, especially in fields related to 
economic growth such as industry, agriculture, hydrology, 
nuclear power and desalting. 
80. The research programme of the Democritus 
Nuclear Research Centre included both basic and 
applied research. The former was directed towards 
increasing knowledge in various scientific disciplines, 
and it was possible that many basic research 
projects would become of practical use in the very 
near future. The applied research, constituting some 
two fifths of the Centre's programmes, aimed at 
making rapid contributions to national economic 
development. 
81. The basic research tools available in Greece 
were a swimming-pool type reactor and a mediumsized 
computer. Work was in progress on nuclear, 
theoretical and reactor physics and on chemistry, 
biology, electronics, soil science and entomology. 
The production of short-lived radioisotopes for use 
in medicine, agriculture and industry had begun 
in 1961, and it would in the near future be posible 
to cover all national requirements. Greek 
physicists were playing an active part in the highenergy 
physics programme of the European Organization 
for Nuclear Research (CERN), and the 
Greek Atomic Energy Commission was also engaged 
in applied research. Studies of water reservoirs and 
ground-water tracing studies were in progress, and 
their results would be of great benefit in view of 
the increasing water shortage. 
82. Good progress was being made in the control 
of the olive fly by the sterile male technique, using 
gamma rays, and successful completion of the project 
would save the national economy an annual sum of 
some $15 million. 
[17] GC(XI)/OR.lll, para. 69. 
83. A study was being made of the possibility 
of active co-operation between the Greek Atomic 
Energy Commission and the Public Power Company 
in developing a national nuclear power programme, 
and Greek universities were collaborating in the 
training of students in nuclear science. 
/


84. The Agency had provided a number of experts, 
grants and fellowships in connection with many of 
the programmes. In 1966 13 Greek citizens had 
held study fellowships abroad and 11 Agency experts 
had visited Greece under the technical assistance 
programme. 
85. The Agency's objectives were to relate atomic 
energy to economic growth and social advancement, 
particularly in the developing countries, acting in 
close co-operation with other international organizations. 
His delegation wished to stress the 
significant contribution which the Agency had made 
to the expansion of atomic energy activities in 
Greece, and assured it that Greece in its turn 
would do everything possible to promote the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
86. Mr. CHUNG (Republic of Korea) thanked 
the Director General and the Secretariat for the 
work they had done. As a retiring Member, he also 
wished to thank all other Members of the Board of 
Governors. 
87. Korea had accomplished much in various 
branches of science since its first research reactor 
became critical in March 1962; since that date, too, 
radioisotope production units had been installed 
with the Agency's assitance, so that his country 
was now able to meet its own requirements in 
short-lived radioisotopes. A successful start had 
also been made on the production of radio-pharmaceuticals. 
88. The present research reactor was going to be 
upgraded because of the need for higher neutron 
fluxes and long-lived radioisotopes and the need to 
develop reactor physics and reactor engineering. 
Within the next 12 months a start would also be 
made on the construction of another reactor. 
89. During the preceding year, his country had 
made great progress in the industrial applications 
of radioisotopes, which were being effectively used 
for thickness and level gauges, and also in radiography 
and tracer techniques. 
90. In addition, the Republic of Korea was successfully 
using radioisotopes for tracing sand movements 
in harbours, exploring underground water, 
detecting water leakage in mines and reservoirs, etc. 
The use of radioisotopes in food preservation was 
also being studied. 
91. His country was developing its own methods 
of solidifying liquid wastes, using high-quality Korean 

115th. PLENARY MEETING 

clay, and combustible wastes were being treated in 
a new type of incinerator. 

92. The Korean Atomic Energy Research Insitute 
was now-coperating with industry with a view to 
promoting wider applications of radioisotopes and 
the results were highly promising. 
93. Hospitals, too, were making greater use of 
radioisotopes. The Radiological Research Institute, 
established in 1963, had made good progress in 
the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, malignant 
tumours and other diseases. Six mobile radiological 
clinics were to be set up during the coming year. 
94. He was happy to report that the Republic 
of Korea was also using radioisotopes in agriculture, 
and a Radiation Agriculture Research Institute had 
been established. The Institute was doing research 
on fertilization, mutation, fruit preservation and 
plant protection. 
95. Like the rest of the world, his country was 
paying great attention to nuclear power production. 
The country's increasing power needs would be 
partly met by a 500-MW nuclear power station, to 
be completed by 19 74, and another 500-MW reactor 
to be completed by 1976. 
96. Regarding the Agency's future policy, he 
thought its training programme should be further 
expanded. 
97. Speaking of the research contracts programme, 
he stated that so far 13 research contracts had been 
concluded between the Agency and Korea; work 
was still being performed under some of those 
contracts. The contracts had given great encouragement 
to Korea's nuclear laboratories and academic 
institutions. The research contract programme was 
greatly appreciated, and should also be further 
expanded. 
98. He suggested that the Agency's Regional 
Office for Asia and the Far East should be enlarged. 
99. In conclusion, he said he believed the regional 
study group meetings in Asia had done much to 
foster the exchange of opinions and information 
between the Member States; his Government was 
going to propose that the Agency sponsor such 
meetings in the capital of the Republic of Korea. 
100. Mr. LEE (China) expressed the regret of the 
Chinese delegation at the passing away of Sir John 
Cockcroft, who had had many friends in the 
Republic of China. 
101. He thanked the Director General and members 
of the Secretariat for their work. 
102. He appreciated the Agency's efforts in arranging 
international and regional conferences and symposia. 
He also valued the work being performed by 
experts recruited from different Member States, and 
welcomed the Agency's participation in desalting 
projects and the interest it was taking in the production 
of better crops of wheat, rice, peanuts, 
soya beans and other plants by means of artificially 
produced mutations. The Agency's work to eradicate 
fruit and livestock pests was also of great 
importance. All those applications of atomic energy 
would have a profound impact on the future wellbeing 
of mankind. 

103. The Republic of China was also making a 
contribution to that work. Chinese agricultural scientists, 
working on mutation experiments with X-rays 
and isotopes, had succeeded in producing improved 
varieties of rice, sugar cane, peanuts and potatoes. 
An FAO-IAEA Research Co-ordination Meeting had 
been held in Taiwan on the Use of Induced Mutation 
in Rice Breeding, and he hoped that more 
meetings or symposia of that kind would follow; the 
Republic of China would be glad to act as host. 
104. Radioisotopes were going to be used to an 
increasing extent in agriculture, medicine, industry 
and food preservation, and nuclear power was also 
coming into its own. All those developments were 
important both for the advanced countries and the 
developing countries. 
105- It seemed to him, however, that the most 
important function with regard to nuclear energy 
was the work of regulating and controlling its 
peaceful uses. If the leading nuclear Powers could 
co-operate, there would be no difficulty in working 
out measures to deal with the intransigents. 

106. The Republic of China was going to start 
building nuclear power plants. The Taiwan Power 
Company had originally planned to begin construction 
of the first plant around 1970. A comparative 
study of conventional and nuclear power had been 
undertaken and, although it had been found that 
there would not be sufficient time for a nuclear 
plant to be completed by 1970, it had been established 
that nuclear power would be economically 
competitive with power generated by other means. 
107. Two siting missions, one headed by an 
Agency official and the other organized by the 
Taiwan Power Company, had reached almost identical 
conclusions, and as a result the first nuclear 
power station, with a capacity of 500 MW(e), would 
probably be completed in 1974. The Taiwan Power 
Company also planned to build three more nuclear 
power plants with the same capacity before 1980. 
So far only one research reactor was available; it 
had an output of 1 MW, was located in the National 
Tsing Hua University and had been used for 
training and research as well as for the production 
of radioisotopes. The purchase of another research 
and materials testing reactor with a larger capacity 
was being considered. 
108. The Republic of China was both a donor 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

and a recipient of technical assistance. Most of the 
assistance China had received had been in the 
form of equipment and the services of nuclear 
experts. His country was also grateful for the fellowships 
and research contracts from which it had 
benefited. The assistance offered by China consisted 
mainly of the services of agricultural scientists, 
textile engineers, electric power engineers and, occasionally, 
consignments of radioisotopes. Admittedly 
the Republic of China was essentially a receiving 
country, but it had accepted a number of people 
for training in radioisotope applications. 

109- His delegation was gratified to note that the 
Agency had started recruiting Chinese nationals in 

its Secretariat. He hoped that would continue. His 
country had tried to send participants to all the 
Agency's international and regional conferences and 
symposia. 

110. He announced that, in response to the Agency's 
request, his country had decided to make a voluntary 
contribution of $10 000 to the General Fund 
for 1968, thereby doublingits previous contribution. 
He hoped the Agency's target of $2 million would 
be reached. 
111. In conclusion, he said his Government would 
support the Agency's programme for the coming 
year. 
The meeting rose at 12.50p.m. 


international Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XI)/OR.116 
13 February 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER - 2 OCTOBER 1967) 


ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 29 September 1967, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the 
Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1966-67 (continued) 
151 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Federal Republic of Germany 1— 14 
Turkey 15— 24 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 25— 51 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 52— 78 
Iran 

79— 95 


Pakistan 

96 — 102 


Bolivia 

103 — 109 


Peru 

110 — 116 


Brazil 

117—129 


Czechoslovakia 

130 — 151 


*. GC(XI)/368. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE ference as an important opportunity for delegations of 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1966-67 all Member States to exchange views with each 
[GC(XI)/355, 355/Corr.l, 366] (continued) other and with the Director General and his staff. 
In the rapidly changing world of nuclear energy it 

1. Mr. PRETSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) seemed appropriate to review international 
noted that the ten years since the Agency's first co-operation within the Agency at frequent inter-
General Conference had been a period of successful vals and to improve it in the light of scientific and 
work carried out in an atmosphere of growing technical progress. 
mutual understanding. Past achievements justified 
3. His delegation would approve the report of 
the hope that the Agency would maintain its 
efficiency in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic the Board of Governors for 1966-67 [GC(XI)/355, 
energy, and his Government was eager to participate 355/Corr.l and 366], and support the Agency's 
in the Agency's activities more than it had been Budget for 1968 [1]; however, he wished to 
able to do in the past decade. comment on both documents. 

2. His Government regarded the General Con-[1] GC(XI)/360. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

4. In 1961the General Conference had requested 
the Board and the Director General to prepare a 
long-terme programme for the Agency's activities [2], 
and he was gratified that the Board was now proposing 
to present to the next General Conference a 
revised long-term programme for the period up to 
1974. Many Member States had drawn up their 
own long-term nuclear programmes, which were 
generally fleXIble and could easily be harmonized 
with the long-term programme proposed by the 
Agency. A five-year programme for the period 196872 
was being prepared in the Federal Republic 
of Germany. 
5. While appreciating the fact that the Agency 
had used its limited resources in a concerted effort 
to help developing countries, he found it regrettable 
that in 1968 it might be possible to meet only 
about one third of the requests for technical 
assistance; it was disturbing to learn that the 
percentage of requests met had declined from 90 % 
in 1959 to 37% in 1967. It therefore seemed 
essential to look for new ways of improving and 
increasing technical assistance. He welcomed the 
fact that a growing proportion of the work at the 
Seibersdorf Laboratory was directed towards meeting 
the needs of developing countries. 
6. The agreement with the Government of 
Monaco on the International Laboratory of Marine 
Radioactivity, which would expire in 1968, should 
be renewed for an adequate period, as recommended 
in 1966 by the Ad Hoc Committee appointed to 
review and advise on its activities. He also welcomed 
the fact that the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste had been awarded a 
substantial grant from a foreign foundation. 
7. The Agency's programme of symposia, panel 
meetings, study tours and training courses had been 
successful. His Government was delighted to act as 
host for the Symposium on Fast Reactor Physics 
and Related Safety Problems to be held in 
Karlsruhe from 30 October to 3 November 1967, 
and was also prepared to support an IAEA/FAO 
training course on the use of isotopes in horticultural 
research, which was to be held in Hanover 
in 1968. 
8. His Government was giving considerable 
attention to the Agency's ambitious project for the 
establishment of the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS). The implementation of that 
project would require a careful step-by-step approach, 
in which the first step might be a detailed systems 
analysis combined with the proposed pilot project. 
It would be essential to gain support from the 
publishers of Nuclear Science Abstracts and to 
co-operate with EURATOM. His Government was 
willing to offer active assistance, and the atomic 
[2] GC(V)/RES/105; the long-term programme is reproduced 
in document INFCIRC/50. 
energy documentation centre in Frankfurt was also 
ready to co-operate. 

9. The Agency's safeguards activities were assuming 
increasing importance in view of the rapidly 
growing number of nuclear power plants and the 
possible conclusion of a treaty on the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. While the General Conference 
was no place for discussion of the problems 
connected with that treaty, it might be useful to 
examine the new tasks in which it might involve 
the Agency, particularly since technical progress 
itself would increase the need for amendments in 
the safeguards provisions. 
10. His Government noted the readiness to place 
their nuclear facilities under international safeguards 
expressed by Poland [3], Czechoslovakia [4], Hungary 
[5] and Bulgaria [6]. Such a welcome move 
should, however, be considered in the context of 
a world-wide non-proliferation treaty. All delegates 
were aware that such a world-wide treaty including 
international safeguarding of source and special 
fissionable materials was at present under negotiation 
by the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament 
in Geneva, and it was to be expected that countries 
not possessing nuclear weapons — like the four 
referred to — would apply effective international 
safeguards under that treaty rather than in the 
context of a special arrangement with the Federal 
Republic of Germany. It might not prove at all 
helpful to divert interest from the world-wide effort 
at a moment when the Geneva negotiations were 
expected to lead to a successful conclusion. He 
would remind delegates that all nuclear activities in 
the Federal Republic of Germany were already 
devoted exclusively to peaceful purposes, and were 
already subject to the all-embracing and effective 
international safeguards system of EURATOM. His 
Government was willing to consider all related 
actions in the framework of the European community. 
It appreciated the move of the four countries 
mentioned, in spite of its limited character, as a 
step towards giving effect to the principle of reciprocity, 
which meant that no country should take 
part in safeguards and inspection which did not 
accept international safeguards like those of the 
Agency, or the equivalent. Equal conditions for the 
peaceful nuclear activities of all countries were 
essential to ensure the world-wide acceptability of 
safeguards. His Government appreciated the fact 
that the Western countries possessing nuclear 
weapons either had already accepted such equality 
or were prepared to accept it in connection with a 
non-proliferation treaty, and it would certainly facilitate 
a world-wide acceptable solution to the safeguards 
problem if all nuclear-weapon countries would 
do the same. It was therefore not the Federal 
Republic of Germany which constituted an obstacle 
to a non-proliferation treaty. 
[3] See document GC(X)/OR.103, para. 56. 
[4] See document GC(X)/OR.104, para. 14. 
[5] See document GC(XI)/OR.112, para.97. 
[6] See document GC(XI)/OR.ll4, para. 16. 

116th. PLENARY MEETING 

11. Two aspects of safeguards control appeared 
to be of particular importance. First, the application 
of safeguards should on no account be allowed to 
hinder research into nuclear energy or the most 
economic use of it. Secondly, from a technical point 
of view control of the flow of fissionable material 
would be sufficient to prevent its diversion for 
weapons production; it would not be necessary to 
control civilian nuclear technology as such. The 
aim should be to concentrate controls at certain 
strategic points and to make them as far as possible 
automatic, thus making it increasingly possible to 
dispense with control by inspectors; that would 
reduce the significance attached to the question of 
who in feet performed the inspection work. His 
delegation noted with satisfaction that the Board's 
report asked for greater effort in research into and 
development of control devices in order to improve 
and simplify safeguards techniques, while ensuring 
that they were tamper-proof and so designed as not 
to hamper die operation of facilities. 
12. His Government was convinced that the 
Agency could make a vital contribution to the 
preservation of peace in the world by preventing 
the misuse of nuclear energy, in close co-operation 
with other organizations serving the same purpose. 
EXIsting control systems which had proved their 
reliability and efficiency should be acknowledged 
in accordance with paragraph 28(d) of the Agency's 
Safeguards System (1965, as Provisionally Extended 
in 1966) [7]. An agreement between the Agency 
and EURATOM would not only ease the Agency's 
burden, but would also ensure that the Member 
States of EURATOM were controlled in accordance 
with the same standards and by the same methods 
as those countries under direct control of 
the Agency. 
13. In connection with nuclear development in 
the Federal Republic of Germany, he wished to 
mention briefly that two German public utility 
groups had decided to construct on the river Weser 
a nuclear power plant of 600 MW using a boilingwater 
reactor, and another of 640 MW with a pressurized-
water reactor near the mouth of the river 
Elbe. Both power plants would be financed 
exclusively by the two groups concerned, with no 
support from the Government. They would produce 
electricity even more cheaply than would plants on 
the same sites using conventional fuel. New reactor 
development would be concentrated on fast-breeder 
and high-temperature reactors, and the funds to be 
made available for the next five-year plan would be 
divided roughly equally between fundamental nuclear 
research and technical development. 
14. To support the Agency's activities for 1968, 
his Government intended to make the General Fund 
a voluntary contribution correspondingto its percentage 
share of the Agency's budget. 
[7] INFCIRC/66/Rev. 1. 
15. Mr. ISTINYELI (Turkey), after welcoming the 
Malaysian delegation, said that the regular increase 
in the Agency's membership showed the growing 
interest aroused throughout the world by international 
co-operation for the peaceful use of atomic 
energy. 
16. There was no doubt that the use of radioisotopes 
and radiation, the applications of which 
were spreading so rapidly, would in the near future 
contribute to the prosperity of mankind. The Agency 
had played, and would no doubt continue to play, 
an imp ortant constructive role in that respect. Already 
in its first ten years, the Agency had achieved 
considerable success in the effective performance of 
its tasks: it had done a great deal to disseminate 
nuclear knowledge by publication, courses and symposia 
and to extend radioisotope applications in 
industry, agriculture, hydrology and medicine; it had 
also encouraged nuclear research by awarding 
research contracts. 
17. Among recent developments which threw an 
interesting light on the future trend of the Agency's 
activities, special reference should be made to Agency 
safeguards. Allthough it could in no way serve as 
an example to countries in other regions, which had 
their own peculiar characteristics, the Treaty on the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
showed the scope of the Agency's future obligations 
and responsibilities in that field. Turkey, which had 
always been in favour of the Agency's Safeguards 
System, noted with interest that the number of 
States accepting Agency safeguards was steadily 
increasing. 
18. At the tenth session ofthe General Conference 
the Turkish delegation had stressed the need for 
the Agency to draw up a model tripartite agreement 
for the transfer of safeguards [8]. That problem was 
still unsolved. Turkey had also already declared its 
willingness to agree in principle that the administration 
of the safeguards at present applied by the 
United States to nuclear material supplied by it to 
Turkey should be transferred to the Agency. The 
competent authorities of the two countries were 
jointly working on the text of an agreement which 
would also be acceptable to the Agency. 
19. Turkey was following with interest the work 
which it was hoped would lead up to a treaty on 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Agency 
would no doubt successfully discharge the new 
obligations which would devolve on it in that regard. 
Turkey considered it necessary to establish an 
effective system of controls, which should constitute 
the very core of such a treaty. It hoped the treaty 
would be universally approved and acceded to. 
Indeed, in its view, the two prerequisites for achieving 
the purposes of the treaty were that it should 
be generally acceded to and that it should include 
an effective system of controls. 
[8] GC(X)/OR.107, para. 61. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

20. There was a great technological gulf between 
Europe and North America, which it was being 
sought to close as much as possible. However, it 
was undeniable that there was a still greater gulf 
between the advanced and the developing countries. 
To close that gulf, a considerable responsibility 
rested both on the advanced countries and on the 
international organizations, particularly the 
specialized agencies of the United Nations and the 
IAEA. Atomic energy was in fact one of the main 
hopes of the developing countries. However, recent 
work had shown that one of the chief problems was 
how to provide the Agency with additional financial 
resources. It was to be hoped that in future the 
Agency would receive a wider measure of support 
from international finance and credit institutions. 
In that connection he noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency had entered into contact with the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
in order to obtain fund for certain projects. 
21. As regards technical assistance, the Agency 
must take the necessary steps to increase the supply 
of equipment, separately from the services of experts, 
and make a greater contribution to training scientists 
in the developing countries. 
22. In general the Agency should undertake activities 
of practical importance, so as to contribute 
rapidly to economic development, rather than engage 
in theoretical research. The Agency must ensure 
that there was no duplication between its activities 
and those of national and other international institutions. 
The Agency and FAO had given a perfect 
example of collaboration by establishing the joint 
FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Food and 
Agriculture. The collaboration established bteween 
WHO and the Agency was another example. In that 
connection, Turkey attached great importance to the 
legal aspects of the irradiation of foodstuffs, and was 
convinced that the Agency could play an important 
role by encouraging international collaboration and 
taking the initiative in that respect. The establishment 
of standard, internationally recognized methods 
of dosimetry for the irradiation of foodstuffs was a 
specific example of international collaboration which 
Turkey would like to see come about in the near 
future. 
23. Turkey had continued to benefit from the 
Agency's technical assistance programmes, receiving 
expert services, equipment and fellowships. Turkish 
scientists had participated in numerous courses and 
symposia of great interest. In addition, an international 
course on radioisotope applications in hydrology 
and a symposium on the use of radioisotopes 
and radiation in irrigation studies and soil physics 
had been held in Turkey. 
24. Finally he thanked the Director General and 
the Agency's staff for the co-operation and understanding 
they had shown in all their dealings with 
his delegation. He also thanked the Federal Government 
of Austria and the Municipality of Vienna for 
their hospitality to the Agency and for their 
generous offer to erect new premises for a 
permanent headquarters. 

25. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said much of the credit for the great 
progress made in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
particularly in nuclear power, was due to the 
Agency. Even more would have been achieved if 
the world had not been shaken by events that 
strained international relations and inflamed the 
political scene. 
26. The Byelorussian delegation joined with those 
who called for the immediate cessation of hostilities 
in Viet-Nam and the withdrawal of Israeli forces 
from the Arab territories they had occupied. His 
own country had suffered greatly from war in the 
past, but now it was able to develop independently 
in the fraternal family of nations in the Soviet 
Union. The Byelorussian SSR greatly valued its 
good fortune and wanted all nations to be independent 
and happy. Its sympathy and good wishes 
were always on the side of nations fighting for their 
independence and national prosperity. 
27. His country was now making successful pro-. 
gress in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and in 
the training of its own scientists, engineers and 
technicians. It also had an Institute of Nuclear 
Power, under the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences. 
t28. The Institute carried out both fundamental 
research on the study of newly observed phenomena 
and applied research on the practical use of newly 
discovered laws. It possessed a 2000-kW atomic 
reactor, two critical assemblies, a number of loops 
for studies under reactor irradiation conditions, and 
numerous test and experimental facilities which were 
used for a wide range of work on the properties of 
new coolants. 

29. The work of equipping several irradiation 
chambers with apowerful, 200 000-Cigamma source 
would be completed during the present year. 
30. His country also had other equipment suchas 
a linear electron accelerator and a betatron, designed 
and used for medical purposes. 
31. Many different studies were being carried out 
using radioactive substances. Aconsiderable number 
of industrial processes in factories and workshops 
were controlled by means of radiation source equipment. 
32. Byelorussian scientists were working together 
with the scientists of other Soviet republics. The 
scientific conferences and symposia held in Minsk 
had became a regular channel of communication 
not only between Soviet scientists but between the 
scientists of many countries. 
33. At the V.I. Lenin Byelorussian State University, 

116th. PLENARY MEETING 

specialists were trained for work on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. The University had a Faculty 
of Nuclear Physics with a qualified professorial 
teaching staff, various laboratories and the necessary 
technical facilities for scientific research. The Faculty 
of Nuclear Physics worked in collaboration with the 
Institute of Nuclear Power of the Byelorussian Academy 
of Sciences. Students from the University had 
the opportunity of doing practical work with different 
types of modern equipment such as a research reactor, 
critical assemblies and the test stands. 

34. All those achievements reflected the 
tremendous development which a socialist republic 
had experienced as a result of the victory of the 
Great October Socialist Revolution, whose fiftieth 
anniversary would be celebrated during the present 
year. 
3 5. Before the Great October Socialist Revolution, 
Byelorussia had been a backward outland of Czarist 
Russia. 
36. Nowadays, Byelorussia had a highly developed 
industry and was becoming an important economic 
area. Since the Second World War dozens of new 
industries had been established, for instance the 
automobile and tractor industries, an electronics 
industry, an oil industry, etc. 
37. In 1966 the Republic's industry had reached 
a level about 64 times higher than in 1913. Before 
the October Revolution Byelorussia had had no 
higher educational establishments or scientific 
research institutes, but now it had 190 scientific 
institutes with a total of more than 20 000 scientific 
workers. There were now 29 higher educational 
establishments in the country, with more than 
116 000 students. The Byelorussian SSR had its 
own Academy of Sciences, with 28 scientific institutes. 
38. Even the short account he had given of this 
country's technical, scientific and cultural development 
sufficed to show that the successful establishment 
of the scientific and technical basis for exploiting 
the newest branches of science, such as the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, was a natural result 
of the great social changes which the nation had 
undergone as a result of the October Socialist 
Revolution. 
39. The work carried out by Byelorussian scientific 
institutes on the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
could be illustrated by many scientific examples. 
The theoretical and experimental studies carried out 
at the Institute of Nuclear Power of the 
Byelorussian Academy of Sciences had shown that 
the use of dissociating gases as coolants might be 
of great thermodynamic importance and that, from 
the thermodynamic point of view, it was quite 
possible to obtain station efficiencies exceeding 
50 % with the parameters attainable by contemporary 
reactors. 
40. -" In radiochemistry, various chemical processes 
were being studied along with the possible industrial 
production of various marketable products obtained 
by the use of radiation. 
41. Referring to the Agency's activities over the 
past year, he thought much useful work had been 
done in training, the dissemination of scientific and 
technical information, the granting of technical 
assistance, etc. He attached great importance to the 
Agency's efforts to try and establish a reliable safeguards 
system. The work done so far showed that 
the Agency could further develop its work in that 
field, and extend it to all the different processes in 
producing and treating fissionable materials. 
4 2. The question of safeguards was directly related 
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. His 
delegation was glad to note that definite progress 
had been made in the work of the Eighteen-Nation 
Committee on Disarmament, which was discussing 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. His delegation 
supported the opinion, already expressed by 
many speakers that it was desirable that a treaty on 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should be 
drawn up without delay and that the Agency should 
be entrusted with the task of ensuring its enforcement. 
That would be a natural extension of the 
Agency's functions and enhance its authority. 
43. Additional work in controlling installations 
and plants in service and the acceptance of new 
control functions would naturally involve some reorganization 
in the Agency and would require an 
increase in staff engaged on control duties. In 
putting those measures into effect, attention should 
be paid to the principle of equal representation of 
the three groups of States into which the world was 
at present divided. 
44. His delegation highly appreciated the initiative 
taken by Poland, Czechoslovakia and the German 
Democratic Republic in offering, already the previous 
year, to submit their atomic installations to Agency 
safeguards if the Federal Republic of Germany 
would do the same. He welcomed the Hungarian 
and Bulgarian statements associating themselves 
with that offer. 
45. His delegation noted the unconstructive 
attitude the Federal Republic of Germany had taken 
on the question. The position was that the Federal 
Republic, though a Member of the Agency, was not 
willing to agree to Agency control functions, while 
the German Democratic Republic, which was not a 
Member of the Agency, was acting in a fully 
constructive manner, in the spirit of the Agency's 
functions and activities. In his view the fruitful 
work of scientists in the German Democratic Republic 
in connection with the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy constituted a convincing argument for acceptance 
of that country as a Member of the Agency. 
46. In view of the present rapid development of 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

science, great importance must be attached to an 
information service. His delegation thanked the 
Agency for its numerous reference publications, 
which were now of practical importance, and welcomed 
the Agency's intention to set up INIS. 

47. Starting in January 1968 the Byelorussian 
Academy of Sciences would publish a new journal 
— Proceedings of the Byelorussian Academy of 
Sciences, Physics and Energetics Series — which 
would also regularly report work on nuclear data. 
Those articles would be systematically forwarded to 
the Agency as they appeared. 
48. He also wanted to draw attention to the 
possible strengthening of the Agency's efforts to 
improve co-ordination with other international 
organizations. 
49. He thanked the Agency's Secretariat for distributing 
reference material on the work of the 
Council for Mutual Economic Aid (COMECON). It 
was to be hoped that the Agency and COMECON 
would co-operate more closely in trying to work out 
an organizational basis for combining the efforts 
of different countries to promote the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. His delegation expressed its 
willingness to co-operate in that work. 
50. In his speech, the Soviet delegate had given 
an example of collaboration between several 
countries in connection with the powerful accelerators 
in operation and under construction in the 
Soviet Union. 
51. In conclusion, the Byelorussian delegation 
wished success to all who were using atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes. It was convinced that the 
Agency would intensify and further develop its 
beneficial work and effectively help the nations of 
the world to benefit without delay from the blessings 
of contemporary science. 
52. Mr. PASECHNIK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said that the annual report of the Board 
of Governors and the Review of the Agency's Activities 
[9] gave a good insight into the Agency's work 
during the past year. From an analysis of those 
documents it was evident that the Agency was 
concentrating its attention more and more, as the 
years went by, on certain activities of special 
importance, among them exchange of experience 
in regard to nuclear power, the use of atomic 
energy for desalting sea-water, the applications of 
isotopes and nuclear radiation to promote worldwide 
prosperity, the provision of assistance to the 
developing countries in training scientists and organizing 
national atomic energy centres, and the further 
development of the Safeguards System. 
5 3. He wished to dwell for a moment on the role 
of atomic energy in economic development. It was 
[9] GC(XI)/362. 
well known that the economy of the Ukraine had 
certain special features, the most important of them 
being an exceptionally rapid rate of industrial growth. 
In the years since the Soviet Government had taken 
power, industrial production in the Ukraine had 
increased 44 times over its pre-revolutionary level. 

54. The Ukraine led Europe in the production of 
pig iron, steel, rolled products, natural gas, iron ore 
and various other raw materials and manufactured 
goods. In per capita production of iron ore, iron 
and steel and sugar, the Ukraine had outstripped 
the most highly developed European countries as 
well as the United States of America, and had taken 
over the first place in the world. 
55. The vigorous growth of industry called for a 
correspondingly rapid development of power. Hitherto 
electric power had been supplied chiefly by 
thermal stations of large capacity equipped with 
large individual generating units. It was, in fact, 
with the large thermal plants that atomic power 
stations would have to compete if they were to 
prove their economic worth. 
56. A second special feature of the Ukrainian 
economy lay in the Republic's unusually rich 
resources of organic fuel. Calculations showed, however 
, that the burning of enormous quantities of 
fossil fuel would not in the long run provide a 
satisfactory solution to the power problems. The 
experience of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, 
France, the United States of America and 
other countries, together with long-term assessments 
of the energy balance in the Ukrainian 
Republic, suggested that atomic power stations 
would be economically justified in the very near 
future, even in the Ukraine. 
57. Thus, it was fair to assume that in the next 
decade atomic energy would be supplying electricity 
to the Republic's power grid. However, the plan 
was not merely to increase power generating capacity 
by setting up nuclear stations, but to construct 
entirely new industrial aggregates, particularly in 
branches of industry requiring large amounts of 
electricity. 
58. Not only were plans being prepared for the 
development of nuclear power, but atomic energy 
was to be used in other fields as well. Particular 
attention was being given to the use of 
radioisotopes and nuclear radiation for the development 
of technological processes and methods of 
automation and control, as well as for the production 
of materials with certain specific properties. 
The uses of radiation in genetics, microbiology 
and chemistry had also made good progress. 
59- Ukrainian scientists were taking an active 
part in the Soviet Union's major atomic energy 
projects, more particularly in research on the physics 
of fast neutron reactors (in which the interactions 
of intermediate-energy neutrons with nuclei were 


116th. PLENARY MEETING 

being studied) and in work on the properties of 
hot plasmas, aimed ultimately at the construction 
of a thermonuclear reactor. 

60. In those activities the scientists of the Ukraine 
were associated with many laboratories throughout 
the world. The Ukraine had taken part in all three 
international conferences on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy [ 10] and participated in the Agency's 
conferences and symposia. It regularly placed the 
nuclear data obtained in its laboratories at the 
disposal' of the Agency's Nuclear Data Unit, and 
supported the creation of INIS. The Ukraine would 
continue to assist the developing countries by lending 
the services of its experts. 
61. Ukrainian scientists would continue their 
work on nuclear structure and on the mechanisms 
of nuclear reactions. 
62. Special importance was being attached to 
theoretical research, and it was for such research 
that an institute for theoretical physics had been 
established in the Ukraine, a centre whose principal 
task lay in the development of nuclear theory and 
the physics of elementary particles. A substantial 
part of the Institute's regular staff would be made 
up of foreign scientists, and they would also be 
represented on its scientific council. The international 
course in theoretical physics recently held 
at Yalta had attracted scientists from all continents 
and could be expected to encourage broader collaboration. 
63. Speaking of ways in which the Agency could 
strenghten its role in promoting the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy, he said that the Ukrainian delegation 
had heard with particular satisfaction of the 
successes other countries had achieved in applying 
atomic energy on a broad scale. 
64. By now one could say with justification that 
all the conditions needed to realize the ideals enshrined 
in the Agency's Statute were at hand. 
65- However, the eleventh session of the General 
Conference was taking place in an atmosphere of 
great international tension. Only recently the world 
had witnessed an aggressive war, unleashed by 
Israel against the Arab States. The situation in 
that part of the world had become extremely 
dangerous, and the conflict might flare up with 
renewed force at any moment. 

66. The aggressive war of the United States of 
America in Viet-Nam was continuing and indeed 
gaining in scope. There was an ever-increasing 
danger that the imperialist circles of the United 
States would see in the use of atomic weapons a 
way out of the impasse in which they found themselves. 
67. The Ukrainian Government was a staunch 
advocate of the prohibition of nuclear weapons and 
believed that eXIsting stocks should be destroyed. 
68. Now, more than ever before, it was vital to 
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. The conclusion 
of a non-proliferation treaty would open up 
more favourable prospects for the further development 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The 
Ukrainian delegation therefore believed that the 
Agency should do everything in its power to 
facilitate the ultimate conclusion of a nonproliferation 
treaty. It welcomed the Director 
General's statement that the Agency was prepared 
to taken upon itself the control and safeguards 
functions under such a treaty [11], and would give 
the Agency its support. 
69. The Director General's declaration in fact 
reflected the standpoint of most delegations. A 
discordant note had been sounded in the speech 
of the Australian delegate, who apparently believed 
the Agency to be a purely technical organization 
whose task consisted in solving the engineering 
problems associated with the construction of nuclear 
installations. But actually the Agency had, according 
to the terms of its Statute, much broader tasks; it 
had to ensure that atomic energy would be used for 
the preservation of peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world, and that it would not be 
used for military purposes. 
70. No less important for the Agency and its 
goals was an initiative taken by the delegation of 
the Soviet Union at the twenty-second session of 
the General Assembly of the United Nations: an 
important and indeed urgent question, that of a 
convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons, 
had been submitted for the Assembly's consideration, 
and at the same time the draft text of such a 
convention had been laid before it. 
71. The extension of the Safeguards System to 
isotope separation plants took on special significance 
as the possibility of a non-proliferation treaty 
came closer. The Ukrainian delegation fully supported 
the proposals that had been made on the 
subject and believed that the Agency should go on 
to work out the technical requirements for the 
extension of the Safeguards System. 
72. It also supported the proposal for a special 
committee on safeguards and control which would 
tackle the whole complex of problems associated 
with the Agency's future supervisory role under 
the terms of a non-proliferation treaty. 
73. In conclusion, he wished to comment briefly 
on certain other aspects of the Agency's work. 
74. The Secretariat's financial situation could not 
[10] Held at Geneva in 1955, 1958 and 1964. [11] GC(XI)/OR.lll,para. 36. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

but cause concern. As was apparent from the documents 
before the Conference, expenditure on the 
Secretariat itself had increased from $3.3 million in 
1962 to $6.7 million in 1968; in other words, it 
had doubled in six or seven years. An increase of 
that magnitude was not commensurate with any 
increase in the volume of the Agency's work in 
fields of real importance to the developing 
countries and to the cause of international collaboration. 


75. It was wrong that such a large proportion 
of the staff should hold permanent contracts, for 
that made it impossible to practise a fair 
geographical distribution. He hoped that the present 
year would be the last one when the Secretariat 
would be without a single staff member from the 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. 
76. The systematic review of the Agency's activities 
carried out by the Board of Governors was 
something of positive value. The comments of 
Member States suggested a number of ways in 
which the effectiveness of the Agency's assistance 
to developing countries could be increased. In the 
opinion of his delegation, assistance to the developing 
countries in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
remained one of the Agency's most important tasks. 
However, it was impossible not to protest against 
assistance to countries which in one way or another 
were engaged in aggressive activities, and which 
shared responsibility for the dangerous increase in 
tension in various parts of the world; he was referring 
to South Viet-Nam, South Korea, Taiwan and 
Israel. 
77. It was also an unsatisfacory state of affairs 
that the principle of universality should continue to 
be violated in the Agency. A number of sovereign 
States were still deprived of their right to be Members. 
Thus, there was still no representative of the 
German Democratic Republic among the delegations 
represented at the General Conference, even though 
the scientists of that country had made an enormous 
contribution to nuclear science. A year earlier, during 
the tenth session of the General Conference, the 
Government of the German Democratic Republic 
had announced its willingness to place its installations 
under Agency safeguards, provided the 
Federal Republic of Germany did the same [12]. 
But the Federal Republic, a Member of the Agency, 
refused to do so and remained its own overseer. 
It was impossible seriously to believe that EURA-
TOM, an organization whose Members belonged to 
the aggressive NATO bloc, could offer any reliable 
guarantee that fissionable materials would be used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes by the non-nuclear 
Powers, in particular by the revanchist circles of 
the Federal Republic of Germany. 
78. By renouncing a policy of discrimination 
towards the German Democratic Republic and other 
countries, the Agency would only increase its prestige 
and influence. 

79. Mr. NABAVI (Iran) said he proposed first 
to make some general comments on the Agency's 
activities as a whole and then to describe briefly 
what had been done and what progress had been 
accomplished in Iran during the past year in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
80. Before going on to the main theme of his 
statement he recalled the very interesting suggestion 
which had been made at the previous session, to 
the effect that Member States should be requested 
to submit annually to the Secretariat, before the 
session opened, reports on the peaceful use of 
atomic energy in their respective countries [13]. 
By adopting that suggestion, which the Director 
General had referred to in his circular letter dated 
30 June 1967, Member States would greatly assist 
the work of the General Conference. Moreover the 
sum total of such reports would provide a valuable 
source of information for all Member States. The 
Iranian delegation associated itself with the suggestion 
and hoped it would meet with general 
support. 
81. The first part of his statement would be 
devoted mainly to certain comments relating to 
General Conference Resolution GC(X)/RES/217, 
by which the Board had been requested to review, 
in consultation with the Director General, the 
Agency's activities with a view to finding ways and 
means of increasing the assistance it gave the developing 
countries, and to submit observations and 
recommendations on that subject to the Conference 
at the present session. 
82. The Board and the Director General had 
discharged that responsibility most creditably, and 
the Secretariat was also to be thanked for the very 
clear and full document it had submitted to the 
Conference on the review. The Iranian delegation 
noted with satisfaction that the review had been 
carried out in an objective and systematic manner 
which had yielded definite results of considerable 
value so that Member States were given a clearer 
picture of the difficulties and problems the Agency 
encountered in carrying out its task. The main 
difficulty was undeniably the inadequacy of funds. 
Iran had always discharged its responsibility vis-avis 
the Agency and, being fully aware of how 
important the financial aspect was, was continuing 
to pay its voluntary contribution as in the past and 
was even thinking of increasing it to the extent that 
it was able. Indeed the necessary steps had already 
been taken to that effect, and the Agency would 
shortly be informed of the result. 
83. The review of the Agency's activities had 
also made it possible to know more clearly the 
views and desires of Member States regarding all 
[12] See document GC(X)/INF/91. [13] GC(X)/OR.107, para. 127. 

116th. PLENARY MEETING 

its activities, and especially those which related to 
the provision of technical assistance to the developing 
countries. Nobody could disregard or minimize 
the assistance which the Agency had consistently 
given the developing countries ever since its 
establishment. Iran for its part had derived ample 
benefit from that assistance, for which it was grateful 
to the Agency. However the Agency's activities, 
in that field as in others, could and should improve 
quantitatively and qualitatively, and it seemed that 
that could only be done in the light of objective, 
systematic and regular reviews of its activities. 

84. To be fully effective, any review of technical 
assistance should be undertaken by the assisting 
organization and the assisted countries. That idea, 
which had been adopted by the Economic and 
Social Council of the United Nations (ECOSOC) 
for projects under the United Nations Development 
Programme, was no less valid for the Agency's 
technical assistance programme. 
85. Indeed, the other aspects of technical assistance 
must not be lost sight of as a result of the 
attention directed to the financial aspect. The Agency 
must use its imagination in order to find the best 
way of improving the amount and the quality of 
technical assistance, for it was by no means certain 
that the present methods were the best. It was 
most desirable that the Agency pay special attention 
to the training of specialized staff. The quality 
and effectiveness of a programme depended very 
largely on the quality of the men who carried it 
out. Attention should therefore be directed primarily 
to the training of medium-grade scientists, 
including technicians. The question of technical 
assistance was bound up with that of co-ordinating 
the technical assistance programmes of the United 
Nations specialized agencies. Such co-ordination, 
on which the success of the programmes very 
largely depended, had been the subject of thorough 
consideration in ECOSOC for many years past. 
Suitable practical steps must be taken in the very 
near future to make that co-ordination, which was 
so important for the developing countries, more 
effective. 
86. It had been rightly pointed out that certain 
developing countries were unaware of the role atomic 
energy could play in the fulfilment of their 
economic and social development plans. That was 
an extremely important point which had rightly 
engaged the Director General's attention. The Iranian 
delegation approved the steps it was proposed 
to take in that regard, as set out in paragraph 20 
of Annex C to the review document. It considered 
that it would be extremely useful for those responsible 
for economic and social planning in the developing 
countries to have talks with Agency staff, and 
any suggestion or proposal made in that regard 
would have its whole-hearted support. It might be 
advisable to ask the Director General to study the 
problem and submit specific suggestions at the 
next session. 
87. The review document contained some very 
sensible comments on the need to set up regional 
centres and to intensify regional collaboration, 
more especially among the developing countries. 
The criteria which, in the Director General's view, 
should govern the establishment of a regional 
centre, which were set out in paragraph 65 of 
Annex C, seemed reasonable, and the Iranian delegation 
endorsed them in their entirety. The growing 
need for water experienced by the countries in the 
region to which Iran belonged was prompting them 
to take advantage of the possibilities offered by 
atomic energy in order to achieve development in 
hydraulics. In that connection he referred to paragraph 
75 of Annex C, which recommended the 
establishment of centres to apply nuclear methods 
of prospecting for water resources, one centre to 
be established in the Middle East. In the light of 
that suggestion the Iranian Government had decided 
to take the necessary steps with a view to 
establishing that regional centre in Iran. An official 
request to that effect would be communicated to 
the Director General and to the Agency, and the 
necessary negotiations would soon be set on foot. 
There were various factors which made Iran the 
most appropriate country in which to locate the 
centre. In the first place the progress it had made 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy would facilitate 
establishment and operation of the centre. No less 
important, there was available a modern building, 
well equipped from the technical and administrative 
points of view, which could easily be adapted to 
meet the centre's requirements. 
88. The Iranian delegation wished to reiterate 
its satisfaction with the results achieved in pursuance 
of General Conference Resolution GC(X)/ 
RES/217. To aid andassistthedevelopingcountries 
in their heroic efforts was the main concern of the 
United Nations and the specialized agencies alike. 
Like other organizations in the United Nations 
family, the Agency could and should play its part in 
that great undertaking, and the review of the 
Agency's activities showed that it was called upon 
to play a much more important role in that field 
than in the past. 
89. He then turned to the progress which had 
been achieved during the past year in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in Iran. 
90. In the first place, the Iranian Government 
had set up by decree the Atomic Energy Council, 
whose task it was to lay down policy governing 
the peaceful utilization of atomic energy and to 
ensure that the decisions were put into effect. The 
Council, which came directly under the Prime 
Minister, was responsible for drawing up the necessary 
plans, arranging with various organizations 
and government departments for them to be put 
into effect, supervising their implementation, drawing 
up the atomic budget for the country, providing 
the necessary funds and facilities for carrying out 
the plans, ensuring the safety of nuclear facilities 
and acting as a link between the Government on 

 GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

the one hand and foreign countries and international 
organizations on the other in atomic energy 
matters. 

91. Secondly, a five-years plan was at present in 
process of being drawn up which would determine 
the scope and range of atomic energy work in the 
light of the benefits which the country could obtain 
from nuclear science and technology. The plan 
envisaged intensified activity in various fields. 
Relatively ambitious in concept, it none the less 
aimed primarily at paving the way for the future 
by establishing the necessary infrastructure for 
genuine nuclear projects of which the country would 
stand greatly in need. 
92. Thirdly, construction of the 5-MW reactor 
at the nuclear centre attached to Teheran University 
had progressed in a very satisfactory manner, and 
preparations for going critical had now begun. 
Start-up was planned for January 1968. The reactor 
offered irradiation and experimental facilities including 
a thermal column, an irradiation chamber for 
gamma rays, various irradiation channels, two hot 
cells and a cell intended solely for medical investigations. 
93. Fourthly, in order to ensure the training of 
scientific and technical personnel, the nuclear centre 
attached to Teheran University had extended and 
broadened the theoretical and practical training 
provided in various fields of nuclear science and 
technology, especially at the post-graduate level. 
It had secured the services of a number of young 
scientists who had recently returned to Iran, and 
hed sent a number of fellows to advanced centres 
abroad to receive the necessary training. 
94. Finally, the use of radioisotopes and radiation 
had been developed. A well-equipped centre 
of nuclear medicine had been established at Shiraz 
University. Considerable improvements had also 
been made in the equipment of a centre on the 
medical applications of radioisotopes attached to 
Teheran University's faculty of medicine. Construction 
of a building housing laboratories for research 
into the use of radioistopes in industry, agriculture 
and medicine had just been completed. With a view 
to training radiation protection staff, a two-year 
course for hospital physicists had been organized at 
the centre with the help of Agency experts. 
Research on the radioactivity of mineral water and 
drinking water had been put in hand and the 
results already obtained had been published. Other 
work on the effectiveness of indigestible material 
as a chemical agent providing protection against 
radiation had been successfully completed and the 
results obtained were encouraging. Work had continued 
on the measurement of natural and artificial 
radioactivity in the atmosphere, rain-water and 
various food products. The ninth course on the 
use of radioisotopes in industry, agriculture and 
medicine had been completed. Twenty-five fellows, 
including doctors of medicine, agronomists, physicists 
and chemists nominated by various organizations 
and institutes, had successfully completed 
the course. So far, nearly 200 fellows had been 
trained in that way. It was intended to improve 
the equipment and staffing of the radiology and 
radiotherapy centres, and some work had already 
begun. As regards the use of radioisotopes in agriculture, 
work on fertilizer uptake had been organized 
with the help of an Agency expert and had 
been under way since early 1967. Twenty fellows 
had successfully completed a two-month summer 
course on nuclear electronics. Preliminary studies 
had been made for the prospecting and evaluation 
of agricultural and hydraulic resources. That work 
would be carried out in stages, beginning in a 
few months. 

95. Relations between the Agency and Iran had 
developed very satisfactorily. An agreement had 
been signed in regard to the assistance which Iran 
was receiving from the Agency in connection with 
the research reactor which would shortly be started 
up in Iran, and the Agency, Iran and the United 
States had also concluded a tripartite agreement 
for the transfer of fuel for the reactor [14]. The 
necessary steps had also been taken to enable the 
Agency to discharge its safeguards responsibilities, 
in accordance with the agreement that had been 
concluded. The technical assistance provided by 
the Agency to Iran had grown during the past 
year. It had mainly taken the form of sending 
experts and equipment and granting long- and 
short-term fellowships. With the growth in Iran's 
atomic energy activities, there was no doubt that 
relations between it and the Agency would develop 
still more in the future. 
96. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) spoke briefly of the 
more recent developments in his country's nuclear 
programme. Pakistan had only limited resources 
to deal with the gigantic problems caused by 
disease, malnutrition, rising population and shortage 
of power, and, like many developing countries, 
had only comparatively recently realized the benefits 
to be derived from the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in its economic development programme. 
97. The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission 
was engaged both in harnessing atomic energy for 
the production of electricity, in accordance with its 
10-15 year plan, and in using radioisotopes and 
radiation sources, primarily in agriculture but also 
in industry and medicine. Its nuclear power plant, 
at Karachi, was scheduled for completion by 1970, 
and reactor feasibility studies were also under way 
in East Pakistan. The two radioisotope application 
centres were engaged in developing new varieties 
of various crops and work on disinfestation of 
stored food grains and preservation of fruit and 
vegtables. 
98. In January 1967 the Commission had acted 
[14] INFCIRC/97. 

116th. PLENARY MEETING 

as host to an International Seminar in Low-energy 
Nuclear Physics at Dacca. 

99. Turning to the achievements and shortcomings 
of the Agency, he stressed that they had to be 
judged in the light of the objectives enshrined in 
its Statute. He recalled that the Director General 
himself had stated at the preceding session of the 
General Conference that experience gained since 
the Agency's foundation had suggested the need 
for modification of those objectives and possible 
revision of the Statute [15]. His delegation was 
keenly interested in knowing more about the suggested 
modifications, and wished to see more 
emphasis placed on the responsibility of the developed 
countries to asist the Agency in achieving its 
objectives. He felt that that was important since 
the initial hope that sufficient funds would be provided 
by them to meet the legitimate needs of the 
needs of the developing countries had not been 
fulfilled and funds made available under the 1967 
budget would only cover one fifth of the monetary 
value of the requests submitted in 1966 for assistance 
in the form of experts and equipment. 
100. On the subject of the assignment of experts, 
he considered that the developing countries definitely 
required more equipment than expert services, 
and that equipment only should be supplied whenever 
trained local scientists were available. Moreover, 
short-term assignments of really outstanding 
experts would achieve the same results as one- or 
two-year assignments of second-rate ones. 
101. Turning to the activities of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics, with which Pakistan 
had been closely associated from the start, he noted 
with gratification that its work had been 
outstandingly successful and that consideration was 
being given to its establishment on a more permanent 
basis. 
102. He then pledged Pakistan's wholehearted 
support for the future activities of the Agency. 
103. Mr. VELTZE MICHEL (Bolivia) said that 
the Bolivian Nuclear Energy Commission now consisted 
of three departments, dealing with applications 
in medicine and agriculture, scientific documentation 
and fellowships, and nuclear physics and 
engineering, respectively. 
104. In medicine, apart from the routine work of 
cancer diagnosis and goitre treatment, the third 
course on radioisotope applications was being held 
at national level in co-operation with staff and 
equipment from the Brazilian Atomic Energy 
Institute. 
105. In agriculture, the main problem was to 
combat the fruit fly, which was responsible for an 
annual loss to the country of $5 million; the fruit 
[15] GC(X)/OR.101, para.33. 
fly was a pest not only in Bolivia but in the whole 
of Latin America. Bolivia had asked the Agency for 
assistance, and the first stage of a project was now 
under way. In the same connection, an agreement 
had been signed with Peru whereby the latter, 
recognizing the seriousness of the problem, had 
placed a caesium source at Bolivia's disposal for 
irradiating fruit fly pupae. 

106. The department of scientific documentation 
and fellowships was responsible for collecting documentation 
on nuclear energy and placing it at the 
disposal of all interested persons, and also awarded 
fellowships to Bolivian citizens for training in the 
nuclear field. His Government wished to thank the 
Agency for the efficient way in which applications 
for fellowships were handled. Offers had also been 
received from other Latin American countries: Venezuela, 
for instance, was making a number of fellowships 
available to Bolivia for 1968. 
107. The department of nuclear physics and engineering 
was engaged principally in prospecting for 
radioactive minerals, and in that field, too, assistance 
was forthcoming from the Agency in the form of 
an expert who would spend three months in Bolivia. 
In nuclear chemistry technical assistance was also 
being received in the form of equipment and expert 
services. 
108. Bolivia was making efforts to work in colboration 
with other countries, as the Bolivian Nuclear 
Energy Commission realized that the Agency's funds 
were limited; his country therefore tried to pursue a 
regional policy, avoiding any kind of programme 
duplication within the region. Bolivia was also 
keenly interested in participating in more conferences, 
courses and symposia, but frequently could 
not be represented because of the heavy travel 
expenses involved. For that reason his Government 
would be gratified if regional programmes 
in Latin America could be extended and if more 
scientific meetings could be held in Latin American 
countries, which were united by language, customs, 
traditions and ideals. 
109. Finally, he wished to refer briefly to the 
Agency's responsibilities. At the preceding regular 
session of the General Conference many delegates 
had spoken of the progress made by their countries 
in nuclear energy, and a chronological review had 
been made of the duties and responsibilities that 
had fallen to the Agency since its establishment. 
At the start of the second decade of the Agency's 
life, it could be seen that every year brought new 
tasks. For example, there was now the possibility 
that the Agency would exercise control over atomic 
weapons. As time went on, the Agency would not 
only constitute an organ for regulating progress in 
the nuclear sciences, but would assume an enormous 
responsibility of a moral character. For many 
nations of the world the Agency would constitute 
their main hope of survival. The rate at which the 
world's population was increasing, the natural 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

catastrophes which hampered increased agricultural 
production and better exploitation of the earth's 
riches, and the ease with which malignant diseases 
spread in areas of malnutrition could only be combated 
by the "peaceful atom". 

110. Mr. CORREA MILLER (Peru) said that Peru 
had received technical assistance from the Agency 
for its programmes on radiological protection, distribution 
of radioisotopes and agricultural applications 
of radioisotopes. Visits had been received 
from missions to study the possibility of using 
nuclear power for desalting in order to relieve the 
water shortage in some arid regions on the coast, 
to investigate the prospects for using radiation to 
eliminate bacteria from fish meal, and to assess 
the advisability of installing a research and training 
reactor in Peru. 
111. Peruvian scientists had attended Agency 
courses and symposia, and a symposium on the 
use of nuclear methods in prospecting for and exploiting 
mineral resources was to be held in Peru; 
he cordially invited Member States to send representatives 
to attend that symposium in Lima in 
November 1968. 
112. The Peruvian Atomic Energy Board had 
received from the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission the generous gift of a 20 000-Ci 
caesium-137 irradiator which had been installed in 
Lima for use in an insect eradication programme, 
with particular reference to the Mediterranean fruit 
fly. That programme was of great economic 
importance not only to Peru but also to neighbouring 
countries suffering from the pest. 
113. The French Government had presented to 
Peru an item of very modem equipment which had 
been assigned to the environmental radioactivity 
department. 
114. In the medical applications of radioisotopes 
Peru had made great advances, which were fully on 
a level with those of countries at the same stage of 
scientific and technological development. 
115. In the near future an extensive uranium 
prospecting programme would be initiated in the 
eastern region of Peru, an area which until very 
recendy had been isolated but was now easily accessible 
; the first studies had yielded very satisfactory 
results. 
116. As regards international relations in the field 
of atomic energy, Peru had signed bilateral treaties 
with Brazil and Israel, and hoped soon to conclude 
technical co-operation agreements with Argentina, 
Chile, Columbia, Ecuador, France, Mexico and Spain. 
117. Mr. COSTA RIBEIRO (Brazil) welcomed 
Malaysia to the Agency. 
118. The Brazilian Government wished to thank 
the Austrian Government for its offer to provide 
land and construct the building for the Agency's 
permanent headquarters. It also wished to express 
to the Director General and the entire Secretariat 
its appreciation for their excellent work throughout 
the past year. 

119. The Brazilian Government had on several 
occasions stated its policy with regard to nuclear 
energy, considering it to be of great importance 
both for the development of the country and for 
the internal safety and progress of Latin America 
as a whole. A basic feature of Brazil's policy was 
that it did not wish to receive or manufacture 
nuclear arms, an intention which it had demonstrated 
by signing the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America, which made a clear 
distinction between the military uses of atomic 
energy, which were prohibited under the Treaty, 
and the peaceful uses, which opened up a vast 
range of possible applications from which Latin 
America could benefit. 
120. In application of its policy, and in spite of 
its limited resources, the Brazilian Government had 
doubled the budget of the National Nuclear Energy 
Commission for 1968 and was studying the possibility 
of making even larger allocations. Brazil 
was intensifying its uranium prospectingprogramme, 
for which it was trying to get as much international 
co-operation as possible, in order to be able to 
make accurate estimates of its uranium reserves. 
121. Nuclear power production was of great interest 
to Brazil. A joint committee of the National 
Nuclear Energy Commission and the State Electric 
Power Company had recently recommended to the 
Government the construction of a 500-MW(e) 
nuclear power plant which would go into operation 
in 1975 in the south-central part of the country, 
where all the necessary technical conditions were 
fulfilled. It had not yet been decided what type of 
reactor should be used in that plant, but Brazilian 
technologists and industrial concerns would take 
part as far as possible in its construction. 
122. The possibility of constructing reactors in the 
country was being considered. Designs were to be 
prepared and aprototype constructed for the purpose. 
123. No decision had been reached on the construction 
of reactors for desalting and power production. 
Such reactors could produce the fresh water needed 
by arid areas of the country, e.g. the north-east, 
but such areas did not and would not for some 
time have sufficiently large power requirements to 
justify their construction. However, it was quite 
possible that the demand would ultimately materialize 
as a result of the new applications of 
electricity in the chemical industries. 
124. Brazil was very interested in the development 
of breeder reactors, especially those using thorium, 

116th. PLENARY MEETING 

since the country possessed large deposits of that 
element. 

125. The range of radioisotope applications in 
Brazil was being extended and the necessary work 
was under way for doubling the power of the Sao 
Paulo reactor and expanding its installations so 
as to increase and diversify radioisotope production. 
126. It was not inappropriate to refer briefly to 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Brazil had been working since 1955 
to reach its present stage of nuclear development 
and, to that end, it had concluded co-operation 
agreements with other Member States of the Agency. 
Mention should also be made of the Agency's 
efforts to increase technical assistance to the developing 
countries, including Brazil. His delegation 
was fully convinced that the lofty objectives of the 
Agency would gradually be achieved as scientific 
and technical co-operation between Member States 
became more effective. The present meeting in 
Vienna was a real contribution to the development 
of friendship, understanding and exchanges between 
all countries which saw in the development of 
nuclear techniques a source of prosperity and wellbeing 
for their peoples. 
127. In addition to its eXIsting programmes, the 
Agency's future activities would provide for new 
forms of co-operation and mutual assistance between 
Member States. One of them, the new INIS project, 
was of real value to all countries. The fact that the 
project was to be implemented gradually and 
cautiously would help to dispel some of the concern 
to which its huge scale had given rise. 
128. Brazil considered that major conferences on 
the peaceful use of atomic energy and its 
importance for development, held under the sponsorship 
of the United Nations and other international 
organizations such as the Agency, might 
appropriately include a fourth Geneva Conference, 
in two or three years' time, in line with General 
Assembly Resolution 2056(XX). The United 
Nations might study other possibilities in collaboration 
with the Agency. It might, for instance, be 
appropriate to take advantage of regular meetings 
of the General Conference to organize atomic energy 
conferences similar to those at Geneva, but on a 
smaller scale and of more limited scope. 
129. Brazil sincerely hoped that the Agency, in 
the service of all Member States, would continue 
fulfilling the valuable aims of its Statute. 
130. Mr. NOVOTNY (Czechoslovakia) said that 
his delegation approved of the work of the Agency, 
its Secretariat and the Director General over the 
past year, and in particular of the progress which 
had been made in developing the Safeguards System. 
The Agency was now essentially ready to apply 
safeguards to experimental and power reactors and 
to other types of nuclear facilities, and had already 
acquired valuable practical experience of inspection. 

131. The Agency must be ready to meet the task 
which might be entrusted to it of discharging a 
safeguards and inspection function under the treaty 
for non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. His delegation 
supported the proposal made by the Soviet 
Union that an ad hoc committee should be set up 
to study the extension, improvement and organization 
of the Agency's safeguards and control machinery. 
As its contribution to that activity, Czechoslovakia 
was studying methods of applying safeguards to a 
specific power reactor project. 
132. His delegation attached great importance to 
the INIS project which, in its scope and technical 
sophistication, extending to the latest computer 
techniques, could serve as an example for an international 
information exchange system, aiding progress 
in all the participating States. Czechoslovakia 
was making the necessary preparations for the early 
creation of a national information centre which 
would collaborate with all the appropriate institutes 
and undertakings, and in particular with INIS. 
133. The eXIsting ways of exchanging information, 
including conferences and symposia, meetings, training 
courses and other forms of direct contact 
between specialists, had given excellent results. 
134. His delegation felt that the Agency's coordinating 
activity in regard to reactor safety and 
health protection was also developing successfully. 
135. Good results had been obtained in the developing 
countries in the use of radioisotopes in agriculture, 
medicine, sterilization of food products, etc. 
136. His delegation shared the view that the 
Agency's effort to promote the practical application 
of atomic energy in various fields were of value to 
all Member States. However, not all the possibilities 
had yet been exhausted, as was shown by the 
review of the Agency's activities which had been 
undertaken in accordance with General Conference 
Resolution GC(X)/RES/217. His delegation hoped 
that the projects proposed and recommendations 
made by the developing countries in the course of 
that review would be taken into account in developing 
the new long-term programme and the 
programme for the next two years. 
137. Czechoslovakia was participating as fully as 
it could in furthering the Agency's activities in close 
collaboration with it, as well as with COMECON, 
the Joint Nuclear Research Institute at Dubna and 
other organizations. 
138. He would touch briefly on some of the most 
outstanding work of Czechoslovak scientists in 
nuclear energy in the course of the past year. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

139. In 1966 construction had begun of a zeroenergy 
heavy-water reactor having a core 3500 mm 
in diameter and 4000 mm high with a variable 
lattice pitch. Its initial programme would be made 
up of experiments for the second Czechoslovak 
atomic power station. 
140. Czechoslovak scientists working at the Joint 
Nuclear Research Institute at Dubna had developed 
a rapid new "gas chemistry" method, with the aid 
of which it had been possible to isolate the element 
104 and separate it from the other transuranium 
elements. 
141. Another achievement was the experimental 
work on determining the source of infarcts using 
internal doses of a new substance labelled with 
mercury-20 3 or mercury-197. 
142. He felt bound to repeat yet again that contrary 
to the principle of universality, certain States 
having a legal right to do so had not yet been able 
to take their place in the Agency. The fact that the 
German Democratic Republic, which had achieved 
great successes as regards nuclear power and in the 
production and use of stable and radioactive isotopes, 
was not a Member of the Agency, was indubitably 
a considerable hindrance to the Agency's activities. 
The communication from the German Democratic 
Republic sent to the General Conference in 1966 
bore testimony to that coun try's constructivepolicies, 
its interest in the Agency's work and its support of 
the Agency's aims. There must also be a basic 
change in the present representation of China, which 
was unrealistic. 
143. With regard to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, his delegation in principle shared the 
view of the developing countries that preference 
should be given to projects of urgent importance to 
their economic development; they themselves should 
be able to determine the balance between the supply 
of equipment and the provision of experts. 
144. His delegation felt it was regrettable that the 
Agency did not make a general economic assessment 
of the technical assistance provided. In view 
of the increasing requirements of the developing 
countries, Czechoslovakia had increased its contribution 
to the General Fund to 150 000 Czechoslovak 
crowns, and hoped it would be used principally to 
purchase Czechoslovak equipment for technical assistance 
projects. 
145. His delegation agreed with those delegates 
who had expressed serious concern at the rapid 
growth in the Agency's budget. He fully recognized 
the need for ensuring that new tasks and obligations 
already incurred were adequately covered, but felt 
that not everything had been done to prevent unwarranted 
increases in administrative expenses, 
which were already so high. 
146. The Agency's role in regard to safeguards and 
inspection was becoming exceedingly important. 

147. The draft treaties for the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, presented to the Eighteen-Nation 
Committee on Disarmament in Geneva by the 
representatives of the Soviet Union and the United 
States, merited active support. It was clear from 
the statements of the Director General [ 16] and the 
President [17] that when the treaty was concluded 
the Agency would probably be entrusted with control 
functions. His delegation fully shared and supported 
that point of view. The fact that the Agency's 
inspection system had already been accepted by a 
large number of countries, and had recently been 
mentioned in the preamble to the Treaty on the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, 
clearly showed that the Agency could cope with that 
task. His delegation felt that the Agency could and 
should take upon itself the task of inspection when 
the non-proliferation treaty became a reality. 
148. Together with Poland, Czechoslovakia had at 
the previous session of the General Conference 
declared its readiness to submit its nuclear facilities 
to Agency inspection. The delegate of the Federal 
Republic of Germany had now, after a year, welcomed 
those declarations and those of Hungary and 
Bulgaria, which had since been joined to it. 
Unfortunately, the Federal Republic itself had not 
followed that example. 
149. The unwillingness of the Federal German 
Government to submit West German nuclear facilities 
to Agency inspection was linked with the 
negative attitude it adopted with regard to the 
conclusion of an agreement on the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, and with the efforts of certain 
groups in the Federal Republic to obtain access 
to nuclear arms. 
150. His delegation felt that the danger of the 
misuse of nuclear energy could not be disregarded 
at a time when United States aggression in Viet-
Nam was constandy increasing and the occupation 
of Arab territories, like the other consequences of 
Israeli aggression had not yet been brought to an 
end. The threat to peace in those and other parts 
of the world could be removed only by unremitting 
efforts, to which the Agency too must make its 
contribution. 
151. The Agency and its Member States were 
faced with problems whose solution was of great 
importance to the cause of world peace. He was 
convinced that the Agency's future activity, the 
constant efforts made to make it more effective 
and the constructive co-operation of States with 
one another and with the Secretariat would promote 
[16] See document GC(XI)/OR.lll, paras 33-36. 
[17] Ibid., para. 9

116th. PLENARY MEETING 

not only the further development of the peaceful 
use of atomic energy, but also the development of 
science and technology, the raising of living standards 
for the peoples of the world, an increase in mutual 
understanding and the attainment of world peace. 

Czechoslovakia, in accordance with its policy of 
peaceful international co-operation, would continue 
to collaborate actively with the Agency and cooperate 
to the fullest extent in helping it to carry 
out its mission. 

The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(XI)/OR.117 
13 February 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER - 2 OCTOBER 1967) 

ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 2 October 1967, at 10.50 a.m. 


President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1966-67 (continued) 1 — 33 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Chile 1 — 11 
Ghana 12 — 20 
Iraq 21 — 28 

Statement by the Director General 29—33 

3(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 34— 47 

11 Opening date of the twelfth regular session 48 — 49 

12 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 50 — 70 

GC(XI)/368. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE priate method would have to be devised for extend-
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1966-67 ing the scope of the Agency's Safeguards System 
[GC(XI)/355, 355/Coir.l, 366] (continued) (1965, as Provisionally Extended in 1966) [1]. He 
welcomed the fact that Mexico had placed all its 

1. Mr. SERRANO FERNANDEZ (Chile) said nuclear energy activities under Agency control and 
that his country had signed the Treaty for the was sure that the Agency would set up adequate 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, control Machinery in all such instances. 
to which it attached great importance. Chile was a 
profoundly peaceful country and had signed the 3. That this country supported international 
treaty in the belief that it would help to bring about co-operation in nuclear energy activities was dethe 
prohibition of all atomic weapons. monstrated by the fact that it had requested the 
Agency to ovaluate its nuclear energy development 

2. With a view to ensuring that the control and 
safeguards procedures were fully effective, an appro-[1] INFCIRC/66/Rev. 1. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


 GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

plans. The Government and the National Nuclear 
Energy Commission collaborated closely in both 
pure scientific research and practical work. A National 
Nuclear Research Centre had recently been set up. 

4. Some persons considered that the technical 
as sistance provided by the Agency and the procedures 
followed were satisfactory and that the amount of 
assistance provided could be increased only if the 
voluntary contributions of the developing countries 
— which were the very ones which should receive 
assistance — were increased. Chile, on the other 
hand, believed that the procedures followed could 
be greatly improved and that the amount of technical 
assistance provided could be considerably 
increased. It had decreased over the past few years 
as a result of the growth in the Agency's membership, 
which had not been accompanied by a corresponding 
increase in the funds available. 
5. The Agency's technical assistance programmes 
were examined and approved by the Board of 
Governors, i.e. by the relatively more advanced 
countries, which were permanently represented on 
the Board. That was one of the many reasons why 
it would be necessary to revise the Statute, which 
did not ensure that representation on the Board 
was realistic and universal in character. As a result, 
the technical assistance given to the less-developed 
countries was not sufficient to meet their needs. 
There was a tendency to grant much more 
assistance to comparatively advancedcountries; that 
was detrimental to the interests of the less-developed 
countries as the funds available for technical assistance 
did not keep pace with requirements. The 
reason frequently given —that the less-developed 
countries were less able to take advantage of technical 
assistance — could result in a distribution 
based on the principle that the more advanced 
countries should be helped at the expense of those 
more in need of assistance, precisely because they 
were less developed. 
6. In order to ensure that the allocation of 
assistance was equitable, it should be based more 
on the requirements of the less-developed countries, 
thus avoiding a further widening of the gap between 
the "rich" and the "poor". 
7. The Director General had mentioned his 
concern at the growing gap between the advanced 
countries, the super-Powers and the developing 
countries of the "third world" in Asia, Africa and 
Latin America [2]. Decisive steps would have to be 
taken to prevent the gap becoming a permanent 
one, which would lead to an irreparable division 
of the world. If far-sighted action was taken to 
make its'benefits widely available, nuclear energy 
could constitute the best means of helping those 
countries which needed inmost urgently for their 
development, reducing discord and antagonism and 
closing the deep gulf between the most highly 
industrialized and the developing countries. 

8. With regard to technical assistance, he also 
wished to raise the question of the relation between 
experts and equipment, which had been widely 
discussed. Experts were frequently sent whenever 
equipment was provided. Sometimes the expert 
was not needed by the receiving country, because 
the equipment did not call for his services. Moreover, 
the expert and the equipment often did not 
arrive together, through no fault of the national 
authorities, with the result that the assistance provided 
was not used to the best advantage. The 
ratio between equipment and experts should not 
be fixed, but should be adapted to suit each case. 
In making those comments, his aim was to bring 
about a further improvement not only in the administration 
of technical assistance, but in all the 
Agency's activities. 
9. Chile had made a voluntary contribution to 
the General Fund which was proportionally larger 
than its assessed contribution to the Agency's budget, 
but its effort was not matched by the benefits it 
obtained in the form of technical assistance; that 
was also true of other Member States. In urging 
that the Board should be made more representative, 
Chile also had in mind the entire administrative 
structure of the Agency. Various countries, such as 
his own, were not represented on the senior staff, 
and that situation would have to be remedied if 
universal representation were to be achieved. 
10. His delegation would leave the Conference in 
an optimistic frame of mind. Governments were 
gradually coming to the belief that the Agency 
would eventually control nuclear activities throughout 
the world. It might not be long until the 
Agency played the most important role in human 
destiny: that of the true guardian of peace and 
progress. 
11. Asa Latin American country, Chile was proud 
of having been one of the first to entrust 
the Agency with responsibility for exercising control 
and applying safeguards under a continental agreement 
on the prohibition of nuclear arms. It hoped 
that its example would be followed by all countries. 
12. Mr. QUARTEY (Ghana) said that he would 
like to express his warm appreciation of the work 
done by the Director General, the Board and the 
Agency's Secretariat over the past year in pursuance 
of General Conference Resolution GC(X)/ RES/ 217 
calling for a review of the Agency's activities and 
had studied the resulting review document [3]. 
He had listened with interest to the statement 
made to the General Conference by the Director 
General [4], and would like to make a number 
of comments. 
[3] GC(XI)/362, 362/Add.1 and 2. 
[2] GC(XI)/OR.lll,para. 39. [4] C-C(XI)/111, paras 26-63. 

117th. PLENARY MEETING 

13. First, the delegation of Ghana wished to 
underline the importance of fleXIbility in fulfilling 
the principal objective of the technical assistance 
programme, which had been defined as "the transfer 
of knowledge and skills". In practice "the transfer 
of knowledge and skills" had always involved 
the provision of experts' services, yet, in many 
cases, what developing countries needed in order 
to make full use of the available knowledge and 
skills was equipment, not experts. The delegation 
of Ghana believed that the Agency should be able 
and willing to provide equipment, without necessarily 
requiring any formal relationship between 
the provision of equipment and the provision of 
experts. 
14. In that connection, he urged that serious 
attention be given to draft resolution GC(XI)/ 
COM. 1/105 co-sponsored by Ghana, which had 
been approved by the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee [5], since he believed that its 
implementation could be expected to make the 
Agency's technical assistance programme more 
fleXIble and, hence, more useful to Member States 
requesting assistance. 
15. There was a wideninggap betweentheamount 
available to the Agency for technical assistance and 
the growing needs of the developing countries and 
Ghana supported the call for voluntary contributions 
from Member States to enable the Agency to fulfil 
its relevant obligations. He was therefore happy to 
be able to announce that Ghana would make a 
voluntary contribution for 1968 proportional to its 
assessed contribution, as recommended by the Board. 
16. Secondly, his delegation believed that the 
work being done at the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste was both useful and 
in line with the Agency's objectives. Consequently, 
it considered that the Agency should not only 
support the Centre in its present form, but should 
also encourage and assist, to the maXImum extent 
practicable, the further development of the Centre 
and its programme. To ensure steady progress, the 
Centre should be financed from the Regular Budget 
of the Agency, instead of from uncertain voluntary 
contributions. In spite of the scale of financial 
support involved, it was incumbent on the Agency 
to ensure the Centre's rational operation and development, 
so long as it remained an Agency responsibility. 
17. Finally, with regard to the organization of 
the Secretariat, he noted the Director General's 
expressed intention of recruiting staff from as wide 
a range of countries as possible [6]. For reasons 
which had been stated by the delegation of Ghana 
at successive sessions of the Conference, his country 
believed special efforts should be made to recruit 
personnel from the developing countries for the 
[5] GC(XI)/COM.1/OR.78, paras 40 and 41. 
[6] GC(XI)/OR.lll, para 41. 
Secretariat. It did not accept the view that such 
action would lower the standards of the Secretariat. 
On the contrary, it was possible and indeed necessary 
to associate the developing countries closely 
with the work of the Secretariat, so that the people 
of those countries could develop a sound understanding 
of the work of the Secretariat and of the 
Agency and benefit from their experience. The 
Agency should organize a training scheme under 
which personnel from the developing countries could 
work in the Secretariat for short periods to study 
the routine of work there and understand the problems 
involved and skills required. 

18. He next wished to refer to the Statute, which 
he believed contained some anomalies. Revision of 
the Statute would be as useful as the recent review 
of the Agency's activities. He noted, for example, 
that the Board had again designated the Republic 
of South Africa as one of its Members, on the 
grounds that it was the Member State "most 
advanced in the technology of atomic energy" in 
Africa and the Middle East. Even if it were accepted 
that South Africa was the Member State most 
advanced in that respect in the area, the delegation 
of Ghana would urge the Agency to take cognizance 
of the fact that, owing to its political policies, 
the Republic of South Africa was not able to perform, 
vis-a-vis the other Member States in the 
area, the functions which the most advanced Member 
State was expected to perform in relation to 
the purposes and objectives of the Agency. South 
Africa had declared it willingness to co-operate 
with neighbouring States in atomic energy activities 
and the delegation of Ghana was prepared to concede 
that the Government of South Africa genuinely 
sought that co-operation, but until South Africa 
changed it policies such co-operation was impossible. 
In any case, in his delegation's opinion, even 
the assumption that South Africa was the Member 
most advanced in the technology of atomic energy 
in Africa and the Middle East was open to question. 
His delegation hoped, therefore, that the Board 
and the General Conference would see their way 
to adopt a policy in that connection which, while 
respecting the scientific criteria embodied in the 
Statute, would help to promote the objectives of 
the Agency. 
19. In spite of the difficulties which he had mentioned, 
Ghana considered that the Agency had been 
extremely useful. His country had received, and 
continued to receive, a great deal of assistance 
from the Agency for its atomic energy programme. 
The past year had been spent on a reappraisal of 
that programme, in order to achieve the balance 
between it and other important areas of national 
development necessary to ensure the most profitable 
use of the limited funds and scientific manpower 
available. Work on radioisotope applications 
in medicine and agriculture continued to be the 
main areas to which efforts in Ghana were being 
devoted. The relevant programme had been supported 
by the award of research contracts and 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

training fellowships by the Agency. Some of the 
personnel trained under those fellowships and others 
trained by the Ghana Energy Commission itself 
had already returned home to make their contribution 
to the national effort in the peaceful applications 
of atomic energy. 

20. The delegation of Ghana noted with pleasure 
that the Agency had already accomplished much. 
It wished to pay a special tribute to the memory of 
Sir John Cockcroft. It recalled with admiration 
Sir John's pioneering contribution to the development 
of nuclear science and to the establishment 
of the Agency. It also recalled with deep gratitude 
Sir John's invaluable advice and assistance to the 
Ghana Government and the Ghana Atomic Energy 
Commission. So great was its sense of loss, so 
deep its sense of indebtedness, that it ventured to 
express the hope that the Agency and the international 
scientific community would, before very 
long, find a means of commemorating Sir John 
Cockcroft and his great work. 
21. Mr. El-HA SHIMI (Iraq) said he had represented 
his country at a number of international conferences 
but had never attended one at which the 
atmosphere was so harmonious and the business 
was conducted so smoothly as at the present session 
of the General Conference. 
22. His delegation, believing as it did that the 
maXImum number of countries should share the 
benefits to be derived from membership of the 
Agency, welcomed the new Members and hoped their 
participation would make a valuable contribution 
to its work. 
23. At the last session of the General Conference 
his delegation had expressed its views regarding 
the type of asistance needed most by developing 
countries and had called for an equitable distribution 
of technical assistance and a wider geographical 
distribution of posts in the Agency [7]. 
24. His delegation was grateful to the Board, 
the Director General and the Secretariat for the 
excellent review of the Agency's activities, and the 
developing countries were eagerly looking forward 
to the implementation of the recommendations 
made. Such a periodic review was very useful, since 
it enabled the Agency to maintain a consistently 
high standard of efficiency. 
25. Technical assistance should be distributed in 
such a way as to meet the real needs of developing 
countries. His delegation would like to appeal to 
Member States, particularly themoreadvancedcountries, 
to increase their voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund with a view to achieving the target 
of $2 million. In that connection, the Agency should 
[7] GC(X)/OR.108, paras 56-63. 
also seek financial assistancefrom other international 
organizations, such as the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development and the United 
Nations Industrial Development Organization. 

26. He welcomed the extension and successful 
application of the Agency's Safeguards System and 
believed that its future extension should keep pace 
with the growth in the Agency's other activities. In 
that connection, his delegation agreed, in principle, 
that the conclusion of a treaty on the non-proliferation 
of atomic weapons was highly desirable. 
27. Iraq was making the fullest possible use of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Work relating 
to the medical applications of atomic energy with a 
view to raising the standard of health was being 
successfully carried out, and the competent bodies 
were drawing up and implementing plans for its 
use in agriculture. His country was also keenly 
interested in developing the use of isotopes and 
radiation in industry and hoped the Agency would 
devote more attention to that subject in the future. 
28. He would like to refer briefly to social and 
political problems, since they inevitably had a bearing 
on technical matters. The Secretary-General of 
the United Nations and the Director General of the 
Agency had both expressed concern at the hostilities 
and unrest in certain parts of the world [8], which 
resulted in devastation, human suffering and the 
disruption of economic life. The lowering of moral 
and ethical standards seemed to presage the decline 
of the West, of which Spengler had written, and the 
social theories of Hobbes and Machiavelli now found 
favour rather than Rousseau's "contrat social", which 
was based on the consent of the governed. In the 
light of those unfortunate developments, his delegation 
appealed to all people who wished to 
preserve civilization to combine their efforts to 
maintain world peace [9]. 
29. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said he was 
gratified by the spirit of tolerance and understanding 
which had prevailed at the Conference. The 
debate had been both interesting and constructive 
and every effort would be made to implement 
those proposals which had received general acceptance. 
On the more controversial issues, the Secretariat 
would endeavour to reconcile conflicting points 
of view in preparing the future programme of the 
Agency. 
30. It was clear that delegates shared his satisfaction 
and optimism at the prospects for nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons, and his conviction 
that the Agency had an important part to play in 
the related implementation of safeguards. In meeting 
that challenge, the Agency would continually review 
[8] 
GC(XI)/OR.lll, paras 71 and 63 respectively. 
[9] 
This summary of a statement which was not delivered 
at the meeting is inserted in the record by direction of 
the President. 

117th. PLENARY MEETING 

its procedures and practices to ensure their maXImum 
effectiveness and take account of constantly changing 
situations. Research and development to adapt the 
Safeguards System to modern techniques was essential 
and he was gratified by Member States' readiness 
to devote national efforts to that end. He also 
welcomed their willingness to provide facilities, as 
well as instructors and materials, for the purpose 
of training inspectors. 

31. It was to be expected that in an organization 
including many developing countries the subject of 
technical assistance would evoke great interest. He 
had been fully informed of the debate in the Programme, 
Technical and Budget Committee resulting 
in approval of a resolution concerning the provision 
of technical experts and equipment. Although he 
was convinced that firm guiding principles were 
essential for the operation of an international organization, 
he considered that it should always remain 
possible to modify them to meet changing conditions. 
The Agency had always adopted a fleXIble attitude 
to the criteria relating to the provision of equipment; 
in the period 1966-67, equipment had formed 
20 % of the assistance provided from the Agency's 
own resources. Particular attention would be given 
to that aspect in dealing with future technical assistance 
requests, and an effort would be made to 
reflect in practice the spirit of the resolution. However, 
the question would be largely academic unless 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund were 
greatly increased. It must also be recognized that 
the Agency had no authority to apply new criteria 
to assistance provided out of funds derived from 
the United Nations Development Programme, the 
rules for which were established by the United 
Nations. 
32. It was gratifying to note the favourable response 
of most delegations to the proposal to 
establish the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS). Note had been taken of the reservations 
expressed, particularly those emphasizing 
the need for co-ordination with the work done by 
national and regional organizations; it was certainly 
not the Agency's intention to duplicate eXIsting 
services. The programme was being worked out in 
the light of frequent consultations with technical 
experts from Member States and from the regional 
organizations in question. No final proposals would 
be made before completion of the pilot project. 
The system would admittedly involve substantial 
costs, but it was intended to propose that a charge 
be made for special services rendered, the proceeds 
from which should ensure that the INIS budget 
was stabilized. 
33. The sp irit of the Conference and its demonstration 
of international understanding, together with the 
expressions of support for the Agency and its important 
role in world affairs, augured well for the 
future. There was now a clearer understanding of 
the part the Agency could play in achieving the 
objectives of its founders. The Agency could enter 
upon its second decade with confidence, fortified 
by the goodwill shown towards it and its Secretariat 
in the contributions to the debate. Such support 
would be increasingly needed in the future if the 
Agency was to undertake successfully the new and 
important responsibilities which were likely to 
devolve upon it. 

REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 
[GC(XI)/375] 

34. The PRESIDENT announced that the Credentials 
Committee had examined the credentials of 
delegates in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules 
of Procedure; its report, containing two draft resolutions, 
was to be found in document GC(XI)/37535. 
Mr. ANGONI (Albania) said it was 
outrageous that, owing to the cynical attitude adopted 
by the United States and certain other delegations, 
the Chiang Kai-shek clique had been permitted to 
represent China at the eleventh regular session of 
the General Conference. Such a situation was ridiculous 
since the only legal Chinese Government 
was that of the People's Republic of China, a 
country with 700 million inhabitants which used 
atomic energy solely for scientific, economic and 
cultural purposes and was interested in its military 
use for defensive purposes only. With a view to 
enabling the Agency to fulfil the objectives of its 
Statute, it was essential that the People's Republic 
of China, which supported all nations fighting for 
freedom, should represent the Chinese people in 
the Agency, particularly as the solution of current 
international problems could only be achieved with 
its co-operation. Accordingly his delegation was 
opposed to draft resolution I contained in the 
Credentials Committee's report. 
36. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said his delegation did not recognize the 
validity of the Chiang Kai-shek group's credentials 
nor its right to represent China at the General 
Conference, and accordingly could not support draft 
resolution I. 
37. The Credentials Committee had recognized 
the validity of the credentials of the Federal 
Republic of Germany; furthermore that State had 
served on the Board of Governors and its delegate 
had been elected as a Vice-President at the current 
session of the Conference. The Federal Republic 
of Germany did not comply with the main provisions 
of the Statute and did not accept the 
Agency's Safeguards System. On the other hand, 
the German Democratic Republic, had not been 
allowed to participate in the Agency's work, although 
it was entitled to membership in accordance 
with recognized international principles and the 
Agency's Statute. Unlike the Federal Republic of 
Germany, it had already affirmed its readiness to 
accept the Agency's Safeguards System [10] and 
[10] See document GC(X)/INF/91. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

to fulfil all the conditions of membership. Moreover, 
it was a highly industrialized country which 
made an ever-growing contribution to the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, and its exclusion from membership 
on political grounds, at the instigation of 
certain Member States, was prejudicial to the 
Agency's prestige. 

38. Mr. PELE (Romania) regretted that the Conference 
had made no effort to solve the problem of 
the representation of China. The Chiang Kai-shek 
group was not legally entitled to represent that 
country, since it really represented nobody. The 
only legal Chinese Government was that of the 
People's Republic of China, and its exclusion from 
membership was damaging to the Agency's prestige 
and detrimental to its work. 
39- Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) said that, as a 
member of the Credentials Committee, he considered 
it his duty to state that the Committee had 
acted in accordance with the principles and precedents 
followed in the past by the Agency and the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, and he believed 
the Conference, in taking its decisions, should do 
likewise. Political decisions were not the responsibility 
of the Agency, and thus the Conference 
should continue to recognize the validity of the 
credentials issued by the Republic of China. He 
pointed out that when a State had duly become a 
Member of the Agency it was entitled to the same 
degree of respect from other Member States as 
they themselves would expect to receive. 

40. Mr. EFFAT (United Arab Republic) said his 
country had hoped, for a number of years, that the 
People's Republic of China would be permitted to 
join the Agency, since its membership would constitute 
a major contribution to the maintenance of 
peace in the Far East and throughout the world. 
His delegation regretted that it was still debarred 
from membership and accordingly would abstain 
from voting on draft resolution I. 
41. Mr. LEWIS (United States of America) 
endorsed the Committee's report together with the 
two draft resolutions contained therein. Referring to 
the objections to the credentials issued by the 
Republic of China, he recalled that the General 
Assembly of the United Nations had considered 
the question on a number of occasions, most recently 
in November 1966, and had always rejected 
attempts to replace the representatives of the Republic 
of China. The General Assembly had also recommended 
that its attitude in the matter be taken into 
account in technical agencies in the United Nations 
family. In accordance with the standard practice 
followed by the specialized agencies of the United 
Nations, and in order to avoid controversy and 
disruption of the Agency's work, the Conference 
should, in line with its own previous practice, 
follow the General Assembly's recommendation and 
adopt the draft resolutions contained in the Credentials 
Committee's report, which were identical with 
those adopted in the past. 

42. Miss ROESAD (Indonesia) said her delegation 
would support draft resolution II contained in the 
Credentials Committee's report. With regard to draft 
resolution I, however, she pointed out that her 
Government still recognized the Government of the 
People's Republic of China but that the latter's 
persistently hostile attitude had gravely impaired 
relations between the two countries. That attitude 
had been reflected in its deplorable treatment of 
diplomats and its subversive activities, which were 
designed to overthrow the Indonesian Government. 
Her Government was confident that it could counteract 
such activities. The great majority of the 
Indonesian people wished her Government to break 
off diplomatic relations with the People's Republic 
of China and, in response to that demand, the 
Indonesian Foreign Minister had stated that if the 
People's Republic of China decided to break off 
relations, the Government would accept that decision. 
However, since that had not yet happened, her 
Government could not accept the validity of the 
credentials issued by a Government it did not 
recognize. 
43. Mr. CHENG (Republic of China) said that* 
for the past ten years the artificial issue of his delegation's 
right to represent China had been the 
subject of exhaustive deliberation at the General 
Conference, and accordingly he did not intend to 
enter into protracted discussions on the subject. 
Now that the Agency was entering its second 
decade, he hoped the misunderstandings regarding 
the rightful representation of his country would 
cease and that all Member States would co-operate 
in promoting the use of atomic energy in the 
interest of mankind. 
44. His country had been forcibly taken over by 
a tyrannical regime which did not truly represent 
the 700 million people on the Chinese mainland; 
they could only be rightfully represented by his 
Government, in Taiwan, which was morally and 
legally one of the provinces of China. The unfailing 
support of many countries which his Government 
had enjoyed for ten years reflected 
their conscientious desire to promote the cause of 
freedom. The Conference should follow the example 
of the General Assembly and adopt the draft resolutions 
contained in the - Credentials Committee's 
report. 
4". Mr. ANGONI (Albania) suggested that draft 
resolutions I and II should be voted on separately, 
since divergent views had been expressed. 

46. The PRESIDENT, noting that the Albanian 
suggestion was not seconded by any other delegate, 
said he assumed that the Conference wished to 
adopt draft resolutions I and II in document 
GC(XI)/375. 

117th. PLENARY MEETING 

47. It was so agreed. 
OPENING DATE OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR 
SESSION 

48. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee 
had requested him to recommend to the 
Conference on its behalf that the opening date of 
the twelfth regular session should be Tuesday, 
24 Spetember 1968. 
49. The recommendation of the General Committee 
was accepted. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS [GC(XI)/369] 

50. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
report of the General Committee [GC(XI)/369], 
in paragraph 1 of which the Committee notified 
the Conference that seven Members must be elected 
to the Board of Governors during the present 
session. The Committee specified the geographical 
areas in respect of which elections were required 
and drew the Conference's attention to the fact 
that elections must be conducted with due regard 
to equitable representation on the Board as a whole 
of the Members in the geographical areas specified 
in Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. Rule 79 of 
the Rules of Procedure provided that elections 
should be by secret ballot and that there should 
be no nominations. 
51. At the invitation of the President, a member of 
the Swiss delegation and a member of the United Arab 
Republic delegation acted as tellers. 
52. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Latin America. 
53. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which as as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 70 

Invalid votes: 3 
Abstentions: 

3 
Valid votes: 64 
Required majority: 33 
Votes obtained: 

Peru 62 
Chile 1 
Venezuela 1 

54. Having obtained the required majority, Peru was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
55. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Eastern Europe. 
56. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 70 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 5 

Valid votes: 64 
Required majority: 33 
Votes obtained: 

Bulgaria 57 
Romania 3 
Turkey 3 
Hungary 1 

57. Having obtained the required majority, Bulgaria 
was elected a Member of the Board. 
58. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect two Members from the area of Africa and 
the Middle East. 
59-A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 

Members to be elected: 2 
Ballot papers returned: 138 
Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes: 127 
Required majority: 32 
Votes obtained: 

Madagascar: 63 
Algeria 61 
Turkey 2 
Saudi Arabia 1 

60. Having obtained the required majority, Madagascar 
and Algeria were elected Members of the Board. 
61. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from die area of South Asia. 
62. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 69 
Invalid votes: 3 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 64 
Required majority : 33 
Votes obtained: 

Ceylon 63 
Burma 1 

63. Having obtained the required majority, Ceylon was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
64. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of the Far East. 
65. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 68 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 64 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

Required majority: 33 
Votes obtained: 
The Philippines 64 

66. Having obtained the required majority, the Philippines 
was elected a Member of the Board. 
67. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
fill the remaining vacant seat on the Board. 
68. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows.• 
Ballot papers returned: 67 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions: 2 

Valid votes: 65 
Required ma jo rity: 33 
Votes obtained: 
Turkey 65 

69. Having obtained the required majority, Turkey was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
70. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Article VI.D. of the Statute, the Members just 
elected to the Board would hold office from the 
end of the eleventh regular session of the General 
Conference until the end of the thirteenth regular 
session. He congratulated Algeria, Bulgaria, Ceylon, 
Madagascar, Peru, the Philippines and Turkey on 
their election, and thanked the tellers for their 
work. 
The meeting rose at 1.15p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GC(XI)/OR.118 
13 February 1968 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE ELEVENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(26 SEPTEMBER -2 OCTOBER 1967) 

ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 2 October 1967, at 3.25 p.m. 


President: Mr. NABAVI (Iran) 
later: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) 


CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda * 
18 Annual reports on the Agency's activities 1— 4 
19 Appointment of the External Auditor 5— 11 
20 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 12—13 
21 Voluntary Contributions to the General Fund for 1968 14—15 
16 The Agency's accounts for 1966 16—17 
17 The Agency's relations with intergovernmental organizations 18— 19 
13 The Agency's budget for 1968 20— 24 
14 Scale of Members' contributions for 1968 25 —26 
15 Review of the Agency's activities 27— 28 
22 Closing of the session 29—31 
ANNEX: Tributes to the President I—X 

GC(XI)/368. 


ANNUAL REPORTS ON THE AGENCY'S same terms as similar resolutions adopted by the 
ACTIVITIES [GC(XI)/357, 358] Conference in the past, he suggested that it be 
adopted. 

1. The PRESIDENT draw attention to the draft 
resolution submitted by the Board of Governors 2. The draft resolution was adopted. 
in document GC(XI)/357 relating to the Agency's 
report to the General Assembly of the United 3. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
Nations for 1966-67. As it was couched in the consider the draft resolution submitted by the Board 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XI)/INF/96/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

in document GC(XI)/358 concerning the Agency's 
report to the Economic and Social Council of the 
United Nations for 1967-68. 

4. The draft resolution was adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

5. The PRESIDENT observed that it was necessary 
for the Conference to appoint an External 
Auditor to audit the Agency's accounts for 1968 
and subsequent years. With regard to the duration 
of the appointment, the Conference should bear 
in mind that the General Assembly would, in the 
near future, be looking into the whole question 
of the auditing of the accounts of the organizations 
in the United Nations family, and accordingly some 
changes might be introduced into the general arrangements 
for auditing. It would therefore seem appropriate 
for the Conference to make an appointment 
in respect of the next two years, namely 19 68 and 
1969. 

6. Having regard to Regulation 12.01 of the 
Agency's Financial Regulations and the practice 
followed so far, he proposed, in the light of the 
consultations he had had, that the Conference should 
appoint the Auditor General of the Czechoslovak 
Socialist Republic to serve as External Auditor in 
auditing the Agency's accounts for the years 1968 
and 1969. 
7. The President's proposal was accepted. 
8. The PRESIDENT expressed gratitude, on 
behalf of the Conference, to the various Presidents 
of the Court of Accounts of the Federal Republic 
of Germany who had audited the Agency's accounts 
since 1959. Much of the credit for the smoothness 
with which the examination of the accounts by the 
Board of Governors and the Conference hadproceeded 
during that period was due to them and their 
staff. 
9. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) said 
he also wished to thank the outgoing External 
Auditor and his staff, whose services had so kindly 
been made available by the Federal Republic of 
Germany, for the competence and dedication with 
which they had performed their duties. The principle 
of rotation in important posts was also applied 
to that of the External Auditor, and that was the 
sole reason why the Conference had called on the 
services of the Auditor General of another Member 
State. There was every reason to expect that the 
new External Auditor would carry out his work 
as competendy as his predecessors. 
10. Mr. DUMONT (France) said his delegation 
and, he was sure, the delegations of all Member 
States were grateful to the successive External Auditors 
from the Federal Republic of Germany and 
their staff for the equitable manner in which they 
had performed their duties. 

11. Mr. WEARING (United Kingdom) joined in 
the expressions of gratitude that had been voiced 
and wished the new External Auditor every success. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF 
PENSION COMMITTEE 

12. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members 
and two alternates elected by the Conference. One 
of the members and one of the alternates 
had recendy left Vienna. The Conference was thus 
called upon to elect replacements for them. 
Mr. Bohumil Vachata (Czechoslovakia) had been 
nominated as the member and Mr. Richard Buder 
(Australia) as the alternate. 
14. Mr. Vachata {Czechoslovakia) and Mr. Butler 
{Australia') were elected a member and an alternate respectively 
of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee. 
Mr. Neumann {Czechoslovakia) took the Chair. 

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 
GENERAL FUND FOR 1968 [GC(XI)/364/Rev.3] 

14. The PRESIDENT said that by 12 noon on 
29 September the Director General had received 
pledges of voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund for 1968 from 52 Member States to a total 
equivalent of $1 322 838. Since then pledges had 
been made by Ghana ($1400), Iran ($2000) and 
Portugal ($3600). Those three pledges, together 
with the increase in the United States pledge which 
automatically resulted from them [GC(XI)/364/ 
Rev.3, footnote c) to the table], would bring the 
total pledged up to $1 333 608. 
15. He pointed out that the total pledged was 
far short of the proposed target of $2 million [1] 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1966 
[GC(XI)/370] 

16. Mr. HOSSAIN (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report on the Agency's accounts 
for 1966 [GC(XI)/370]. 
17. The draft resolution contained in document GC{XI)/ 
3 70 mas adopted. 
[1] GC(XI)/360, para. 5

118th. PLENARY MEETING 

THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH INTER-
GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 
[GC(XI)/371] 

18. Mr. HOSSAIN (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced the 
Committee's report on the Agency's relations with 
intergovernmental organizations [GC(XI)/371]. 
19. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XT) / 
3 71 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1968 
[GC(XI)/372] 

20. Mr. MALU (Democratic Republic of the 
Congo), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical 
and Budget Committee, introduced the Committee's 
report on the Agency's budget for 1968 
[GC(XI)/372]. 
21. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said that his delegation was opposed to 
the Regular Budget for 1968 because it provided 
for a much higher expenditure than the budget for 
the current year. In the Committee the Soviet 
Union had been one of seven Member States which 
had objected to that budget, and four other Member 
States had abstained from voting on it. 
22. The draft resolution contained in Annex I to 
document GC(XT)/372 (Regular Budget appropriations for 
1968) was adopted. 
23. The draft resolution contained in Annex II to 
document GC(XI)j372 (Operational Budget allocations 
for 1968) was adopted. 
24. The draft resolution contained in Annex III 
to document GC(XI)/372 (Use of the Working Capital 
Fund in 1968) was adopted. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 
1968[GC(XI)/373] 

25. Mr. MALU (Democratic Republic of the 
Congo), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical 
and Budget Committee, introduced the Committee's 
report on the scale of Members' contributions for 
1968 [GC(XI)/373]. At the end of the report was 
a draft resolution which the Committee recommended 
for adoption. 

26. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XI)/373 was adopted. 
REVIEW OF THE AGENCY'S ACTIVITIES 
[GC(XI)/374] 

27. Mr. MALU (Democratic Republic of the 
Congo), Rapporteur of the Programme, Technical 
and Budget Committee, introduced the Committee's 
report on the review of the Agency's activities 
[GC(XI)/374]. At the end of the report was a 
draft resolution which the Committee recommended 
for adoption. 
28. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC (XI)/374 was adopted. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

29. The PRESIDENT said that, in closing the 
session, he would like to say a few words on the 
work being done in Geneva by the Eighteen-Nation 
Committee on Disarmament. Its work had been 
mentioned by a number of delegates and the 
Director General had pointed out that the Agency 
was very interested in the negotiations in progress 
because of the task it would be called upon to 
perform with regard to safeguards arrangements if 
a treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
were concluded. Such a task would be quite in 
keeping with the Agency's objectives. Accordingly, 
he was sure the Conference would wish him to 
express the Agency's willingness to undertake that 
task and to make such preparations as might be 
necessary to enable it to discharge the wider responsibilities 
which might devolve upon it 
30. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

31. The PRESIDENT then declared the eleventh 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 4.5p.m. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: ELEVENTH (1967) REGULAR SESSION 

ANNEX 

TRIBUTES TO THE PRESIDENT 

On the occasion of a meeting of the Board of Governors that was held on the day following the 
proceedings which are summarized in this record, a number of speakers took the opportunity to pay 
tribute to the President's work during the session. Their remarks are summarized below. 

I. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) said that at before the thanks due to him had been expressed. 
the conclusion of the General Conference's session 
many delegations, including his own, had wished VI. Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) associated himto 
thank the President for his excellent conduct of self fully with the tributes which had been paid, 
the debates, but had been unable to do so. He and wished in addition to express the feelings of 
therefore requested the indulgence of Governors delegates from his region of the world that no 
for the unusual step of asking them to join in session had been more smoothly and impartially 
thanking the President now; he could remember conducted. 
no session of the General Conference which had 
VII. MR. RE2ZONICO (Argentina) and Mr. 
proceeded more smoothly. To his previous know-

KAULZA de ARRIAGA (Portugal) unreservedly 

ledge of Mr. Neumann as a distinguished scientist 

joined in the congratulations to the President ex


had now been added the recognition that he was 

pressed by other Governors for his excellent handling 

also a firm and tactful President. 

of the session. 

II. Mr. SMYTH (United States of America) sug-VIII. Mr. PHILIP (South Africa) said that while 
gested that it was in fact the President's the present procedure for congratulating the Presivery 
efficiency which had made it impossible to dent might appear somewhat unorthodox, his delethank 
him at the closing of the session, and he gation felt that it was nonetheless entirely proper, 
therefore welcomed the opportunity to endorse and fully associated itself with all the compliments 
wholeheartedly the laudatory comments made by which had been paid. 
the Governor from Australia. 
IX. Mr. IVANCHEV (Bulgaria) and Mr. RAZA-
III. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist FINDRATANDRA (Madagascar) added their con-
Republics) also welcomed the opportunity to thank gratulations. 
the President. His delegation was pleased that its 
judgement in proposing Mr. Neumann as President X. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) thanked 
had been fully confirmed by his brilliant direction the Governors for their compliments. His perhaps 
of the work of the Conference. somewhat hasty closing of the session had meant 
that he, too, had been unable to express his very 

IV. Mr. WEARING (United Kingdom) said he sincere thanks to all delegates for the frank and 
hoped that the Agency would always be so fortunate reasoned nature of their statements, which had 
as to have such an unfailingly expert, impartial illustrated how important it was to preserve a spirit 
and benevolent President for its General Conference. of co-operation and mutual understanding. He also 
expressed his thanks to the Director General for 

V. Mr. RAJWADE (India) remarked that if there his sound and illuminating reports, and to the 
had been a flaw in the President's conduct of the Secretariat of the Conference for their invaluable 
meetings, it had been his haste to close the session assistance. 

