GC 


Item of the 
provisional a 

1 
2 
3(a) 
4 
5 
6 
7 

GC(XII)/377 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XII)/OR.119 
12 February 1969 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
(24-30 SEPTEMBER 1968) 


ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 24 September 1968, at 3.10 p.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) 

President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 

Opening of the session 

Election of the President 

Appointment of the Credentials Committee 

Election of the Vice-Presidents 

Appointment of the General Committee 

Applications for membership of the Agency 

Statement by the Director General 

Statement by the representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations 

Paragraphs 

1— 4 

5— 9 

10— 11 

12 — 16 

17 — 20 

21 — 28 

29 — 53 

54 — 67 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XII)/INF/103/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the 
twelfth regular session of the General Conference 
open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited the Conference to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
the delegates from Member States, the observers 
from States which were not yet Members of the 
Agency and the representatives of the United Nations 
and other intergovernmental organizations and of 
non-governmental organizations who had come to 
take part in the work of the session. The Conference 
was also honoured by the presence of the Vice-
Chancellor of the Republic of Austria and the Federal 
Minister for Foreign Affairs, as well as senior 
officials of the Government and of the City of 
Vienna. On behalf of the General Conference he 
expressed his gratitude to those mentioned for all 
Austria was doing for the Agency. 
4. In conclusion, he said it was to be hoped 
that all Member States would ratify the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons i), very 
shortly, and felt sure that when the time came, the 
Agency would prove fully capable of carrying out 
the obligations that the Treaty imposed upon it. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President. 
6. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said it was 
an honour to nominate Mr. Sandoval Vallarta, the 
delegate of Mexico, who was well known in scientific 
circles throughout the world. Mr. Sandoval 
Vallarta had taught in a large number of widelyknown 
establishments and had helped to formulate 
the so-called Lemaftre-Vallarta theory on cosmic rays. 
In 1946 he had been Chairman of the United 
Nations Atomic Energy Commission and had taken 
part in all three United Nations Conferences on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy; he was, furthermore, 
Chairman of the Scientific Council of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste 
and had led the Mexican delegation at previous 
1) This Treaty, which is the subject of Resolution 
2373 (XXII) adopted by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations on 12 June 1968, is subsequently referred 
to in this records as "the Treaty" or "the NPT". 

sessions of the General Conference. He thereby 
combined all the qualities fitting him to act as 
President. 

7. Mr. NIISEKI (Japan) seconded, and 
Mr. HIRSCH (France) supported, the nomination. 
8. Mr. Sandoval Vallarta (Mexico) was elected 
President of the General Conference for its twelfth regular 
session by acclamation. 
Mr. Sandoval Vallarta (Mexico) took the Chair. 

9. The PRESIDENT thanked the Conference for 
the great honour it had done his country in electing 
him President. He regarded his election as recognition 
of the efforts made by Mexico in helping to 
eliminate the danger of a nuclear war, and hoped 
that he would have the co-operation of all delegates 
so as to enable the Conference to carry out its 
work successfully. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE 

10. The PRESIDENT proposed, in accordance 
with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, that a 
Credentials Committee should be appointed consisting 
of the following nine Members: Belgium, Bolivia, 
Hungary, Iraq, Japan, Peru, Philippines, the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States 
of America. 
11. The proposal was adopted unanimously. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

12. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 
34 of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference was 
required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the election 
of the Chairmen of the two Main Committees. He 
therefore intended to suspend the plenary meeting 
for a short time to enable the two Committees to 
elect their Chairmen. 
The meeting was suspended at 3.40p.m. and resumed 
at 3.50 p.m. 

13. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President of the Conference. 
14. Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) nominated the delegates 
of the following States: Australia, Brazil, Canada, 
India, Japan, Uganda, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics and the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
and Northern Ireland. 

ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

15. Mr. EL-SOLH (Lebanon) seconded the 
nominations. 
16. The delegates nominated were declared elected to 
the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL 
COMMITTEE 

17. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the General 
Conference was required to elect four additional 
members to the General Committee. He invited 
nominations. 
18. Mr. AFABLE (Philippines) nominated the 
delegates of Bulgaria, France, the Federal Republic 
of Germany and the United States of America. 
19. Mr. ISTINYELI (Turkey) seconded the 
nominations. 
20. The delegates of the States nominated were declared 
elected to the General Committee, which was thus duly 
appointed in compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 
of the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY (GC(XII)/378, 386) 

21. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
consider die recommendations of die Board of 
Governors concerning the applications for membership 
of die Agency made by Liechtenstein and 
Zambia (GC(XII)/378) and by the Niger 
(GC(XII)/386) and the relevant draft resolutions. 
22. Mr. HIRSCH (France) warmly supported die 
application presented by the Niger, a country with 
which France had numerous ties. 
23. Mr. WEARING (United Kingdom) supported 
the application made by Zambia, which was a 
member of the British Commonwealth. 
24. Mr. HOCHSTRASSER (Switzerland), mentioning 
the close ties that united Switzerland and 
Liechtenstein, supported the application for membership 
made by that State. 
25. Mr. HALUSA (Austria) said that for similar 
reasons he joined with the Swiss delegate in supporting 
the application. 
26. The three draft resolutions were adopted unanimously. 
27. The PRESIDENT stated that Liechtenstein, 
the Niger and Zambia would become Members of 
the Agency as soon as their instruments of acceptance 
of the Statute had been deposited with the 
United States Government, in accordance with 
Article XXI.C of the Statute. 

28. Mr. AUWXRTER (Liechtenstein) thanked the 
General Conference for the confidence it had shown 
in his country. Close co-operation with Switzerland 
had enabled Liechtenstein to carry out useful research 
work in die field of atomic energy, to develop new 
materials for reactors and to train nuclear energy 
experts. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

29. The DIRECTOR GENERAL recalled that at 
the previous session of the General Conference he 
had referred to die growing concern in die world 
at the development of nuclear weapons techniques 
and the dangers inherent in dieir proliferation.2^ 
Since then die experts appointed by die Secretary-
General of die United Nations to study the effects 
of die possible use of nuclear weapons had stressed 
the detrimental effects of the proliferation of such 
weapons on world security and die economic burden 
which their acquisation entailed3). Seen in that perspective, 
the General Assembly's resolution June 1968 
commending the NPT constituted perhaps the most 
significant international agreement since the advent 
of the nuclear age. 
30. Long and difficult negotiations had preceded 
the acceptance of die draft of die Treaty, particularly 
Article III, which concerned international safeguards, 
and was of prime importance to die Agency. Eightyone 
States had already signed die Treaty, but many 
non-nuclear-weapon States diat were among die most 
advanced in nuclear technology had not done so. 
He hoped die latter States would do so in the near 
future and, in that connection, he realized diat the 
Agency had a responsibility to publicize its safeguards 
system more widely and define die terms of die 
safeguards agreements on which implementation of 
the Treaty would be based. 
31. In closing the previous session of the General 
Conference die President had expressed die Conference's 
desire that the Agency should undertake 
its appropriate role in relation to safeguards under 
the Treaty4). After the General Assembly had adopted 
the NPT resolution, he (the Director General) had 
informed die President of the General Assembly 
of die Agency's readiness to assume die responsibilities 
vested in it by die Treaty. The Secretariat 
had already analysed die provisions of the Treaty 
2) GC(XI)/OR.m,para.26. 

") See United Nations document A/6858. 

4) GC(XI)/OR.118,para.29. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

together with its various legal, technical, operational 
and financial implications. It would continue working 
with the assistance of consultants in October and 
November and in the light of its analysis would 
formulate a model safeguards agreement that could 
serve as a basis for discussions in the appropriate 
bodies of the Agency. 

32. Since the Agency would not be called upon 
to exercise its safeguards function under the Treaty 
until the latter came into force and individual safeguards 
agreements were concluded, there would be 
a transition period of one or two years which could 
be profitably used to train the necessary personnel. 
Scientific and technical research and development 
work seemed to be of prime importance from the 
standpoint of formulating general principles that could 
underlie the safeguards system and developing 
detailed safeguards procedures for the system; Member 
States had made much greater efforts in that 
direction during the preceding year, and although the 
Agency did not have the means to contribute 
materially to those efforts, it was able to promote 
work at the national level by participating in joint research 
and by endeavouring to co-ordinate national 
programmes. 
33. He was aware of the fact that the cost of 
applying international safeguards in the future gave 
rise to concern. Estimates relating to the scope and 
the cost of safeguards only became meaningful when 
related to estimates in respect of safeguarded installations. 
It was doubtful whether it was possible to 
make reliable prognostications for more than five or 
six years ahead, and he was quite certain that 
countries advanced in the nuclear field should set 
up national systems for nuclear materials management 
and safeguards controls which, when harmonized 
with the Agency's safeguards system, would facilitate 
its operation. The size of installations under safeguards 
was likely to increase considerably, and that 
meant that the application of the safeguards system 
would require a proportionately smaller staff. The 
influence of those factors was difficult to determine 
quantitatively, but figures recently quoted in the 
literature appeared to be much too high. 
34. The answer to the question whether the Agency 
would be able to cope with the tasks imposed upon 
it in Article III of the NPT was definitely in the 
affirmative, but so far no mandate had been received 
in the form of budget allocations for such tasks. 
His conviction was based upon the fact that there 
was qualified and competent personnel in the Secretariat 
odier than in the Department of Safeguards 
and Inspection who could assist in performing functions 
under the NPT. Furthermore, the Agency was 
already planning to use outside laboratories, for 
example for the analytical services necessary for 
safeguarding fuel reprocessing plants. 
35. The Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America made the Agency responsible 
for applying safeguards, and the first safeguards 
agreement under that treaty had very recently been 
concluded with the Government of Mexico 5). The 
experience gained by the Agency in preparing that 
agreement was important, since some of the problems 
created by an open-ended agreement concluded with 
one country at the latter's request had been defined. 
36. Turning to technical achievements since the 
last session of the General Conference, he said that 
it should be stressed that the development of nuclear 
power had fulfilled the most optimistic expectations, 
as a result of which countries had reviewed the 
uranium supply situation on both national and 
regional levels. Producers of uranium displayed a 
marked tendency to under-estimate their potential 
resources. Since the quantities of nuclear fuel required 
were growing, it was necessary to establish 
new fuel fabrication and reprocessing plants; in order 
to achieve the maximum economy, it would seem 
natural that reprocessing plants in particular, should 
be built on a regional basis. 
37. The Agency's general programme of work 
contained a detailed account of activities and expenses 
for the years 1969-70 and of the expected developments 
during 1971-74. A new format had been 
adopted in compliance with the Board of Governors' 
decision in June 1967 to give effect to the recommendations 
of the General Assembly's Ad Hoc 
Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of 
the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies 6). A 
similar programme was to be drawn up every two 
years, and in the intervening years the General Conference 
would only deal with budgetary proposals 
relating to second year of the detailed programme. 
To improve the structure of the Agency, all publication 
services had been brought under the Department 
of Technical Assistance, now renamed the Department 
of Technical Assistance and Publications; furthermore, 
a Division of Development had been set up within 
the Department of Safeguards and Inspection. 
38. With regard to the International Laboratory 
or Marine Radioactivity, he said that the Board had 
authorized him to negotiate and conclude an agreement 
with the Monegasque authorities to provide for 
its continued operation over the years 1969-74. 
The work of the Laboratory was being concentrated 
more on waste disposal problems and co-ordinated 
closely with that of the Division of Health, Safety 
and Waste Management. 
5) INFCIRC/118. 
6) United Nations document A/6343



ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

39. The International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste had moved into new headquarters 
provided by the Italian authorities and when the new 
building had been inaugurated, a Conference on 
Contemporary Physics had been held, which had 
been attended by about 300 of the world's most 
prominent theoretical physicists. Negotiations with 
UNESCO on the conversion of the Trieste Centre 
into an enterprise operated joindy by the Agency 
and UNESCO were continuing, although the financing 
of the Centre was still a problem since the conversion 
could not be carried out before 1970. He 
thanked the Governments which had made financial 
contributions to the Centre and said he would continue 
to seek other sources of funds. 
40. With the increase in the Agency's safeguards 
activities, the Seibersdorf Laboratory would have to 
do more analytical work in support of safeguards 
inspections. In that connection it was essential that 
the Agency should work independently of Member 
States, although it should be possible to make use 
of their services for the bulk of the routine work. 
He had continued his efforts to have some of the 
Laboratory's work done in laboratories in Member 
States but the response had not been very encouraging. 
The possible need to expand the Laboratory 
had led him to convene a group of consultants 
consisting of scientists and administrators to advise 
on die Laboratory's work. 
41. The Board and the General Conference had 
given considerable attention to technical assistance, 
and had urged that more emphasis should be placed 
on the provision of such assistance to developing 
countries. Member States had not been prepared to 
make available the financial resources required. In 
1968 the situation had continued to deteriorate and 
only 59 out of 98 countries had expressed their 
willingness to make voluntary contributions; only 
68% of the $2 million target had been reached, 
and that target would meet only half the needs 
expressed by developing countries; yet as a result 
of the rise in prices, it had been calculated that a 
22% increase in resources would be necessary to 
provide the same amount of assistance as in 1962. 
That state of affairs was largely due to die fact that 
certain economically developed Member States were 
contributing a substantially smaller share dian would 
be needed to be proportional to their assessed share 
of the Regular Budget. He dierefore urged economically 
developed countries to make up their pledges 
to at least the level of their assessed share, and less 
developed countries to make at least a token contribution; 
he referred in that connection to the provisions 
of Article IV of the NPT. 

42. Of a total nuclear power capacity of 133 000 
MW (e) in power stations in operation, in construction 
or firmly planned, only 2000 MW(e) were to be 
found outside the most industrially advanced countries 

of North America, Western Europe, Japan and die 

USSR. Efforts should be made to prevent a situation 

arising in which die use of nuclear power would 

have the effect of widening rather than closing the 

gap between advanced and developing countries. 

It was probable that technical progress would make 

smaller-sized power reactors competitive. Major in


direct advantages could be derived from the intro


duction of nuclear technology in developing countries, 

and he hoped that the International Bank for 

Reconstruction and Development and regional invest


ment banks would take those advantages into account 

when considering requests for loans for the building 

of nuclear power stations in diose countries. 

43. Referring to large desalting plants and energy 
centres, he pointed out that the magnitude of the 
financial efforts involved in such projects made international 
co-operation imperative. The Agency/US/ 
Mexico study on the feasibility of a dual-purpose 
plant7) had been completed and would be followed 
by a detailed study of the engineering aspects. Construction 
of die Shevchenko Plant by the Caspian 
Sea in the USSR was under way and in one or two 
years'ss time it should yield valuable information on 
different desalting techniques. Desalted water was 
too expensive for general use in agriculture, but 
long-term studies of large nuclear desalting plants 
showed that in the 1980's the production and use 
of desalted water in agro-industrial complexes could 
be profitable, particularly in arid or semi-arid 
regions, and the Agency ought to lend support to the 
studies made in that field. 
44. Member States continued to show a keen 
interest in the proposed International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) and die Secretariat was 
at present seeking to formulate a definitive proposal 
for submission to the Board of Governors in 
February 1969 which, if adopted, would enable the 
system to become operational in 1970. At the end 
of 1968 die Agency would take delivery of the new 
IBM 360/30 computer, which it required for INIS 
and the nuclear data programme. 
45. At its twenty-second session the General 
Assembly of the United Nations had adopted a 
resolution requesting the Secretary-General to prepare 
plans for a fourth international conference on die 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, to be held in 1970 
or 19718). The Secretary-General's Scientific Advisory 
Committee had subsequendy suggested diat the Conference 
be held in 1971, with the fullest possible 
participation of the Agency; die Agency's assistance 
could naturally be taken for granted. 
7) See document INFCIRC/75. 
8) General Assembly Resolution 2309 (XXII). 



GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

46. Turning to the question of the disposal of 
radioactive waste into the sea, he recalled that 
Member States had been requested to furnish information 
with a view to establishing an international 
register. He urged those that had not done so to 
reply; even if the Agency was not yet in a position 
to recommend any regulatory steps that might be 
taken, it was important to record what had been 
disposed. 
47. Referring to the new permanent headquarters 
of the Agency at the Donaupark, he said that joint 
studies with UNIDO and the Austrian authorities 
had made progress; construction was due to begin 
before 1971, and occupation of the buildings would 
be possible in 1973 or 1974. He again paid tribute 
to the Austrian Government for its positive interest 
in all Agency matters and its unfailing support. 
48. As regards budgetary matters, the total expenditure 
provided for in the Regular Budget amounted 
to $11 251 000, and increase of 7.4% over 1968. 
More than half the increase was due to rising prices 
and increases in staff salaries; the rest related principally 
to the development of INIS and to the 
Agency's expanding responsibilities in the field of 
safeguards, but it should be borne in mind that 
the increase for safeguards activities did not cover 
any added responsibilities which the Agency would 
have to assume under the NPT. 
49. The development of the Agency would be 
closely bound up with developments arising out of 
the NPT, and the Agency's safeguards system would 
need to be adapted to the provisions contained in 
Article III of the Treaty. He stressed, furthermore, 
that the signatories of the NPT had requested more 
apportunities than afforded them under the Statute 
to participate in the adaptation process. 
50. The discussions in the General Assembly had 
shown that some of the provisions of the NPT, more 
particularly Articles IV and V, were still not 
sufficiently precise, and that point had been stressed 
at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States9). 
Having personally attended some sessions of the 
Conference, he had been surprised to hear it 
suggested that the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations should be requested to appoint a group 
of experts to prepare a report on all possible contributions 
of nuclear technology to the economic and 
scientific advancement of the developing countries10) 
He did not think those experts could add anything 
to the knowledge already available in the Agency, 
and he would prefer experts to be appointed who 
could advise on where to find the means needed 
to implement already existing programmes. 
9) Held at Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 
10) See United Nations doucment A/CONF. J5/RES.2. 

51. The Conference at Geneva had demonstrated 
that there was an appalling ignorance of the 
Agency's activities and also, apparently, a serious 
lack of co-ordination between the political and scientific 
bodies in some of the countries represented. 
The instructions given by countries to their representatives 
at the Conference appeared to be completely 
inconsistent with those given to delegates to the 
Agency's General Conference. He therefore urged 
the delegates present to do their utmost to avoid 
a situation where their countries gave the impression 
of speaking with two voices on important issues, 
especially those dealing with atomic energy and the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and he emphasized 
once again that the main problem facing the 
Agency was how to acquire the means to implement 
already existing programmes. 
52. A large number of non-nuclear-weapon States 
had voiced concern at the possible limitations imposed 
by the NPT on the use of nuclear explosives for 
peaceful purposes, and some had even proposed the 
setting up of a special organization to deal with 
that matter. The use of atomic energy for that 
purpose was still at the development stage and it 
would be optimistic to expect genuine industrial 
development of that use for some years. He therefore 
felt it would be premature to set up an organization 
specifically for that purpose, and also pointed 
out that the proposals to that effect ignored the 
fact that the problem was under constant study 
by the Agency. In his closing speech at the eighth 
regular session of the General Conference he had 
referred to the Agency's interest in the matter") 
and he stressed that it was both willing and fitted 
to undertake tasks in that area. 
53. In conclusion he repeated that the Agency 
would have to adapt its services and functions to 
fulfil its obligations under the NPT. The Secretariat 
would also undertake studies with a view to meeting 
the urgent requests expressed at the Conference of 
Non-Nuclear Weapon States. He considered it most 
important not to take action until Member States 
had given their assurance that the proposed solutions 
were acceptable. In order to achieve solutions 
acceptable to all, there would have to be continuous 
and careful consultations between Member States 
and the Agency. Questions concerning the NPT 
could only be solved in an atmosphere of confidence 
and the Treaty could not become a corner-stone in 
nuclear disarmament unless that confidence were 
maintained and further developed. The entry into 
force of the NPT would entail a shift of emphasis 
in the work of the Agency and more weight would 
have to be given to the control functions. He hoped 
that the Agency would continue to be an organization 
which was mainly concerned with technical 
11) GC(VIII)/OR.90, para.68. 


ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

matters, although the political situation in the world 
would inevitably impinge on its work to a much 
greater extent than in the past. 

STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS 

54. Mr. WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI (representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations) 
said that he was very pleased to attend, as representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
the annual Conference of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. 
55. In spite of the political divisions and conflicts 
in the world, the work of the Agency was continuing 
and constituted a constructive element in international 
life which was of utmost value to the maintenance 
of peace. The scientific community was playing an 
ever-increasing role in modern society, and the work 
of an organization whose members collaborated for 
peace and for the improvement of the human 
condition was therefore particularly important. 
56. Turning to one of the most prominent developments 
in the United Nations and in international 
politics during the past year, namely the negotiations 
which had led to the conclusion of the NPT, commended 
by the General Assembly in June, he emphasized 
the Secretary-General's deep desire that the 
largest possible number of States - whether in 
possession of nuclear weapons or not-should accede 
to the Treaty. Other political developments, however 
grave, should not prevent the ratification and entry 
into force of a treaty which was of transcendent 
importance to the future of mankind. 
57. Similarly, it was the earnest hope of the 
Secretary-General that other promising developments 
such as the possibility of discussions between the 
super-Powers aimed at reducing the scale and development 
of atomic armament might not be discouraged 
or allowed to lapse because of the reactions on one 
side or the other to particular events of a political 
nature. 
58. As far as the Agency itself was concerned, 
the Secretary-General had noted with great satisfaction 
its readiness to accept the responsibilities assigned 
to it under Articles III and IV of the Treaty. 
59. At the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States, which was currently taking place in Geneva 
under the auspices of the United Nations, many 
delegations had expressed their confidence in the 
ability of the Agency to assume increased functions 
and responsibilities. 
60. It was clear that the functions to be entrusted 
to the Agency under the Treaty could have farreaching 
political implications in the future. In that 
connection, he recalled the special relationship 
between the Agency and the United Nations provided 
for in the Statute of the Agency12) and in 
the Agency's relationship agreement with the United 
Nations !3). Under Article III.B.4 of its Statute 
the Agency had to report directly to the General 
Assembly each year, and notify the Security Council 
if "in connection with the activities of the Agency 
there should arise questions that are within the 
competence of the Security Council". 
61. Moreover, Article III.B.l of the Statute 
provided that in carrying out its functions the Agency 
should "Conduct its activities in accordance with 
the purposes and principles of the United Nations 
to promote peace and international co-operation, 
and in conformity with policies of the United 
Nations furthering the establishment of safeguarded 
world-wide disarmament...". 
62. The provisions of the Agency's Statute concerning 
relations between the Agency and the political 
organs of the United Nations would assume particular 
significance when the NPT entered into force, and 
he was certain that the United Nations organs concerned 
would follow closely the development of 
the Agency's work which, he hoped, would enhance 
the effectiveness both of the Agency and of the 
United Nations in the vital field of arms control 
and disarmament. 
63. The United Nations placed great hopes in 
the Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy, which was to take place 
in 1971 and in which the Agency would play the 
same vital role as in the Third International Conference 
14). The United Nations Scientific Advisory 
Committee had recommended that the Conference 
have as its theme the "Benefits for Mankind from 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy". 
64. In the field of nuclear power, arrangements 
had been made during the previous year for closer 
liaison between the two organizations. The application 
of science and technology to development was 
also a common concern of the two organizations, 
and he was pleased that the Agency was continuing 
to participate actively in the work of the United 
Nations Advisory Committee on that subject. 
65. The Economic and Social Council and the 
General Assembly had devoted considerable attention 
to the development of sea resources and to 
marine science and technology. He was sure that 
12) Article XVI. 
13) INFCIRC/ II, part I.A. 
14) Held at Geneva from 31 August to 9 September 1964. 



GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

work in that field would be facilitated by the research 
being conducted by the Agency on the pollution of 
the sea by radioactive wastes. The United Nations 
was also increasingly concerned with questions relating 
to the human environment—another problem in 
which the Agency was involved. 

66. As the second United Nations Development 
Decade approached, collaboration between the United 
Nations and the Agency within the United Nations 
family of organizations became increasingly necessary. 
The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination was 
a key element in that inter-agency system and, in 
that connection, the Secretary-General wished to 
thank the Director General, Mr. Eklund, for the 
constructive part which he had always played on 
the Committee. 

67. In conclusion, he conveyed the SecretaryGeneral's 
best wishes to the Conference for a sucessful 
session and to the Agency as a whole for a 
future of increasingly useful and responsible work. 
The meeting rose at 5p.m. 


GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
General Conference 
GC(XII)/OR.120 
12 February 1969 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 
RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR(24-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1968) 
SESSION 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 25 September 1968, at 10.40 a.m. 
President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 
Item of the 
agenda* 
8 
9 
CONTENTS 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items for initial discussion 
General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Finland 
United States of America 
Romania 
South Africa 
Japan 
Australia 
1 — 
3 — 
3 — 
16 — 
35 — 
59 — 
81 — 
92 — 
2 
100 
15 
34 
58 
80 
91 
100 
GC(XII)/390 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XII)/INF/103/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOC-
ATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XII)/387) 

1. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference 
accept the recommendations made by the 
General Committee in regard to the agenda and 
the allocation of items for initial discussion 
(GC(XII)/387). 
2. The recommendations of the General Committee were 
accepted, and the agenda was thereby approved. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1967-68 
(GC(XII)/380, 389) 

3. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) said that instead of 
discussing the Agency's general activity since the 
last session of the General Conference, he wished 
to deal with some special questions that could be 
considered of major importance for the whole of 
mankind as well as specifically for the Agency. 
4. An important and interesting report on the 
effects of the possible use of nuclear weapons and 
on the security and economic implications for States 
of the acquisition and further development of these 
weapons had been submitted soon after the last 
session of the General Conference to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations by a group of expert 
consultants, among them some of the original creators 
of nuclear weapons technology.1) The most interesting 
aspect of the report was that it showed clearly and 
objectively how impractical nuclear weapons would 
be if used in an actual war, and that their value was 
highly questionable even from the standpoint of 
psychological warfare. Although the report showed 
convincingly that if mankind acted rationally in every 
situation, nuclear weapons would never be used, 
the history of mankind did not entirely bear out 
that the actions of decision-makers always followed 
rational patterns. 
5. In addition to the frightening potential of the 
nuclear weapons stocks now in the hands of five 
Powers, the number of countries with the requisite 
resources to acquire their own nuclear weapons 
was rapidly increasing. Furthermore, the fast-growing 
number of nuclear power plants increased the potential 
capacity for making plutonium for bombs, even 
if the plutonium produced was not necessarily suitable 
as weapon-grade material. 
6. The first proposals for control and total prohibition 
of weapons of mass destruction had been 
made more than 20 years before. Since that time 
the problem of nuclear disarmament had been dis1) 
See United Nations document A/6858. 

cussed at a great many conferences and meetings, 
though not in vain, as shown by the drastic 
reduction in the fallout figures, following the Partial 
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963, despite the fact 
that two nuclear-weapon countries were not parties 
to the Treaty. 

7. Although the slow progress made might be 
criticized, there was no reason for defeatism. The 
biggest step forward to date had been the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 2), 
signed by 80 States. Though it was not a final 
solution to the problem of nuclear armaments, it 
was to be warmly welcomed as a most promising 
achievement. In the opinion of his delegation, the 
Agency was obliged to do all in its power to ensure 
its implementation. 
8. Mankind considered the verification of the 
implementation of treaties and agreements a prerequisite 
for their credibility. Under Article III.l 
of the NPT, the Agency was entrusted with vital 
tasks and duties which it would perform when the 
Treaty came into force; Article IV obliged the 
Parties to the Treaty to promote peaceful exchange 
in the field of nuclear technology and, if possible, 
to co-operate with other States, especially non-nuclearweapon 
States, for that purpose. Article V stated 
that the benefits of the peaceful application of nuclear 
explosions would be made available to non-nuclearweapon 
States "under appropriate international observation" 
and "through an appropriate international 
body". He considered that the Agency was the 
appropriate body to carry out the obligations under 
that article. 
9. The fundamental concept of an organ such 
as the Agency had already been in existence in the 
1940's. Although when first established, the Agency's 
function had been limited to the peaceful uses ot 
atomic energy, no one could fail to note that the 
long process of building up the Agency had also 
entailed efforts to establish a system for controlling 
nuclear armament, and the Agency had no moral 
right to avoid the fulfilment of its new duties under 
the NPT. 
10. The NPT comprised close-knit political, organizational 
and technical elements that could not be 
separated if the aim in mind was to establish a 
meaningful safeguards system. Since the NPT was 
intended to cover the whole world, there would 
have to be a world-wide safeguards system, and 
one possibility would be a strongly centralized system 
with one organization in control of activities everywhere, 
while another would be a system with organizations 
acting on a regional basis and subordinate 
to a central organization. 
2) This Treaty, which is the subject of Resolution 
2373 (XXII) adopted by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations on 12 June 1968, is subsequently referred 
to in this record as "the Treaty" or "the NPT". 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

11. The question of safeguards was considered 
to be of cardinal importance in the Agency's Statute, 
and safeguards control was one of its major activities. 
But safeguards control in the spirit of the NPT 
would be a far wider and more exacting task than 
the Agency's present safeguards activities. Nevertheless, 
his delegation felt that the Agency should be 
accepted as the central organization referred to because 
of its background, the prominence given to 
safeguards in the Statute, and the experience already 
gained by the Agency in that connection. But the 
most important reason was that, if the Agency was 
not the body responsible for safeguards, it would 
be deprived of a large part of the duties forming 
the basis of its existence. Furthermore, the foundation 
of a new organization was not to be recommended 
since the number of international organizations was 
already rather large and membership of them might 
be a burden fox smaller countries. 
12. Reliable estimates of the cost of safeguards 
activities under the NPT and the manpower needed 
should be made as soon as possible. In addition, 
the Agency should make an evaluation of its own 
activities, and the basic philosophy of safeguards 
technology should also be objectively studied. 
Systems planning techniques had now been sufficiently 
developed to permit the optimum system 
to be devised for the technical implementation of 
the NPT safeguards principles. Although his delegation 
realized that that would inevitably involve 
political factors, he wished to stress the importance 
of objective systems analyses. The existing safeguards 
controls technology contained elements that 
were unessential, and which to some extent even 
afforded possibilities of industrial espionage. The 
main purpose of safeguards should be to control 
and record the existence and flow of materials and 
not to exercise detailed control over facilities 
producing raw materials which could be used to 
manufacture weapons. 
13. The only way in which the Agency could 
ensure its recognition as the central organization 
in a world-wide safeguards system was for it to 
develop the optimum system of safeguards control. 
But even then the services of regional organizations 
could be utilized. His delegation thought that even 
the, creation of new regional bodies might become 
desirable. In that connection he referred to the 
proposal for free-trade areas for peaceful nuclear 
activities submitted by the Finnish delegation at 
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States.3) 
14. Referring to Finland's own endeavours to enter 
the atomic age, he said that eight years before, a 
study of the prospects of nuclear power in Finland 
had been made in co-operation with the Agency. 
3) Held at Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 

A report on the study, published by the Agency 4), 
showed that nuclear power could only be incorporated 
rationally in acountry's electric power system 
provided that certain requirements as regards size, 
technical level and degree of integration were fulfilled. 
Although those requirements were met in the case 
of Finland, the programme had been postponed 
since the administration had been faced with new 
and unforeseen problems in that connection. As 
soon as large nuclear power plants were constructed, 
they would be placed under Agency safeguards; 
Finnish research reactors had been subject to Agency 
safeguards since 1962. 

15. As one of the countries designated to serve 
on the Board of Governors, Finland would make 
every effort to contribute to the solution of vital 
problems facing the international community within 
the framework of the Agency. 
16. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) 
deeply appreciated the honour of representing the 
United States of America for the eighth time at the 
General Conference and congratulated the Director 
General and staff of the Agency on their competence 
and dedicated service to the world-wide scientific 
community. 
17. He was confident that the NPT, which had 
been signed by more than 80 States, would enter 
into force and that an increasing number of States 
would become party to it. The Treaty would call 
for renewed dedication on the part of Member States 
to enable the Agency to discharge the heavy responsibilities 
facing it. 
18. He wished to read the following message 
from the President of the United States of America: 
"I welcome this opportunity to speak, 
through Chairman Seaborg, to the Delegates 
to the Twelfth General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency. 

"A year ago, I said that we stood at 
a crossroads in man's quest for peace and 
progress in that, if we could confine the future 
uses of atomic energy to peaceful purposes, 
we could improve the lives of people all over 
the world; whereas if more nations should 
be inclined to follow the costly road toward 
military exploitation, the atom would be a 
heavy burden on their ascent to a better life 
and an increasing threat to the peace of the 
world. 

"The non-proliferation treaty, which has 
been signed by many nations, is a further step 
toward ending the peril of nuclear war and en


4) Technical Reports Series, No. 2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

suring the equitable sharing of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy under effective safeguards 
for the benefit of all nations. As I said at 
the United Nations on June 12, 'nations that 
were long beset by differences have — in this 
great treaty — found common ground in their 
need to use the incredible force of the atom 
for peace, and not for war.' 

"We must not permit this opportunity, 
which this treaty has given us, to be lost. 
Each of us should do all within our power 
to bring about early ratification of the treaty. 

"With congratulations for your past accomplishments, 
I send you the best wishes 
of the people of the United States for your 
future endeavors." 

19. The United States reaffirmed its support of 
the Agency and believed that, in making the benefits 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy available to 
the largest possible number of countries, care must 
be taken to ensure that atomic energy would not 
be used for the destruction of mankind. 
20. He believed the Agency's programme for accelerating 
and enlarging the contribution of nuclear 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world, which had been developed with the assistance 
of many Menber States, would make even 
greater progress in future because of the remarkable 
advances made in using atomic energy in everyday 
life. The Agency would achieve even greater successes 
when the NPT created conditions which would 
facilitate closer international co-operation. The Treaty 
had focussed world attention on the Agency which, 
in his view, would be capable of discharging die 
enormous responsibilities with which it was faced. 
The onerous work which would have to be done 
should be started immediately by the Agency with 
a view to carrying out its task when the Treaty 
came into force. 
21. The Agency already had an effective safeguards 
system which was suitable for application to a wide 
range of activities and was not prejudicial to national 
nuclear energy programmes or commercial interests. 
Inspectors were available who could enable the Agency 
to discharge the wider responsibilities envisaged. 
While the safeguards system would permit such responsibilities 
to be discharged to the satisfaction of 
all parties to the Treaty, his Government was 
prepared to co-operate with the Agency and other 
Member States in further improving and simplifying 
the system. In that connection the application of 
the concept of "strategic points", which was foreseen 
in the Treaty, should be closely studied. The United 
States would continue to carry out work on research 
and development and inform the Agency and its 
Member States of the results obtained, which so 
far had been encouraging. 

22. With regard to the need for additional safeguards 
inspectors, he reiterated his Government's readiness 
to co-operate fully with the Agency in an expanded 
international safeguards training programme. He 
commended the Director General on his efforts 
to develop plans for building up the Agency's 
safeguards staff with a view to shouldering increased 
responsibilities. His Government would continue 
to assist the Agency in recruiting highly qualified 
staff and provide training opportunities; a safeguards 
training course was already under way at Argonne 
National Laboratory in which an Agency staff member 
was participating. 
23. In addition to safeguards activities, attention 
should continue to be given to activities of interest 
to developing countries. In that connection it was 
the responsibility of Member States to provide adequate 
funds for the technical assistance programme. 
The United States supported the Operational Budget 
proposed for 19695)and would continue to contribute 
a substantial proportion of the funds required, both 
in cash and in kind. It would also continue to 
provide the services of cost-free experts, training opportunities 
and certain items of equipment. For the 
tenth consecutive year, it would make available up 
to #50 000 worth of special nuclear material for 
use in Agency projects covering research and medical 
therapy. His Government strongly supported the 
Programme and the Regular Budget proposed for 
19696) and hoped other Member States would do 
likewise. 
24. In his address to the United Nations on 
12 June 1968 and on the occasion of the signing of 
the NPT, President Johnson had stated that the 
United States would engage in the fullest possible 
exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and 
technological information relating to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and that the needs of the 
developing countries would be given particular attention. 
The United States could take pride in the 
fact that it had maintained, over the past decade, 
an unparalleled programme of co-operation with other 
countries in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
and it would continue to do so in future. 
23. The advances being made in nuclear energy 
' activities 
would have a stimulating effect on the 
Agency. Recendy nuclear power plants with a capacity 
of up to 1200 MW(e) had become commercially 
available and were being incorporated in utility 
systems in the United States and elsewhere. 

5) GC(XII)/385, paras 681-685. 
6) Ibid., part II and paras 645-680 respectively. 



ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

26. The cost of water desalting was being substantially 
reduced as the size of desalting installations 
increased. With the growth in the world's population 
and in the per capita demands for water, desalting 
was playing an expanded role in many arid areas 
of the world. His Government had for several years 
been studying, frequendy in co-operation with the 
Agency, the possible use of nuclear desalting plants 
to provide water and power in Israel, the United 
Arab Republic, Greece, Mexico and the United States 
itself. 
27. A report had been drawn up and made 
available to the Agency on the use of nuclear energy 
centres as industrial and agro-industrial complexes 
which indicated that low-cost, nuclear-generated electricity 
could be used in the operation of large-scale 
industrial complexes and associated agricultural 
development. Fresh water, chemicals and metallurgical 
products could be produced and used to 
make the surrounding land productive. Consideration 
had also been given to the effect such centres 
could have on the economy of arid coastal regions. 
Special attention was being given to the possible 
use of such centres to meet the chronic shortage 
of water and power in the Middle East. The Agency 
could play a useful and constructive role in those 
studies. 
28. In co-operation with Member States the Agency 
had promulgated a series of standards, codes of 
safety and manuals which were extremely valuable. 
29. Many Member States had also shown keen 
interest in the collection and dissemination of scientific 
and technical information by the Agency. The 
rapid increase in the data available and the progress 
made in the use of computers had led the Agency 
to introduce the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS), and a number of Member States 
as well as EURATOM had lent experts to carry 
out a detailed study of INIS which might permit 
it to start operating on a small scale in 1970. 
30. Notable successes had been achieved by the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste 
and the International Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity 
at Monaco. 
31. A considerable number of regional co-operative 
projects were being carried out under the auspices 
of the Agency, particularly in developing countries. 
In that connection the Republic of Korea and 
Thailand were now participating in the joint IndiaPhilippine-
Agency programme of neutron spectrometry 
studies; regional radioisotope research and training 
courses had been held at Cairo and Kinshasha; 
the Central American countries had collaborated 
with the joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy 
in Food and Agriculture in a project to demonstrate 
the feasibility of eradicating the Mediterranean frun 
fly, and the Joint Division was also co-operating 
with the Government of Austria and the European 
Nuclear Energy Agency in a food irradiation project 
and with the Government of Iceland and the United 
States in a fish irradiation project. 

32. The Agency could play a leading part 
in connection with the uses of nuclear explosives 
for peaceful purposes, which offered exciting prospects 
for the future. The parties to the NPT were 
required to co-operate in making available to the 
non-nuclear-weapon States, on a non-discriminatory 
basis, the benefits derived from such uses and, in 
that regard, the Treaty provided that States could 
request assistance through an appropriate international 
body. In his Government's view that body 
should be the Agency, which should also devise 
procedures for meeting such requests, and the Conference 
should ask the Director General and the 
Board to start studying the subject. 
33. The United States would continue to carry 
out a programme of research and development regarding 
nuclear explosives particularly suitable for 
peaceful purposes and their potential use, and information, 
technical advice and assistance would 
be provided to countries on request. The work 
in question would involve evaluation of specific projects 
or general applications in other countries and, 
where it seemed useful from the point of view of 
overall research and development, nuclear experiments 
might be carried out in such countries. In 
the United States, legislation to facilitate the practical 
uses of nuclear explosives was already being considered 
by Congress. 
34. In conclusion, he wished to reiterate his Government's 
belief that the NPT represented a major 
step forward in the effort to end the peril of nuclear 
war and further advance international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. A number 
of complex problems would have to be solved, but 
much had already been done, particularly by the 
Agency, in the development of nuclear science for 
peaceful purposes and the organization of the world 
community to permit the use of nuclear energy 
for the benefit of mankind. The work still to be 
done represented a challenge which, with intelligence 
and good-will, could be met successfully. 
35. Mr. HULUBEI (Romania), after stressing that 
the strengthening of international peace and security 
was a prerequisite for bringing to fruition the manysided 
process by which mankind attained higher 
levels of civilization and progress, said that it was 
only if international peace and security were ensured 
that modern scientific and technical progress could 
be harnessed for the benefit of all countries. At 
a time when the existence and continuous refinement 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

of nuclear weapons — the most destructive which 
history had ever known — exposed mankind to 
a danger of unprecedented gravity, the Romanian 
people, through its Government, solemnly affirmed 
that peace could only be secured if relations between 
States were based on generally accepted principles 
of independence, sovereignty, equal rights and noninterference 
in the domestic affairs of States, and 
that increasing respect for those principles could 
help to curb the arbitrary actions which still beset 
international relations. 

36. Nowadays more than ever in the past, energetic 
action on the part o£ all States was necessary 
to eliminate sources of tension, to ban force as a 
means of setding international problems and to 
bring about a climate of confidence and co-operation 
which would free mankind from fear and from the 
disastrous consequences of war. 
37. The rapid development of Romanian industry 
and the national economy was due to the tremendous 
efforts made by the Romanian people. 
38. The Chairman of the Council of Ministers, 
Mr. Ceausesco, had recently stated that the country 
devoted 50% of the national revenue to the development 
of its socialist economy, in the knowledge 
that that was the only means whereby it could ensure 
a prosperous future. International peace and security 
were the corner-stones in that constructive work, 
in which the whole population was involved. Romania 
considered that all matters of dispute could and 
should be settled by negotiation alone and that 
in international relations it must be the force of law 
and not the law of force which should prevail. 
39. Nuclear research and the use of nuclear physics 
and related disciplines in the various sectors of 
economic and social life played an important role 
in any programme of scientific research. While the 
harnessing of nuclear energy, thanks to the work 
done in numerous scientific centres throughout the 
world, was a momentous step in the history of 
science and represented one of the hopes of mankind, 
it remained true that it also, unfortunately, 
gave rise to international dissension and profound 
concern owing to the danger of a destructive war 
which threatened mankind. 
40. It was for those reasons that Romania had 
always been unreservedly in favour of prohibiting 
the use of nuclear weapons, suspending the testing 
and production of such weapons and reducing and 
finally liquidating the present stocks of nuclear 
weapons and the means of transporting them. 
41. Conclusion of the NPT represented an important 
step towards increased security for all States, 
both large and small, and towards more effective 
and meaningful international co-operation with a 
view to the peaceful use of nuclear energy in a great 
variety of fields. 

42. International organizations and bodies had 
an important part to play in bringing into being 
a climate conducive to co-operation, without which 
efforts to promote progress and civilization must 
surely fail. However, in order that they might work 
effectively, it was in his view essential that they 
should reflect the realities of the present-day world 
and uphold the vital interests of all nations. TKJ 
Romanian delegation accordingly regarded as unacceptable 
the abnormal situation which led to the 
People's Republic of China being deprived of its 
rightful place in the Agency, where the principle 
of universality should be observed. 
43. The Romanian delegation also considered that 
it was necessary to end the unjustifiable discrimination 
which was exercised in regard to other socialist 
States - in particular the German Democratic Republic, 
North Viet-Nam and North Korea - which did not 
take part in the Agency's activities. 
44. It was on the other hand glad to note that 
Liechtenstein, the Niger and Zambia had been 
approved for membership of the Agency. 
45. The Agency had a number of notable and 
praiseworthy achievements to show on the occasion 
of the twelfth session of its General Conference. 
It had made its mark as an organization which was 
useful to its Member States because of the 
contribution it made to the development of international 
collaboration in the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. 
46. In its safeguards system, in favour of which 
the Romanian delegation had voted in 1965, the 
Agency had a means of carrying out one of the major 
tasks allotted to it. In June 1968 the Board of 
Governors had approved extension of the system 
to plants for converting and fabricating nuclear 
materials.7) 
47. In order to ensure due respect for the 
sovereignty of States the Romanian delegation considered 
it essential that any system for controlling 
the nuclear activities carried out in safeguarded facilities 
should be agreed to by all the States concerned. 
The provisions embodying such a system should 
be unequivocal and equitable, they should be based 
on the principle of the equality of States and 
allow all States without distinction the right and 
the possibility to carry on, unhindered, research 
in the nuclear field and to apply the results 
of nuclear science for their peaceful development. 
7) See document GC(XII)/INF/99. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

48. The peaceful use of nuclear energy implied 
that all States had an inalienable right to benefit 
from the progress made in scientific research, to 
free access to the information and results obtained 
in nuclear science and technology, to participation 
on as wide a basis as possible in the exchange 
of information and, finally, to nuclear equipment 
and materials. 
49. In the Romanian delegation's view, the 
generous support given by the Agency to the scientific 
and technical development of the non-nuclear 
countries must not be jeopardized by any additional 
expenses in which the Agency might find itself involved 
as a result of implementation of the NPT. 
50. The progress that had been made during the 
past year bore out the value of the Agency's efforts 
to ensure that atomic energy made an effective contribution 
to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. The devoted work of the Agency's Secretariat 
under the able direction of its Director General 
had been an important factor in bringing that 
progress about. 
51. The Annual Report of the Board of Governors 
to the General Conference for 1967-19688) described 
the progress made. Special mention should be made 
of technical assistance, the organization of scientific 
conferences and symposia and the establishment 
oflNIS. 
52. The important contribution of nuclear power 
development to the general improvement of the 
national economy was undeniable. In the presentday 
conditions of economic, technical and social 
development, nuclear power occupied a place which 
would rapidly become ever more important. His 
delegation was glad to note that increasingly close 
attention was being paid to questions of nuclear 
power, in accordance with the wish which it had 
expressed in previous years. In its view the Agency's 
programme for 1969-74 would serve to stimulate 
its activity in that area of major importance. 
53. In accordance with Resolution GC(X)/ 
RES/215, which recommended close co-operation 
with ILO and UNESCO, in particular in the training 
of technicians and the transfer of nuclear know-how 
to developing countries, the Romanian delegation 
suggested that the Agency pay special attention to 
the training of technicians in 1969-70. It was in 
favour of continued close collaboration with WHO 
in holding courses dealing more particulary with 
nuclear accidents, and favoured a more systematic 
approach to the problem of training specialists, an 
extremely complex matter in the nuclear field. 
8) GC(XII)/380. 

54. The Secretariat was to be congratulated on 
the attention it was paying to the fellowship 
programme. Means should be found to make the 
maximum use of Type II fellowships and to obtain 
a larger number of specialists with higher qualifications. 
The Agency should also collaborate with 
UNESCO and ILO in training specialists at graduate 
and technician level. It should also pay more 
attention to organizing courses, seminars and study 
tours, and to the procedure for training fellows. 
55- With regard to research contracts he welcomed 
the efforts made to tackle problems of practical 
interest, which offered immediate advantages both 
from the point of view of the Agency and from 
that of the development of research in Member 
States. The co-ordinated research projects undertaken 
in certain fields had helped substantially in 
clarifying important problems and it seemed that 
the research contract programme would gain in value 
and effectiveness if that method were extended. 

56. The work done to draw up safety standards 
and regulations governing radiation protection and the 
transport of radioactive materials also merited close 
attention because of the helpful guidance it gave 
national authorities responsible fo'r drawing up or 
bringing up to date their own regulations. 
57. The Agency was also to be commended for 
the initiative it had taken in publishing an annual 
review of the research carried out in Member States 
on questions of radiation protection. 
58. Romania, which had engaged in an ambitious 
programme of economic and industrial development, 
was keenly interested in the development of cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and for that reason followed the Agency's activities 
with close attention. It supported the Agency wholeheartedly 
and welcomed the proposal to convene 
a fourth International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy in 1970 or 1971.9) Lastly 
it supported the Agency's efforts to expand the 
scale of its technical assistance and was therefore 
prepared, as in the past, to make its contribution 
to the Operational Budget. 
59. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) said that the last 
few months had witnessed a birth and a death, both 
of more than casual interest in relation to nuclear 
energy. The birth had been that of the NPT; the 
death, the passing of Otto Hahn, one of the discoverers 
of the fission process, whose name would 
live on with those of the Curies, Rutherford, Fermi, 
Strasmann and Bohr. It must have been a considerable 
satisfaction to Hahn - an old opponent 
of nuclear weapons - to see the glimmerings of 
9) General Assembly Resolution 2309 (XXII). 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

sanity among the nations of the world. Imperfect 
though the terms of the NPT might be, many believed 
it could represent the first step towards 
nuclear disarmament, a move towards stopping mankind's 
mad, headlong rush to suicide. 

60. In that context, a special tribute was due 
to the President of the Conference for the energy 
and enthusiasm which he had shown in helping 
to promote the denuclearization of Latin America. 
61. Thus, the statesmen had now produced a 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 
and it was time for the scientists and the Agency to 
make their contribution to the enterprise. The 
Agency's safeguards system would have to be looked 
at in a new light. The voluntary principle, formerly 
a feature of the safeguards system, would give way 
to definite obligations on the part of those States 
which acceded to the Treaty. What had been 
tolerable under a voluntary system could not 
necessarily be accepted under a mandatory one, and 
the criteria for implementation of safeguards would 
have to be remodelled on sound statistical lines. 
Much more had to be learned about the critical 
points of the uranium fuel cycle, so that the 
procedures could be adapted accordingly. The NPT 
itself was full of obscurities and ambiguities which 
had provoked criticism from many countries; they 
would have to be clarified, and it would be the 
Agency's function to perform that task so that its 
obligations under the Treaty could be effectively 
discharged. The precise interpretation expected of 
the Agency would require much thought and study, 
and much consultation with Member States. 
62. During the deliberations of the Conference 
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States there had been 
frequent references to the organization, responsibilities 
and activities of the Agency. It was his understanding 
that any proposals adopted by that 
Conference would have to be referred to the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, which would 
determine whether and to what extent they should 
be referred to the Agency. The nuclear Powers, 
although able to participate in the Conference of 
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, had not had the right 
to vote. At the present stage, therefore, it would 
be improper for the General Conference to take 
a position with regard to anything that had happened 
during the previous four weeks in Geneva. 
63. The Agency was faced with the mammoth 
task of implementing the control functions laid down 
in the NPT. His delegation attached particular importance 
to avoiding unnecessary and wasteful inspection 
routines. There should be no mistake about one 
thing: the implementation of the Treaty would be 
extremely costly in terms of money and qualified 
manpower. The inspecting staff would increase, 
according to evidence presented to the United States 
Senate by the Brookhaven National Laboratory, to 
at least 394 and possibly twice that number by 
1971; the corresponding expenditure was estimated 
by the same authority to lie between $13 000 000 
and $30 000 000 for that year. An effective system 
to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons might 
be thought to be cheap at any price, but that could 
not justify wasteful expenditure, nor should it encourage 
the Agency to dissipate its resources 
(especially in terms of qualified inspectors) over an 
unnecessarily wide field. 

64. An almost impossible task awaited the 
Department of Safeguards and Inspection unless 
a realistic and balanced approach were taken. In 
his delegation's view an essential prerequisite was 
to determine the relative importance of the various 
stages of the fuel cycle, to ensure that the Agency's 
authority was exercised at the most critical points 
of the cycle. The safeguards system should 
concentrate on the control of special fissionable 
material of significance for military purposes. Source 
material had no direct application in the manufacture 
of weapons and should receive a correspondingly 
low priority. In general, a much higher degree of 
effectiveness would result if the control measures 
started further along the chain. 
65. In the same context, the organizational framework 
which the Board had established for the Agency 
would need adaptation. However, although safeguards 
responsibilities were likely to increase 
enormously as time went on, they must never be 
allowed to overshadow the Agency's other important 
objectives. It was of the utmost importance that 
a clear perspective should be maintained when 
adapting the organizational framework to accommodate 
increased safeguards responsibilities. In the 
view of his delegation, the solution should be sought 
in the direction of a permanent safeguards committee 
with wide representation of Member States, which 
would advise the Board on all matters relating to 
safeguards, and to which the Board would delegate 
specific functions in that field. Procedures would 
have to be prescribed for that committee which 
would satisfy Member States that their legitimate 
wishes concerning safeguards could not easily be 
brushed aside. 
66. In the interests of efficiency it would 
be necessary to maintain the present high standards 
of competence within the Inspectorate. That could 
be done only by retaining the skilled services of 
the Agency's inspectors. It had long been his 
Government's contention that the engagement of 
well-qualified nuclear scientists as inspectors on shortterm 
contracts was basically unsound and largely 
unproductive. Staff of the high calibre needed to 
carry out complex inspections of nuclear installations 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

were unlikely to be attracted by the prospect of 
interrupting their careers in their home countries 
for a few years and then returning home with a 
possible loss of seniority. Another disadvantage, 
from die Agency's point of view, was diat a large 
portion of the contract period had to be given over 
to training and was dierefore unproductive, while 
the remaining period was, by normal industrial and 
commercial standards, scarcely long enough to be 
truly useful. Though there were some sound 
arguments on the other side, his delegation had no 
doubt that the Agency's safeguards inspectors should 
be offered an assured career, so that incumbents 
could discharge their duties in an impartial manner 
as truly international civil servants. 

67. Whatever the solution decided upon, the 
important new responsibilities conferred by the NPT 
could not be properly discharged unless political 
issues were excluded entirely from the Agency's 
activities and left to the United Nations where they 
properly belonged. If the Agency were so weak 
as to trade in political issues it would only contribute 
to its own disruption and to die frustration of the 
whole noble objective. 
68. However, the Agency would have to retain 
a sense of perspective not only in safeguards but 
through die whole range of its activities. Now was 
the time, before commitments became too heavy, 
to adopt a realistic and rational approach to future 
work. A dispassionate definition of the objectives 
of the Agency - followed by effective pruning of the 
side issues tiiat had grown up over die years would 
be needed. Duplication and imitation by 
die Agency of existing facilities in Member States 
must be rigorously avoided, and die activities in 
which die Agency was engaged as to the objectives 
aimed at and tiieir ultimate benefit to Member States 
should be subjected to a searching assessment. 

69. The Chairman of the United States Atomic 
Energy Commission had recentiy pointed out that 
the time was past when scientists could work on 
any project that engaged their attention. If that 
was true in a large Member State, it applied a fortiori 
to the Agency, which had comparatively small means 
at its disposal. 
70. Much had been said recently about the need 
for safeguards research and development, and it was 
his delegation's view that the planning and launching 
of a co-ordinated programme in that field should 
rest squarely on the shoulders of die Agency. The 
valuable work which some Member States had already 
undertaken should continue, but it was nevertheless 
advisable for the Agency to co-ordinate die studies 
already under way, and to stimulate and promote 
further research where appropriate. Though the 
Agency might itself have to undertake some research, 
it should as far as practicable avoid establishing 
facilities and providing staff, and should concentrate 
radier on initiating investigations at existing centres 
in Member States by the award of research contracts 
and other means. In the interests of efficiency and 
economy, the principle of over-all co-ordination, 
guidance and encouragement of research in Member 
States was one which his delegation recommended 
whole-heartedly; it was, moreover, equally applicable 
to all fields of nuclear research widi which 

die Agency was concerned. 

71. The absence of funds sufficient to enable the 
Agency to carry out every desirable project (especially 
in technical assistance) was a perennial problem. 
It was evident diat die effect of die NPT on die 
structure and the operations of the Agency would 
not be confined to die Department of Safeguards and 
Inspection. Article IV. 2 of the Treaty provided 
for "die fullest possible exchange of equipment, 
materials and scientific and technological information 
for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy". It was not 
yet clear how diat article would be implemented 
in practice. Presumably it meant more than just 
a continuation of the existing metiiods and tempo 
of exchange, and die views of die sponsors of the 
Treaty as to how it should be put into effect would 
be awaited widi keen interest. 
72. Everyone knew that the Agency's technical 
assistance was provided primarily in the form of 
technical and scientific training and expert advice, 
and that equipment was also supplied in accordance 
with the provisions established during die review 
of the Agency's activities.10) Those general principles 
were valuable and should continue to guide the 
Agency. What could not be defended so easily was 
the undertaking of relatively long-term commitments 
to accept responsibility for a substantial portion 
of the running costs of research institutions. 
73. There were basically two categories of research 
institution: regional centres catering for die needs 
of die Member States within their areas, and 
institutions wholly or pardy financed by the Agency, 
as at Seibersdorf, Trieste and Monaco. For the 
former category, certain guiding principles had already 
been formulated which were designed to limit the 
Agency's financial responsibility to a reasonable and 
tolerable level. With regard to the latter category, 
it had been argued that the Agency had already 
fulfilled its function in promoting die establishment 
of those institutions and that it should now witiidraw 
its contribution towards running costs. His Government 
would subscribe to diat view if tiiere were 
any odier national or international bodies available 
to replace the Agency; however, as no alternative 
10) See documents GC(XI)/362 and Add. 1 and 2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

sponsors could be found at present, a time limit 
on the period during which the Agency should 
continue to extend financial aid in the form 
of straight subsidies ought seriously to be considered. 
The period would of course differ for each 
institution, and they would continue to qualify for 
financial assistance in other forms, such as research 
contracts and fellowships. 

74. It seemed that, especially in the light of the 
growing demands on its limited resources, the 
Agency's involvement with any such institution in 
future should be limited to: 
(a) 
An expert assessment of the need for 
and the feasibility of the institution; 
(b) 
Provision of expert advice on the planning 
and setting up of the institution; 
(c ) 
Training of key personnel to staff the 
institution; and 
(d) 
Guidance and advice on the operation 
of the institution for the first few years 
of its existence, to ensure that it was 
founded on sound administrative principles. 
75. It remained his country's convinction, a conviction 
born of the real experience of South Africa, 
that progress must come from one's own resources 
and efforts. In the economic sphere the watchword 
had been "Trade not Aid". In nuclear energy the 
problem of promoting the advancement of the 
developing countries should be approached in much 
the same spirit, by encouraging and assisting Member 
States to build with the bricks of Agency assistance 
on the foundations of their own resources and 
efforts. 
76. The Agency's obligations and responsibilities 
were likely to increase substantially in the coming 
few years, partly as a result of the provisions of the 
NPT, and partly because the application of nuclear 
techniques throughout the world was becoming more 
intensive and more extensive. The consequent increase 
in the facilities which the Agency would be 
called upon to supply would inevitably require more 
expenditure and a larger annual budget. South Africa 
was not opposed to that inevitable development, 
provided that the additional expenditure involved 
was properly motivated, and that each item was 
assessed according to the criteria of merit, priority 
and relevance to the functions and objectives of 
the Agency. Expansion of the budget should not 
imply a relaxation of the principles of sound budget 
administration which had been observed in the past. 
While the Agency should not be prevented by lack 
of funds from performing the tasks for which it was 
designed, it must continue to realize that those 
funds were in short supply and must be carefully 
husbanded. 

77. On the subject of technical information, South 
Africa had noted with gratification the steady progress 
being made in the development of INIS under the 
Agency's administration. The Director General and 
his staff should be encouraged to pursue their efforts 
in that direction with energy and with due regard 
to sound organizational principles. Given those prerequisites, 
INIS could become one of the chief 
functions of the Agency, and one of its most 
important contributions to the scientific world. 
78. Another activity to which his Government 
attached significance was the application of nuclear 
techniques to agriculture. The problem of feeding 
the rapidly expanding population of the world was 
one which loomed larger every year, and nuclear 
science in general, and the Agency in particular, 
had much to offer towards its solution. Nuclear 
techniques could be applied to improve crop production 
and to prevent wastage through deterioration 
of the final product, and it was important that the 
Agency should continue to take an appropriate part 
in the development of those techniques and more 
particularly in the dissemination of information about 
them. 
79. When the Agency had been established it had 
been difficult to foresee precisely the pattern and 
die tempo of developments in the atomic energy 
field over the subsequent two decades or so. However, 
the pattern was now much clearer, and it could 
be justifiably claimed that the architects of 
the Statute had succeeded to a gratifying degree 
in establishing a sound organization. They had 
furnished the potential to grapple effectively with 
the increasing demands of the nuclear age, demands 
which were closely associated with satisfying the 
universal desire for the security and economic progress 
of the world. 
80. All the present indications were that the tempo 
of development was increasing rapidly. If there was 
some justification for the contention that the Agency's 
facilities had not been fully utilized during the past 
decade, there should be no such justification during 
the succeeding one. Expanded opportunities for 
applying nuclear techniques for the benefit of mankind 
were to be welcomed. The Agency faced a 
challenge which would be both stimulating and 
satisfying. The South African delegation had no 
doubts about its ability to meet that challenge. 
81. Mr. NIISEKI (Japan) expressed the hope 
that the Agency, which had since its foundation 
played so significant a role in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, would quickly respond to the 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

great new challenge posed by the expected entry 
into force of the NPT. 

82. A detailed account of the development of 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in Japan during 
the past year could be found in document 
GC(XII)/INF/101/Rev. 1. The construction of 
nuclear power stations had proceeded in accordance 
with the Long-Range Programme on Development 
and Utilization of Atomic Energy worked out by 
the Atomic Energy Commission of Japan. The 
installation of two light-water reactors had already 
been sanctioned during the current year, thus increasing 
Japan's nuclear power generation capacity 
to 2500 MW. In order to ensure the stable supply 
and efficient use of cheap nuclear fuel, the Government 
of Japan had authorized two Japanese enterprises 
to undertake nuclear fuel fabrication services 
on an industrial scale; the first was scheduled to 
start operation in 1969 with an annual output of 
140 tons, the second in 1970 with an annual output 
of 100 tons. Japan had furthermore entered into 
agreements for co-operation in the field of nuclear 
energy with the United States of America and the 
United Kingdom, and a group of Japanese electricity 
enterprises had concluded a long-term contract to 
import natural uranium from Canada. 
83. In addition, remarkable progress had been 
made in the chemical application of nuclear energy. 
The Japanese Atomic Energy Research Institute had 
succeeded in polymerizing trioxane by radiation on 
an industrial scale, thereby opening up a new field 
in the chemical application of radiation. Finally, 
a Basic Programme on the Research and Development 
of Nuclear Fusion had been drawn up by the 
Atomic Energy Commission. 
84. As a result of the remarkable advances made 
in peaceful uses of nuclear energy since the Agency's 
foundation, the power reactors in the world, including 
those under construction or being planned, now 
totalled 213. The world's nuclear power generation 
capacity was expected to reach 30 000 MW by 1970, 
and more than 300 000 MW by 1980. 
85. Developed countries were currently devoting 
much effort to the development of a fast-breeder 
reactor, which would play a leading role in nuclear 
power generation in the future, and of an advanced 
converter reactor, which would fulfil an intermediate 
but important function between existing reactors 
and the fast-breeder reactor. The Agency should 
play an active role in facilitating the exchange of 
technical information on those projects. 
86. The expected ten-fold increase in the world's 
nuclear power generation capacity over the next 
ten years was likely to intensify certain safety 
problems relating to the transportation of nuclear 
materials, nuclear facilities, and radioactive waste 
management. The Agency should continue to take 
an interest in problems connected with radioactive 
waste and study how such waste should be disposed 
of. 

87. New areas in which the Agency could conduct 
long-term research and development work included 
nuclear fusion, steel-making with the aid of reactors, 
process-heat and transuranium elements. 
88. In granting aid to developing countries, the 
Agency should consider how peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy could best be combined with the economic 
development of those countries. It should, moreover, 
henceforth shift the emphasis, which had until now 
been placed on agriculture and medicine, to the 
utilization of multi-purpose reactors to further the 
necessary economic and social development 
programmes. Its first task, however, should be to 
assist developing countries to plan their long-term 
programmes relating to nuclear power generation, 
and train the required technical personnel. 
89. The most important matter facing the Agency 
at the present time was the role it should play in 
the implementation of the NPT, the purpose of 
which was not only to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, but also to develop peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. The Agency appeared 
to be particularly well qualified to art as a centre 
for international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy under the NPT. In that 
connection, it ought to consider, as a matter of 
urgency, what concrete measures it could take to 
make the provisions of Articles IV and V of the 
NPT effective and meaningful. It was, furthermore, 
important for the future economic development of 
non-nuclear-weapon States that the Agency should 
become the central organization for implementing 
the provisions of Article V of the NPT and ensure 
that the non-nuclear-weapon States were granted 
access to the benefits to be derived from peaceful 
nuclear explosions. 
90. The Agency should tackle the important 
problem raised by the proposed application of its 
safeguards system under the NPT by making, at 
an early date, a blueprint of possible solutions of 
the technical, financial and staff problems likely 
to arise. It should also make efforts to simplify 
its safeguards techniques, without reducing their 
effectiveness; such simplification was desirable also 
from the financial point of view. In his delegation's 
view, the costs arising from the application of the 
Agency's safeguards should be borne by the Agency, 
since the latter applied its safeguards for the sake 
of the international community. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

91. The Agency's safeguards system should be 
applied to all States on a non-discriminatory basis. 
While such safeguards should play a vital role under 
the NPT in ensuring that atomic energy was used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes, the primary responsibility 
still rested with each State, that of carrying 
out its obligations in that regard. 
92. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) said that the 
past year had seen a marked increase in the worldwide 
use of nuclear power and related technologies. 
That trend reflected the confidence which now existed 
in the safety of nuclear power, its reliability and, 
not least, its cleanliness, a matter of growing importance 
to Australia and other countries where 
air pollution was causing increasing concern. Above 
all, it reflected the increasing competitiveness of 
nuclear power. His country was now on the 
threshold of introducing economic nuclear power. 
The Australian Atomic Energy Commission was 
working closely to that end with die power 
generating authorities of New South Wales and 
Victoria, where nuclear power would be economic 
in unit sizes of 500 MW and above from 1975 
onwards. Taking cost, fuel supply and all other 
relevant factors into account, the type of reactor 
chosen would probably be the natural-uranium-fuelled 
power reactor, moderated by heavy water. By standardizing 
on one power reactor type for the initial 
series of nuclear stations, Australia would achieve 
economies through replication of ordering and production 
of components, many of which would be 
made locally, and thus greatly assist die establishment 
of a domestic nuclear manufacturing industry. 
93. On the basis of power consumption estimates, 
it was expected that Australia would have to bring 
into operation the equivalent of fifteen 500-MW 
power stations between 1975 and 1980 and the 
equivalent of a further 36 between 1980 and 1985. 
It seemed reasonable to assume that half that installed 
capacity would be nuclear. The actual size 
of the units would tend to encrease: by the late 
1970's at least one Australian State would be 
looking for stations with an output of 750 MW 
and in the 1980's units of 1000 MW or more would 
be in demand. 

94. For units of that size it was expected that 
fast-breeder reactors would be economic by the late 
1980's. Their interest lay of course in the promise 
of reduced power generating costs. A substantial 
initial inventory of plutonium would be needed, 
however, to establish a .family. of fast-breeder power 
reactors in Australia; and although those reactors 
would produce more fissile material than they 
consumed, the extra production would not suffice 
to fuel all new fast-breeder reactors being built. 
For those reasons countries which planned to use 
fast-breeder power reactors should take immediate 
steps to ensure future stocks of plutonium. In 
Australia, the policy he had described appeared to 
meet that requirement. 

95. In carrying out its programme Australia enjoyed 
fruitful collaboration with the United Kingdom, 
Canada, the United States of America and France. 
The Australian Atomic Energy Commission had sent 
to Canada and the United Kingdom some 30 scientists 
and engineers to work on joint projects relating 
to power reactor systems fuelled by natural uranium. 
96. In view of what he had said it was understandable 
that Australian research was mainly focussed 
on natural uranium reactors. For some years past 
Australia had been collaborating with the Indian 
Atomic Energy Commission, through the exchange 
of scientists and the division of experimental and 
theoretical projects between Trombay and Lucas 
Heights, in studies relating to the reactor physics 
of such reactors; that collaboration had recently 
extended into the field of materials science and 
technology. It was noteworthy that that collaboration, 
based on mutual interest and mutual confidence, 
was between countries which were geographically far 
apart: a common frontier was no prerequisite for 
peaceful co-operation. 
97. Australia was not, however, neglecting other 
useful nuclear power systems. For example, it was 
still doing work on high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, 
specifically those fuelled with a ceramic mixture 
including enriched uranium. Indeed, no country 
could afford to abandon completely the idea of introducing 
enriched-uranium reactor systems. At the 
same time it would hardly be prudent to base one's 
power industry on a fuel cycle which could be satisfied 
by a limited number of sources only. The 
certainty of obtaining future supplies and the economics 
of enriched-uranium reators were a matter of 
serious concern to countries like Australia which, 
although possessing their own uranium deposits, 
did not have enrichment facilities. Australia had for 
some time past been engaged in a programme of 
work on enrichment processes, including the gascentrifuge 
method of uranium isotope separation, 
which promised to be cheaper than the gaseous 
diffusion method. It was aware that other countries 
were engaged in similar programmes and it seemed 
regrettable that there should be duplication in developing 
a technology which was so important to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, but which continued 
to remain classified. 
98. All that had been said in the past about the 
benefits of radioisotopes remained valid. Indeed 
in the growing field of radiation chemistry the 
promise still lay largely in the future: the new irradiated, 
resin-impregnated timbers with their remarkable 
properties and potential new uses, and the 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

new polymers and polymerization methods that were 
in prospect, were only some of the developments 
in that field which might, in time to come, prove 
of great importance to mankind. 

99. Australia, which had voted in favour of the 
General Assembly resolution .commending. the 
NPT, favoured an effective treaty, as it favoured 
measures directed towards a degree of world-wide 
disarmament. To be effective, the Treaty must attract 
a large number of adherents, including specifically 
those non-nuclear-weapon States that had achieved, 
or had the means to achieve, a significant measure 
of nuclear development. The absence of Communist 
China from the signatories was a matter for concern. 
From Australia's viewpoint it was important that 
the Treaty should not impede the civil development 
of nuclear science and technology, and in that respect 
the present text of the Treaty required clarification 
on a number of points. One area of particular 
concern related to the scope and manner of 
application of safeguards under the Treaty, a matter 
for which the Agency would be responsible. There 
were many aspects to be considered. First of all, 
there was the agreement between the Agency and 
each non-nuclear-weapon State party to the Treaty. 
Secondly, there was the safeguards inspectorate: it 
was essential that inspectors be given a tenure of 
office much longer than at present and conditions 
of employment which would not encourage them to 
seek alternative employment or to neglect their loyalties 
to the Agency. Thirdly, there was the question 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear explosives, referred 
to in Article V of the NPT. It was unfortunately 
a fact that some important peaceful uses of nuclear 
explosives were inhibited by the provisions of the 
Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. Australia, which 
had recently had the pleasure of receiving two 
leading United States experts who had pointed the 
way to potential peaceful uses of nuclear explosives 
in Australia, hoped that where the technique could 
be used with advantage to national development 
and without danger, all countries would be willing 
to co-operate in securing the necessary amendments 
to that treaty. 

100. In fields of endeavour directly sponsored by 
the Agency much good work had been done. The 
Board of Governors had promoted the Agency's 
interests enthusiastically and economically and the 
Secretariat was to be congratulated on enabling 
Member States for the first time to ascertain the 
cost of programmes on a project basis. The next 
important project would be INIS. If properly organized, 
INIS would bring untold benefits, particularly 
to developing countries. It would however be a 
costly and time-consuming enterprise, and it was 
essential that it should be thoroughly planned. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


GC 


vv International Atomic Energy Agency GC(XII)/OR.121 

1 
1 
14 February 1969 
GENERAL Distr. 

%^V)pJf General Conference 

ENGLISH 

Item of the 

ageyida* 

GC(XII)/390. 


RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
(24-30 SEPTEMBER 1968) 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 25 September 1968, at 3.20 p.m. 


President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Yugoslavia 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Canada 
France 
Belgium 
Philippines 
Ceylon 
Bulgaria 


Paragraphs 

1 — 125 

1 — 11 


12— 51 


52— 66 


67— 77 


78— 93 
94— 108 
109— 119 
120 — 125 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XII)/INF/103/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1967-68 
(GC(XII)/380, 389) (continued) 

1. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia) noted that the 
importance and usefulness of the Agency to its 
Member States and to the international community 
at large had increased year by year, as had the scope 
of its activities. 
2. Since the last session of the General Conference, 
new dangers had been added to those created by 
the threat of nuclear weapons and the arms race, 
since it had been demonstrated that the use of 
violence, pressure and military intervention had become 
common practice in international relations. 
Such developments resulted in increased international 
tension and greater discrimination on the part of 
the large nations against the small ones, and had 
an adverse effect upon the policy of peaceful coexistence 
among States with different social systems. 
His own country would continue to be guided in 
its foreign policy by the principle of developing 
international co-operation on the basis of full respect 
for sovereign equality, territorial integrity and the 
right of every nation to decide its own destiny. 
3. The adoption by the General Assembly of 
the United Nations of a resolution commending 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons1) represented an important step towards 
preventing the spreading of nuclear weapons. In 
signing the NPT, his country was convinced that 
it was only the first stage in the process of nuclear 
disarmament. At the Conference of Non-Nuclear-
Weapon States2) countries which did not possess 
nuclear weapons had considered important issues, 
the solution of which would guarantee world security. 
4. The NPT would place heavy responsibilities 
on the Agency, especially with regard to the provision 
of an effective safeguards system. The Agency 
had also given assurances to the General Assembly 
of its participation and involvement in the creation 
of an international mechanism to facilitate the effective 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
5- The assumption by the Agency of new responsibilities 
in connection with the NPT and its 
increasing activities in the administration of safeguards 
were proof both of its competence and of 
the confidence placed in it by its Member States. 
The Yugoslav Government welcomed the decision 
of the Mexican Government to entrust to the Agency 

1) This Treaty, which is the subject of Resolution 

2373 (XXII) adopted by the General Assembly of the 

United Nations on 12 June 1968, is subsequently re


ferred to in this record as "the Treaty" or "the NPT*. 

2) Held at Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 

the safeguarding of all its nuclear activities 3) and 
hoped that action would serve as an example to 
other Member States. 

6. The Agency's activities during the past years 
had been comprehensive, diverse and successful. 
The six-year programme presented to die Conference 4) 
was particularly useful and it was to be hoped that 
other major problems would be considered in a 
similar manner. 
7. The Agency would need the widest possible 
support from Member States in fulfilling the new 
obligations and tasks which it was likely to assume 
in connection with die NPT. The successful execution 
of those activities would have a favourable effect 
upon the development of die peaceful application 
of nuclear energy and would strengthen confidence 
among States, thereby facilitating further measures 
towards general, and in particular nuclear, 
disarmament. 
8. It was to be expected, in die light of Article 
VI of the NPT, that the great nuclear Powers would 
undertake to stop carrying out research of a military 
nature or, at least, gradually reduce the amount of 
such research. If the research now being carried 
out for military purposes were devoted to peaceful 
purposes instead, it would give an enormous impetus 
to die development and extension of the use of 
nuclear energy to promote die prosperity of mankind. 
As an immediate result of the implementation of 
the Treaty, a freer exchange of information and 
knowledge, die declassification of hitherto classified 
data and results and the implementation of new 
projects relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
explosions were to be expected. The expenditure 
necessitated by those activities would be considerable, 
but every effort was worth while if it helped 
to avert a nuclear catastrophe. 
9. Yugoslavia was prepared to assist the Agency 
fully in meeting the ever-growing costs of inspection 
and control by making available its research laboratories 
and facilities for the training of inspectors, 
the carrying out of analyses, and die development 
and promotion of control methods, instrumentation, 
specific dosimetry and, in general, die techniques 
of control and inspection. 
10. The Agency's efforts in providing technical 
assistance to developing countries had in die 
past been constructive and successful, but die increasing 
number of requests for aid, taken in 
conjunction widi the Agency's limited resources, 
was seriously hampering the solution of the problems 
3) See document INFCIRC/118. 
4) GC(XII)/385, paras 11-15 and 32-623. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

involved. His delegation believed that the appeal 
by the Director General for voluntary contributions 
from Member States at the same percentage rate 
as their assessed contribution to the Regular Budget 
should be answered in a positive manner. 

11. Few countries had the necessary facilities for 
a dynamic development oi reactor technology and 
the mass construction of large nuclear power stations. 
On the other hand, many more countries were interested 
in plants of a more modest size or in the 
diversification of reactor types. The Agency should 
give more attention to the problems associated with 
such concepts and possibilities. It should also explore 
means of using as much of its resources as possible 
to carry out its technical assistance programme without 
increasing administrative expenses. It was desirable 
that the Agency should use its available resources 
with the maximum degree of efficiency and economy. 
12. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) read a message to the Conference from 
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the 
USSR5). 
13. He then stated that a new and important 
stage had been reached in the life of the Agency 
as a result of the adoption by the General Assembly 
of the NPT and its opening for signature. The 
NPT would undoubtedly contribute to easing international 
tension and reducing the threat of nuclear 
war, and would give a fresh impulse to the 
implementation of further measures in the field of 
disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament. It 
had been signed by 81 States; that bore witness to 
the wide international recognition of the importance 
of the Treaty for the peace and security of the 
peoples of the world. 
14. The Soviet Government attached great importance 
to the NPT, and had sent to-all Governments 
a memorandum concerning a number of 
measures which should be taken urgently with regard 
to the cessation of the arms race and disarmament. 
Among those measures were the prohibition of the 
use of nuclear weapons, the cessation of their manufacture, 
the reduction and liquidation of their 
existing stockpiles, and the limitation and subsequent 
elimination of the means of their delivery. That 
memorandum had been submitted by the Soviet 
Government to the General Assembly as an important 
and urgent item for its current session. 
The Soviet Union considered that the proposals 
contained in the memorandum were of exceptional 
importance. Their implementation would represent 
a substantial contribution towards putting an end 
to the armaments race and solving the vital problem 
of disarmament. 
5) The text is reproduced in document GC(XII)/INF/104. 

15. The conclusion of the NPT directly affected 
the Agency's work in all its aspects. Under the 
NPT, non-nuclear-weapon States which were parties 
thereto were called upon to accept safeguards, concluding 
special agreements with the Agency for that 
purpose. Altogether, during the two-year period 
following the entry into force of the NPT, the 
Agency would have not only to complete negotiations 
with the non-nudear-weapon States concerned 
and conclude safeguards agreements with them, but 
also to be ready to exercise forthwith effective control 
over their peaceful nuclear activities. 
16. The main responsibility for timely action to 
equip the Agency for carrying out its control 
functions under the NPT lay with the Board of 
Governors. Without waiting for the entry into force 
of the NPT the Board and the Agency's Secretariat 
should start negotiating agreements with the nonnuclear-
weapon States which were parties to the 
Treaty and solving other important problems 
connected with the Agency's safeguards activities. 
17. The Agency possessed all the facilities for 
coping with the tasks it would have to perform 
in ensuring observance of the NPT. As a result 
of painstaking and protracted work in line with 
the Agency's Statute, a system of safeguards and 
inspection had been established, on the basis of 
which it would be possible to discharge the control 
functions laid down by the NPT. That system now 
covered practically the whole nuclear fuel cycle with 
the exception of plants for the isotopic enrichment 
of uranium. The Agency had at its disposal a staff 
of highly qualified scientists and technicians familiar 
with the specific problems of safeguards. With the 
help of those experts the Agency could, within a 
relatively short space of time, establish the necessary 
control and inspection machinery and carry out control 
operations in accordance with the provisions of the 
NPT. In the future also the Soviet Union would 
be prepared to participate actively in that aspect of 
the Agency's work. 
18. In the light of the tasks awaiting the Agency 
in connection with the NPT, it was extremely important 
that the principle of universality, the 
participation in the Agency's work of all the 
countries of the world, should be rigorously observed. 
In that connection the Soviet delegation considered 
it necessary to state that membership of the Agency 
should be open to a country such as the German 
Democratic Republic, the great achievements of which, 
particularly in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
were widely recognized. 
19. As was well known, the German Democratic 
Republic had been among the first to sign the Treaty 
and to state its readiness to place its activities 
relating to the peaceful uses of atomic energy under 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

the Agency's safeguards6). Its participation in the 
work of the Agency would have a beneficial effect 
on the entire work of the organization. 

20. On the subject of the conclusion of the NPT, 
the Soviet delegation wished to emphasize that the 
Agency's control functions should not supersede and 
supplant its other activities in connection with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy or its efforts to 
promote international co-operation in that sphere. 
The Soviet delegation was firmly convinced that 
the NPT would create favourable conditions for the 
utilization of atomic energy for peaceful ends. The 
Treaty established conditions under which the nonnuclear-
weapon countries could derive extensive 
advantages from the peaceful applications of atomic 
energy, including the benefits of nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes. It confirmed the right of 
the parties to engage, free from discrimination, in 
nuclear research, production and applications for 
peaceful purposes. It extended the possibilities of 
participation in a broad international exchange of 
equipment, materials and scientific and technical 
information on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Moreover, in accordance with the wishes of nonnuclear-
weapon countries, the Treaty included 
provisions under which States which had achieved 
a high level of development in peaceful applications 
would co-operate in promoting the development 
of such uses by non-nuclear-weapon States, making 
due allowance for the needs of the developing 
countries. 
21. It was obvious that the non-nuclear-weapon 
States which were parties to the NPT would enjoy 
extremely favourable opportunities in connection with 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It would enable 
them not only to avoid involvement in a hopeless 
and wasteful nuclear weapons race but also to 
conserve a considerable part of their resources to 
meet urgent requirements bound up with their 
economic development, raise the living standard of 
their people and devote greater efforts and more 
funds to the solution of their economic and social 
problems. 
22. It was absolutely essential that the Agency 
should play a leading part in the development of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy following the 
conclusion of the NPT. 
23. The development of nuclear power in the 
Soviet Union would be carried out in the years 
immediately ahead on die basis of familiar types 
of facilities — water-water reactors and uraniumgraphite 
reactors of the channel tape, followed by 
a gradual transition to fast-neutron breeder reactors. 
6) See documents GC(X)/INF/91 and GC(XII)/INF/105, 
part V. 

24. Plans had been made in the Soviet Union, 
and were already being carried out, for die expansion 
of the existing nuclear power stations at Novovoronezh 
and Beloyarsk (installation of a BN-600 fast reactor), 
and also for the construction of the Kola, Armenian 
and Bilibinsk nuclear power stations, as well as a 
dual-purpose nuclear power station at Shevchenko. 
25. In addition, four twin-reactor nuclear power 
stations (unit capacity up to 1000 MW(e)) were 
scheduled for construction. Erection of the first 
of those stations was already under way near Leningrad, 
and the second would be built near Kursk. 
The cost of generating electricity at those stations 
would be considerably lower than at the organicfuel 
power plants in the same regions. 
26. It was well known that the Soviet Union was 
co-operating extensively ' on an international scale 
in the field of nuclear power, concluding agreements 
with a number of countries for the erection 
of nuclear power stations. It was intended 
to continue such co-operation in the future, making 
use of the wide experience that had been gained 
in the construction and operation of such stations. 
27. As part of the effort to promote still further 
the development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in the developing countries, especially the 
generation of nuclear power for the purpose of improving 
the economic welfare and prosperity of die 
peoples of those countries, the Soviet delegation 
was authorized to state that the Soviet Union was 
prepared to enrich natural uranium for interested 
non-nuclear countries up to 2.5-5% in uranium-235, 
i.e. to the level of enrichment required for nuclear 
power stations. It went without saying that such 
uranium would have to be used in those countries 
solely for peaceful purposes. 
28. At the present time, Soviet industry was 
producing on a mass-production basis over 50 
different types of radioisotope devices for industrial 
process control; a total of nearly 3000 familiar and 
widely used items were being produced by 
the isotope industry. 
29. One of the most important radioisotope applications 
in the Soviet Union was the control and 
automation of technological processes in various 
branches of industry. 
30. In 1967 an industrial-scale radiation chemistry 
installation had come into operation for the purpose 
of producing monosulpho-chloride, which was used 
in the manufacture of effective synthetic detergents 
and emulsifiers. There was a steady growth in the 
use of radioisotopes for the manufacture of power 
sources for various types of automatic electronic 
equipment. 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

31. In the past year significant scientific and 
technical achievements had also been made in a 
fundamental field, that of nuclear physics. During 
the same period, the world's largest (70-GeV)proton 
accelerator had started operation in the Soviet Union. 
32. In the course of 1968, a number of essential 
beam parameters had been established and experimental 
work started. The first scientific results in 
an experiment on proton-proton scattering had been 
obtained, yielding valuable information about the 
nature of the interaction of elementary particles in 
that energy region. Co-operation with scientists from 
France and the European Organization for Nuclear 
Research (CERN) under agreements concluded for 
work on accelerators was going forward successfully. 
33. In 1967 an annular electron accelerator (with 
an energy of 6 GeV) had gone into operation. The 
unit was the largest of its kind in the Soviet Union 
and one of die largest in the world. The accelerator 
had reached the planned energy level. 
34. In the past year the Soviet Union had made 
definite progress in the study of plasma physics 
and controlled thermonuclear reactions. Thermonuclear 
plasma parameters — temperatures up to 
100 million degrees, densities up to 1020 particles 
per cm3 and confinement times up to one second — 
had been obtained separately in various experimental 
facilities. The main task of scientific research in that 
field was to obtain a plasma which would combine, 
in one facility, all the parameters required 
for bringing about a thermonuclear fusion reaction. 
One of the basic problems was to develop ways 
of countering micro-instability and maintaining a 
high-temperature plasma. 
35. It was gratifying to note that during the past 
year the Agency had become an even more efficient 
organization. It had brought greater benefits to 
both developing and developed countries. Altogether, 
his delegation was favourably impressed by the accomplishments 
of the Secretariat during the past 
year and was glad to see that a great deal of work 
had gone into the preparation of the draft 
programme — work, moreover, of high scientific 
and technical calibre. Particularly well-prepared were 
the programmes of die Division of Nuclear Power 
and Reactors, Health, Safety and Waste Management, 
Life Sciences, and Scientific and Technical Information 
— in the latter connection the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS) deserved special 
mention. 
36. Whilst approving die programme as a whole 
and being aware of its undoubted merits, he felt 
obliged to point out that in some areas there seemed 
to be no proper relationship between the different 
scientific and technical activities. That applied to 
hydrology (Division of Research and Laboratories), 
and to the programme of die Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division of Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture. 
The programmes in question were far too wide and 
ambitious and had been drawn up witiiout proper 
consideration of die Agency's true possibilities. 

37. The work of the Agency's laboratories and 
scientific centres had been put on a more rational 
basis during the past year. However, a lot had still 
to be done. That applied in particular to die work 
of die Agency's laboratories at Seibersdorf and at 
Headquarters. At the present time an analysis was 
being carried out of the work scheduled for diose 
laboratories. The results of that analysis should 
permit the Agency to review its attitude to the 
laboratories and to organize their work in such a 
way diat it would be better integrated widi the 
Secretariat's odier activities from both the technical 
and financial points of view. 
38. In his delegation's view, special attention 
should be paid to that section of the Agency's programme 
concerned with the establishment of an 
international information system in the field of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Soviet delegation 
was glad to note that in conformity with Article 
VIII.A of the Agency's Statute, the Secretariat had 
in 1965 started to take practical steps to establish 
an international nuclear information system based 
on multilateral co-operation between the Agency's 
Member States in the collection, processing and 
distribution of information on atomic science and 
technology. That activity was nearing successful 
completion. 
39. The work of setting up INIS took on special 
significance in the light of the NPT. The system 
could, and must, ensure in particular that all States 
diat were parties to the Treaty had access to the 
benefits of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
technology — diat was one of die main principles 
of the Treaty. 
40. The Soviet Union attached great importance 
to INIS and regarded it as an instrument widi which 
die Agency could accelerate world-wide scientific 
and technical progress; he therefore fully supported 
the Agency's activities in that connection and his 
country would do its share to see diat INIS operated 
successfully. 
41. His Government, as was well known, had 
always attached great importance to international 
collaboration and the provision of scientific and 
technical assistance to developing countries. It was 
part of his country's national policy to give maximun 
part of his country's national policy to give maximum 
support along those lines. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

42. His country was at the present time a party 
to many bilateral agreements concerning the peaceful 
use of atomic energy with other socialist countries, 
and with developing and developed capitalist countries. 
Most of the agreements concluded provided 
not only for the exchange of scientific and technical 
information and for visits of scientists, but also for 
the provision of technical assistance. 
43. In its programme of international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy his country 
did not confine itself to bilateral agreements; it 
was also fostering broad international co-operation 
in that field under the auspices of a number of 
international organizations, primarily the Agency. 
44. He welcomed the collaboration which had been 
established between the Agency and the Council 
for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON) by 
the exchange of information and scientific and technical 
documentation and by reciprocal participation 
in each other's activities. 
45. His country had always attached importance 
to the Agency's work in granting technical assistance 
to developing countries. Since the Agency had only 
limited funds available for that purpose, the question 
arose as to how they could be used to best effect. 
46. The Secretariat had started to take account 
of the desires of the developing countries for increased 
assistance in the form of equipment, as could 
be seen from the programme for 1968. It should, 
however, be pointed out that the increase compared 
with the programmes for 1966 and 1967 amounted 
to only 1-1-596, which in his view was totally 
inadequate. 
47. His country regularly made voluntary contributions 
to the Agency's General Fund, and placed 
at the Agency's disposal both financial resources 
and fellowships. His delegation was glad to note 
that the Agency had used almost the entire sum of 
100 000 roubles offered by his Government as a 
voluntary contribution at the last regular session of 
the General Conference. It was also pleased that 
the arrangements which the Soviet Union had made 
during the past summer regarding activities under 
the technical assistance programme had been favourably 
received. 
48. Desirous of contributing further to the Agency's 
work in providing technical assistance, the Soviet 
Union was pledging an increased voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund for 1969, amounting 
to 150 000 roubles in national currency for the 
purchase of equipment, apparatus and materials in 
the Soviet Union. 
49. At the present session of the General Conference, 
as was customary, the Agency's budget 
estimates for the coming year were up for consideration. 
It must be recognized that the Agency's 
Secretariat and the Director General had made a 
definite attempt to limit the rate of increase of the 
budget and that that attempt had met with some 
success. 
50. There were no inherent obstacles to the 
Secretariat in following a rational policy in staffing 
and financial matters, and his delegation hoped that 
such a policy would be applied. 
51. In conclusion he again stressed that the Soviet 
Union had always attached great importance to die 
Agency's aims and activities. In its view, the Agency 
had provided, and would continue to provide, valuable 
scientific and technical assistance both to the 
developing and to the developed countries in die 
use of atomic energy for the benefit of mankind. 
The Agency was also under an obligation to take 
active steps to thwart attempts to use atomic energy 
for purposes contrary to the interests of mankind. 
That objective made the Agency's existence not 
only desirable but indispensable and enhanced its 
role and influence in international relations. The 
Soviet delegation was convinced that the Secretariat 
fully understood the importance of the new tasks 
with which the Agency was faced. 
52. Mr. McCORDICK (Canada) said that the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy were developing rapidly 
and continuously in Canada. Among recent 
developments in the Canadian nuclear power 
programme, he would refer only to the construction 
at Pickering, Ontario, of what would, in the early 
1970's, be the world's largest nuclear power plant 
using heavy water moderated, natural uranium type 
reactors, and — another significant development — to 
the construction at Gentilly in the Province of 
Quebec of the first Canadian nuclear power station 
employing boiling light water as coolant. The use 
of boiling light water instead of pressurized heavy 
water as the heat transfer medium offered the prospect 
of significant savings in both capital cost and 
the cost of the power produced. 
5 3. Among the areas of common interest to Canada 
and the Agency mention should be made of reactor 
development, the economics of nuclear power, the 
use of isotopes in medicine, agriculture and other 
fields, the establishment of health and safety standards, 
and the provision and exchange of technical and 
scientific information, together widi the very 
important sector of safeguards. 
54. If he were asked to what extent the Agency 
had been able to fulfil the functions assigned to it, 
and whether it had been and was still capable of 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

adapting itself satisfactorily to meet the ever-changing 
demands being placed upon it and to the everchanging 
circumstances within which it had to 
conduct its work, his reply would be that the 
Canadian delegation was satisfied with the Agency's 
achievements. He considered that he was reflecting 
the general view in saying that the Agency had 
already amply demonstrated its capacity to serve the 
international community and that its usefulness and 
authority were growing steadily. 

55. Without going into details with regard to the 
Agency's activities, he nevertheless wished to mention 
certain functions to which Canada attached great 
importance. One of those functions was the Agency's 
role in the field of nuclear power. It was foreseen 
that that role would acquire ever greater significance, 
particularly as regards assisting Member States in 
preparing their nuclear power programmes. The 
Agency occupied an almost unique position among 
international organizations in being directly and intimately 
concerned with that major industrial field, 
which was of fundamental interest to all its Members. 
The Canadian delegation was convinced that the 
Agency had successfully recognized both the importance 
and the sensitive nature of its role in that 
respect. 
56. As to the dissemination of scientific information, 
the ever-increasing volume of scientific literature 
had created highly complex problems, which only 
recourse to new methods, such as those provided 
by the computer sciences, would make it possible 
to solve. The large technically advanced countries 
were already communicating both to smaller industrial 
countries and to developing nations the results yielded 
by their conventional information systems. In that 
connection the Agency could play a key role by 
providing a channel for exchanges and thus avoiding 
duplication of effort. On the other hand, care should 
be taken in determining the precise function of the 
Agency with regard to nuclear data and in deciding 
what resources it could reasonably devote thereto. 
Canada intended to continue to make an active 
contribution to the development of the Agency's 
work in that domain. 
57. When the Agency's technical assistance programme 
was viewed in the very general context of 
the strategy which the United Nations and specialized 
agencies intended to pursue during the Second 
Development Decade, it was clear that the Agency 
would certainly play an active role in development, 
particularly in nuclear energy and its applications 
in agriculture, medicine and the generation of 
electricity. 
58. The Canadian delegation also considered that 
the Agency should take an active part in the preparations 
for and the deliberations of the fourth 
international conference on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy which, according to a recommendation 
of the General Assembly of the United Nations, 
would be held in 1970 or 19717). 

59. Turning to the subject of safeguards, he was 
gratified at the vigour with which the Agency had 
expanded its safeguards system, which now included 
most of the facilities in the nuclear field and should 
soon cover the complete fuel cycle. The Agency's 
unremitting efforts to refine safeguards techniques 
and develop new methods proved that it was keeping 
abreast of developments in that sphere. 
60. Following the conclusion of the NPT, the 
Agency would need to review its safeguards system 
and perhaps expand its activities. It would thereby 
secure an outstanding opportunity to advance the 
cause of international safeguards and to elaborate 
agreements and procedures which would become the 
accepted international standard, thus fulfilling two 
of its main purposes: that of ensuring that special 
fissionable materials, equipment and facilities were 
not used for military purposes, and that of facilitating 
the international exchange of nuclear materials and 
equipment for peaceful purposes. 
61. In that connection it would first be necessary 
to develop a model agreement permitting the fulfilment 
of the obligations assumed by the parties to 
the NPT in respect of safeguards. Such an 
agreement should place broadly similar obligations 
on parties which would negotiate individually with 
the Agency and on groups of States which would 
negotiate collective agreements. 
62. The Agency would also have to assess its 
requirements for additional staff not only for elaborating 
the model agreement and carrying out the 
related technical studies at Headquarters but also 
for work elsewhere, and it would similarly 
be necessary to make provision for the 
recruitment and training of inspectors. 
63. To complete the negotiations relating to 
safeguards agreements, the Agency had a period of 
two years as from the date of entry into force of 
the NPT; in view of the large number of States 
with which agreements would have to be negotiated, 
that two-year period did not seem unduly long. 
64. Regarding the additional expenditure brought 
about by the expansion of operations and of staff, 
the Canadian delegation considered that such expenditure 
should be charged to the Regular Budget 
and shared by Member States proportionately to their 
assessed contributions thereto. 
7) General Assembly Resolution 2309 (XXII). 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

65. In his view, the Agency was uniquely qualified 
by virtue of its Statute, especially Articles III.A and 
XI, to assist in implementing Article V of the NPT, 
which concerned the provision of services relating 
to the peaceful applications of nuclear explosions 
to non-nuclear-weapon States. He would 
suggest that the Secretariat study the role which the 
Agency might play in that direction, where substantial 
progress was in prospect, and submit a report on 
the subject to the following session of the General 
Conference. 
66. Before concluding, he desired to commend the 
Secretariat on the excellent manner in which the 
programme and budget had been prepared, as a 
result of which it was possible not only to analyse 
the Agency's detailed programme for the following 
two years but also to discern the general trend of 
the programme for the next six years. The Agency 
would thus be able to make the best possible longterm 
use of its limited resources. While congratulating 
the Secretariat on its efforts to avoid wasteful 
expenditure and to keep the expansion of the budget 
under firm control, his delegation believed that one 
should not allow oneself to become so preoccupied 
by budgetary considerations that one shrank from 
considering new areas in which it would be to the 
advantage of Member States to expand the Agency's 
programme. He reaffirmed that, satisfied as it was 
at the progress which the Agency had made in the 
past, the Canadian delegation looked forward with 
hope and confidence to the role which the Agency 
would be able to play in the future. 
67. Mr. HIRSCH (France) said that, after twelve 
years of existence and in spite of the difficulties 
it had encountered, the Agency had gained its place 
among the international organizations. The developments 
which would be witnessed in the years 
immediately ahead (especially as regards the use of 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes) could only 
intensify the co-ordinating role played by the Agency 
in the dissemination of techniques connected with 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
68. The development of nuclear energy, which had 
gone on at a rapid rate since the last session of the 
General Conference, continued to raise a large number 
of problems, both scientific and economic. One could 
not fail to be struck by the scope of the task that 
had to be undertaken in order to cope with the 
extraordinary growth in power consumption, and 
it was more necessary than ever to seek ways of 
achieving maximum efficiency as rapidly as possible. 
The exchange of information between countries which 
had acquired skill and experience and countries 
which were less advanced was the best means of 
avoiding waste and error, which for the richer 
countries were something to be regretted but for 
the developing countries were actual disasters. 
69. The international meetings — symposia, seminars 
and panels — organized by the Agency had 
yielded very good results and deserved every 
encouragement, provided efforts were made in certain 
cases to obtain the collaboration of other international 
organizations so as to avoid any likelihood of 
duplication and also to achieve savings. 
70. France appreciated the Agency's efforts to 
achieve rationalization in drawing up its long-term 
programme. The difficulty in the years ahead would 
lie in choosing the priorities to be assigned to the 
various projects. 
71. He welcomed the Agency's increased support 
for the Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity at Monaco, 
which would henceforth be able to co-ordinate research 
done by national institutions and to standardize the 
results. The French Government had decided to 
make the Agency a gift of electronic equipment for 
the Monaco Laboratory; the items in question would 
form the components of a gamma spectrometry unit 
worth F.Fr.100 000. 
72. He was very much in favour of the objectives 
which the Agency had laid down for INIS. He took 
it that the team responsible for considering the 
best systems would report to the Board on solutions 
that were feasible, giving detailed information on 
their financial implications. 
73. The French delegation approved the Agency's 
budget for 1969, although it had some reservations 
regarding the expansion of the Department of Safeguards 
and Inspection. If the Agency was to be 
called on to assume wider control functions in the 
near future, it should certainly make preparations 
to that end, but the number of inspectors employed 
by the Department should not increase at a rate 
higher than that of the number of installations to 
be inspected. 
74. As regards the general question of the financing 
of inspections, he wished to reiterate the position 
of the French Government, which had agreed that 
such financing should be covered by the Agency's 
Regular Budget as long as research reactors, certain 
power reactors of different types and certain reprocessing 
installations were involved. However, the time 
was not far off when, owing to the transfer of control 
functions to the Agency under bilateral agreements, 
a considerable number of power reactors would be 
subjected to the Agency's safeguards, and the costs 
involved would tend to account for a considerable 
proportion of the total budget as it now stood. 
The French delegation considered it out of the 
question that such expenditures should in every case 
be charged to the Agency's Budget. The time would 
come when special measures would have to be taken. 
Those expenditures would then, to some extent 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

like conventional insurance against accidents, have 
to be charged to the sellers and users concerned, 
which meant, in the last analysis, that they would 
be included in the cost per kilowatt-hour. 

75. Another problem, which had been raised by 
a number of countries, was the expansion of the 
Board of Governors. Since it was very rare for an 
item in the general debate to be the subject of a 
decision by vote, the French delegation had no 
objection a priori to the consideration of that 
problem; it had, moreover, adopted the same attidude 
in 1961 when two seats had been established for 
the benefit of the area of Africa and the Middle East. 
However, negotiations on the subject should not 
give rise to disputes nor raise questions concerning 
the Agency's Statute, and the new composition of 
the Board should not result in the discussions 
becoming more cumbersome. 
76. As far as the development of the French 
nuclear programme was concerned, he merely wished 
to point out that, following the sudden breakthrough 
in the industrial development of nuclear energy in 
the world, the past year had been the occasion for 
a period of reflection on the part of the French 
authorities. While orders for nuclear power plants 
had continued to grow, most of the reactor types 
that were gradually coming to be considered as tried 
and tested had met with operational and structural 
incidents which raised important technological 
problems and made it necessary to carry out 
thorough-going studies. Independently of the use 
of nuclear power to generate electricity, a number 
of other uses of atomic energy had been considered, 
especially desalting and nuclear ship propulsion, to 
say nothing of French efforts to develop the peaceful 
use of nuclear explosions. 
77. He welcomed the fact that consideration was 
being given to the holding, in 1971, of a fourth 
international conference on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. He was convinced the experience 
gained at the previous conferences and the active 
assistance of the Agency's Secretariat would permit 
such a meeting to be organized with a maximum of 
efficiency. 
78. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) said that among the 
achievements of the past year pride of place should 
be accorded to the NPT. As its representatives had 
stated both at the United Nations in New York and 
at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, 
Belgium considered the NPT not as the final stage 
in an effort aiming at the ultimate achievement of 
disarmament, but as the starting point of a policy 
designed to bring about the adoption of measures 
likely to ensure a genuine, controlled disarmament. 
In his delegation's view, the decision taken by the 
non-nuclear-weapon States to sign the NPT ought 
to be followed by positive action on the part of the 
nuclear-weapon States, whose duties and responsibilities 
had been increased by the very fact of the 
NPT being accepted. 

79- In signing the NPT, Belgium had understood 
that it was becoming a party to an important treaty 
which represented a first real step on the road to 
disarmament. It would object, however, if the NPT 
were to impair already existing achievements or 
impede the future progress of European co-operation, 
to which it attached great importance. 

80. It certainly saw no incompatibility between the 
aims pursued by the NPT and the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM), but since the NPT 
contained, on the subject of safeguards, only a 
reference to agreements to be concluded with the 
Agency, it was not prepared to ratify it until the 
negotiations which, under Article III of the Treaty, 
would be carried out between the Agency and the 
Commission of the European Community had led 
to an agreement which respected the terms of the 
treaty under which EURATOM had been established. 
81. He proposed to make some critical comments 
on the Agency's activities, which, he hoped, would 
prove beneficial to its work. 
82. In the first place, he wished to recall certain 
remarks he had made at the last regular session 
of the Conference^), which still remained topical. 
83. It appeared more than ever advisable that a 
budget should be established for carrying out safeguards 
activities, which would be distinct from that 
covering all the other financial commitments of the 
Agency. The Belgian delegation had no desire to 
change the unique institutional character of the 
Agency, but rather to ensure die maintenance of its 
essential activities, for it feared that, in the face of 
the large additional expenses which would inevitably 
result from die expansion in the control functions, 
once the NPT had entered into force, die real cost 
of the Department of Safeguards and Inspection 
might be artificially reduced by including a part of 
its expenses in other administrative charges borne 
by the Agency. Such, indeed, was already the case. 
The safeguards budget should cover all payments 
for hours of service and all sums spent for safeguards 
purposes by officials of other Departments of the 
Agency. It was important that a clear and accurate 
picture be presented of the extent of the expenses 
incurred in respect of each of the Agency's activities 
and that nothing be done which might gradually 
restrict some of its activities under the pretext of 
a lack of funds, while a proportion of the latter, 
originally earmarked for those activities, was expended 
on safeguards. 
8) See document GC(XI)/OR. 113, paras 104-115. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

84. The Belgian delegation had on many occasions 
recommended the establishment of a committee, 
composed of administrators and technical experts, 
which would be responsible* for examining from an 
industrial, budgetary and general policy angle the 
proposals relating to the work of the Agency's 
Laboratory. It noted with satisfaction that the 
suggestion had been favourably received, since a 
fresh and detailed study of the work of die 
Laboratory was to be undertaken by a group of 
scientists and administrators in October 19689). He 
felt certain that the conclusions of that study, which 
were to be transmitted to the Board of Governors, 
would enable the latter to determine more easily 
and with greater efficiency the nature and scope of 
the activities of the Laboratory. 

85. With regard to the more general problem of 
the financing of the laboratories and centres, his 
delegation could not approve of the trend towards 
charging to the Regular Budget the cost of an ever 
increasing proportion of the work undertaken, nor 
could it accept as relevant the reason given for 
doing so io). As the Belgian delegation had declared 
in 1965, the Laboratory ought not to undertake with 
its own resources, which would of necessity always 
remain limited, activities which could easily and 
more cheaply be carried out at its request by laboratories 
in Member Statesu). The Agency should 
beware of being drawn into too much fundamental 
research, to the detriment of work on the practical 
uses of nuclear energy. 
86. As far as the INIS project was concerned, 
the uneasiness voiced by the Belgian delegation at 
the eleventh regular session of the Conference 12) 
had not been allayed; on the contrary, a careful 
examination of the programme for 1969-74 had 
merely strengthened its fears. Although the matters 
which it had raised the previous year still appeared 
to be unresolved, and no decision had been taken 
at the governmental level, the Agency seemed to 
regard INIS as an established fact. Indeed, as the 
Belgian delegation would state at greater length 
during the debate on the 1969 budget 1J), it had 
the feeling of being confronted with a series of 
accomplished facts which in no way solved the 
fundamental problems. 
87. It was still wondering whether the conditions 
whose fulfilment it regarded as essential before the 
Agency should be authorized to establish the INIS 
project had in fact been met. Had steps been taken 
to ascertain whether a sufficient number of countries 
9) See document GC(XII)/385, para. 241. 

10) Ibid., para. 239, last sentence. 
11) GC(IX)/OR.93, para. 46. 
12) GC(XII)/OR-113, paras 107-109. 

13) See document GC(XII)/COM.1/OR.80, paras 14-22. 

capable of making a useful contribution to the 
system in the form of information were prepared 
to join in it? Such did not appear to be the case, 
for no approach had been made to Belgium in 
that connection. Had steps been taken to ensure 
that the project would not overlap, either in the 
field of documentation or that of information, with 
other similar schemes? That also seemed unlikely. 
Finally, had agreement been reached on the standardization 
of indexing before the implementation of the 
project? It appeared likely that that question also 
would receive a negative reply. 

88. Nevertheless, a large infrastructure had already 
been set up in 1968, and the establishment of posts 
was planned for 1969. Had market research been 
carried out to assess the economic value of the 
project? Not until the latter was known could it 
be decided whether INIS was of interest to 
future users. 
89. The interest it presented to users must be 
taken into account. Whether the system when 
established proved worth while or not would depend 
on the number of those calling upon the proposed 
services. The Belgian delegation felt that sufficient 
information was not yet available. The only fact 
that was known was that by 1970 the salaries of 
staff already in service or due to be attached to 
INIS, together with the operating costs of the 
computers, would amount to approximately $500 000. 
Belgium did not regard that as a sufficient reason 
for approving that part of the Agency's programme 
at the present stage. 
90. Its critical attitude should not, however, be 
interpreted as an expression of hostility towards the 
work done by the Agency. 
91. Belgium valued highly the meetings organized 
by the Agency or with its support and readily 
recognized the usefulness of the assistance it offered 
to developing countries to further their progress 
in nuclear technology. It was in line with that 
attitude that Belgium placed at the disposal of the 
Agency each year six Type II fellowships, to a value 
of approximately $20000, in addition to making its 
annual voluntary contribution to the General Fund. 
92. For the same reason the Belgian representatives 
at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States 
at Geneva, in stressing the effectiveness of the 
technical assistance currendy being provided by the 
Agency, had proposed the imposition of a financial 
penalty upon the States possessing nuclear weapons 
in the form of a substantial increase in the amount 
of their voluntary contributions to the Agency's 
General Fund, to be devoted entirely to providing 
technical assistance to developing countries. From 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

a perusal of the remarks made by various delegations 
at Geneva, he noted that many of them had, like 
Belgium, expressed the wish that the States 
possessing nuclear weapons should increase their 
voluntary contributions to the Agency. The Belgian 
delegation had, however, been the only one to 
express that desire in quantitative terms; it had 
suggested that such States redeem their "nuclear sin" 
by paying as their annual voluntary contribution an 
amount equivalent to four times their voluntary 
contribution based on their assessment ratio under 
the Regular Budget, but not exceeding three times 
the highest current contribution. 

93. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Director 
General for the excellent step he had taken in inviting 
Member States to communicate to him, before 
the Conference, written statements on the progress 
made in peaceful applications of atomic energy during 
the preceding year W), thereby relieving them of the 
task of presenting such statements in a plenary 
meeting. Belgium had taken advantage of that 
invitation and submitted a written statement on the 
progress made in its nuclear energy activities during 
1967-68. 
94. Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) said he wished, 
on behalf of his delegation, to congratulate and 
welcome the Agency's new Member States. The 
continuing growth in the membership of the Agency 
bore witness to the universal recognition and acceptance 
of the indispensable character of its work in 
promoting the peaceful uses of atomic energy for 
the benefit of all peoples throughout the world. 
95. It was auspicious that the present session 
of the General Conference had convened at a time 
when the General Assembly of the United Nations 
had decided to commend the NPT. That action, 
in the words of the Director General, represented 
a step of profound importance towards international 
peace and security. The Treaty presented a new 
and demanding challenge to the Agency, particularly 
as regards its role in implementing the safeguards 
provisions. The smooth functioning of the Agency's 
safeguards system, which had now been extended 
to plants for converting or fabricating nuclear 
material, was of great significance for the proper 
discharge of the Agency's safeguards functions under 
the Treaty. The Philippines had manifested its 
unconditional support for the Treaty by being among 
the first signatories. 
96. His delegation believed that substantial 
progress had been achieved by the Agency in several 
fields during the past year. The Director General 
and the Secretariat should be congratulated on the 
work they had accomplished, and if much still remained 
to be done, particularly in meeting the needs 
14) See document GC(XII)/INF/101 /Rev. 1. 

of developing countries for technical assistance, it 
was only because the Agency was handicapped by 
insufficiency of funds. 

97. The Philippine delegation indeed shared the 
growing concern of the Board of Governors and 
of many Member States at the inadequacy of the 
resources available for the Agency's technical assistance 
activities. Voluntary contributions had never 
reached more than 7596 of the yearly target 
of $2 million and the shortfall appeared to be getting 
more substantial as time went by. 
98. To developing countries like the Philippines, 
technical assistance was one of the Agency's most 
important activities, and failure to obtain it often 
compelled such countries to postpone worth-while 
projects in nuclear research and development. He 
therefore desired to reiterate the appeal made by 
the Philippine delegations at previous sessions of 
the Conference that the more advanced and wealthy 
nations should respond sympathetically to the request 
for increased voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund by pledging funds at least corresponding to 
their assessments under the Regular Budget, and 
more if possible. Despite its financial difficulties 
the Philippines would make a voluntary contribution 
to the Agency's General Fund for 19 69 corresponding 
to its assessment under the Regular Budget. 
99. The Philippines was keenly interested in the 
work being done, with the Agency's support, in 
research on the use of radiation in food preservation 
and grain disinfestation, and on agricultural studies 
leading to increased food production. The 
demonstration-type projects sponsored by the Agency 
were most welcome to scientists from the developing 
countries, who were usually interested above all in 
practical solutions to pressing problems relating to 
economic and social development. Limited research 
work was being done in that connection in the 
Philippines, which however hoped that the results 
of the Agency's projects would enable it to make 
greater progress. 
100. His Government viewed with keen interest 
the Agency's efforts to promote co-operation between 
the countries of Asia and the Far East. There was 
no doubt that the use of the limited resources of 
the nuclear energy establishments of the individual 
countries in that region to solve common problems 
would be conducive to realistic regional co-operation. 
He was particularly gratified at the establishment 
of the Agency's Regional Office for Asia and the 
Far East in Bangkok, under the direction of 
Mr. F. Medina. 
101. He now wished to summarize the salient 
features of his country's activities in the peaceful 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

application of nuclear energy during the year 1967/68; 
a full statement on those activities had been 
communicated to the Director General and distributed 
by the Agency as information material for die 
Conference. 

102. As regards nuclear power development, 
although the Manila Electric Company (MERALCO), 
the largest electric utility company in the country, 
had postponed until 1975 the operation of its first 
nuclear power plant, the Philippine Government 
had paved the way for the eventual introduction of 
nuclear power by enacting die Atomic Energy 
Regulatory and Liability Act, concluding a revised 
agreement for co-operation with die United States 
of America concerning die civil uses of atomic energy 
and making arrangements for die conduct of a local 
training programme in reactor operation, maintenance 
and instrumentation for die engineering staffs of bodi 
government and private bodies concerned with electric 
power generation. 
103. The India-Philippines-Agency (IPA) neutron 
crystal spectrometry programme 15) was now in its 
fourth year of operation, and had stimulated great 
interest in solid-state physics in die region. The 
Philippines supported die recommendation of die 
Joint Committee for die IPA programme on die 
need to expand die project to include the participation 
of Australia, the Republic of Korea, Thailand 
and Japan. 
104. As he had just stated, the Governments of 
the Philippines and of die United States of America 
had in June 1968 signed a new Agreement for Cooperation 
concerning the Civil Uses of Atomic Energy, 
superseding the agreement of July 1955. The two 
Governments had agreed, inter alia, that the Agency 
would continue to administer the safeguards stipulated 
in die new Agreement for Co-operation as had been 
done under die superseded agreement. Accordingly, 
a new trilateral agreement on die transfer of safeguards 
between die Agency, die United States of 
America and die Philippines had been signed on 
15 July 1968 16). 
105. The Philippine delegation was happy to note 
die increased importance attached to research contract 
projects by the Agency. The soundness of die 
research contract arrangements had resulted in 
Member States concluding contracts widi die Agency 
on an ever-increasing scale. His own Government 
acknowledged the stimulating effect on its nuclear 
research activities which such contracts had had, 
and it trusted diat the Agency would continue its 
research contract activities widi even greater vigour. 
1 . See document INFCIRC/56 and Add.l. 
16) Reproduced in document INFCIRC/120. 
106. The Philippines was also grateful to die Agency 
and to the United States of America for the assistance 
extended in the form of grants of special 
uranium materials for die fabrication of replacement 
fuel elements for the Philippine Research Reactor 
PRR-1. The first 20 replacement fuel elements were 
now ready for use and negotiations had started for 
die fabrication of die furdier 10 elements which 
would complete die replacement of die reactor's fuel. 
107. He desired to put on record his Government's 
sincere appreciation of the sympadietic support 
accorded to it by die Director General and his staff 
during the past year. That support had been given 
in die spirit of true co-operation, despite the limitations 
within which die Agency had to operate. 
For its part, die Philippines had exerted - and would 
continue to exert - greater efforts to make itself 
deserving of increased aid, and to become a still 
more effective force in contributing to die advancement 
of die lofty aims of die Agency. Those aims 
would be brought still nearer to realization by die 
implementation of various measures of a practical 
nature, particularly tiiose proposed by six Members 
for enlarging die composition of die Board of 
l7\

Governors

108. In conclusion, he said his delegation welcomed 
the recommendations made by die Director 
General18) and by the Board in its report to die 
General Conference (GC(XII)/380 and 389). 
109. Mr. PEIRIS (Ceylon) welcomed the agreement 
between Mexico and the Agency by virtue of which 
all Mexico's nuclear activities would be placed under 
the Agency's safeguards. In his view, diere was a 
clear connection between die present session of the 
General Conference, which was continuing the efforts 
made to harness die energy of the atom for the 
benefit of mankind and to promote economic and 
social progress, and the deliberations now under 
way at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States 
at Geneva, which was striving to eliminate the threat 
of a nuclear holocaust. Some of the views and 
suggestions put forward at die Geneva meeting might 
be of value to the General Conference, and it was 
fitting diat it should send the delegates at Geneva 
a message expressing its best wishes for the success 
of dieir work. 
110. Approval of the NPT was not an end in itself: 
it would have to be followed by other actions if 
any real sense of security was to be warranted. One 
such furdier step was complete disarmament, in 
17) See the draft resolution in document GC(XII)/397. 
18) See document GC(XII)/OR.l 19, paras 29-53. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

regard to both conventional and nuclear weapons. 
As further progress was made in that direction, the 
Agency would gradually be called upon to assume 
further responsibilities, and it should prepare itself 
in every way to do so. 

111. Although the Agency would have important 
obligations to discharge in connection with the NPT, 
it was essential that it should not lose sight of its 
basic objectives and priorities. Its most important 
task was to make information and know-how relating 
to die peaceful uses of nuclear energy available to 
the developing countries. It would be unfortunate 
and regrettable if the impression were created that 
the Agency was losing sight of, or abandoning, 
that priority objective. 
112. It was idle to expect that general and complete 
disarmament could be achieved without a complete 
transformation of the general political situation in 
the world. That was a discouraging prospect, but 
efforts should nevertheless be made to move forward, 
even by short steps. The main obstacles to a relaxation 
of world tensions and to general and complete 
disarmament were injustice, fear and mistrust. A 
greater degree of trust and confidence, not only 
among the great Powers but among all the nations 
of the world, appeared to be a sine qua non for a 
general improvement of the world political situation. 
Was it too much to hope that a greater degree of 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy would make some small contribution 
to that end? 
113. Most of the developing countries could report 
some advances in the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. Ceylon had, unfortunately, not yet been 
able to develop any nuclear capacity, and its financial 
position was unlikely to enable it to do so in the 
foreseeable future. It was, however, encouraged to 
learn that the previous year's forecasts of the rate 
of development of die world's nuclear capacity had 
not only proved to be realistic but were even likely 
to be surpassed. A statement summarizing what 
Ceylon was doing in fields which were of interest 
to die Agency had been communicated to the 
Director General. 
114. He wished, however, to make a few general 
remarks on the work of die Agency. 
115. A very tight budget seemed to be a perennial 
problem. However, it was doubtful whedier 
die developing countries would be able to increase 
dieir present contributions and it was therefore to 
be hoped that the more fortunate countries would 
find it possible to make bigger contributions, diereby 
enabling the Agency to intensify what should be 
its main activity — the granting of all types 
of technical assistance to developing countries. Meanwhile, 
the Ceylonese delegation endorsed die 
suggestion that technically advanced countries should 
help support, on a bilateral basis, projects which 
the Agency could not at present finance owing to 
lack of funds. 

116. What the developing countries needed most 
were experts, equipment and technical training. He 
welcomed the recommendation made at the previous 
session that equipment should be provided independendy 
of the services of experts in respect of several 
projects 19). He hoped that policy would be 
continued. 
117. It was also desirable that the greatest possible 
number of seminars and training courses should 
be organized for the benefit of developing countries. 
118. The establishment of die Ceylonese Radioisotopes 
Centre had made it possible to hold courses 
for undergraduates in certain specialized subjects. 
He wished to reiterate die suggestions which Ceylon 
had made concerning the desirability of die Agency's 
holding more courses, of an international 
or regional nature, at diat Centre. Radiological 
protection and nuclear medicine were two fields 
in which such courses could be held. It had also 
been suggested that the Ceylonese Radioisotopes 
Centre could be developed into a regional centre 
for training and research. 
119- In conclusion, he wished to express the 
gratitude of his Government to die Director General 
and the Secretariat for die valuable assistance and 
co-operation which Ceylon had always received from 
the Agency. 

120. Mr. GANEV (Bulgaria) said that the Agency 
was continuing its efforts to provide a larger number 
of "States witrr the opportunity to benefit from tiie 
achievements of nuclear science and technology. The 
NPT, which had been signed by more than eighty 
States, including Bulgaria, created a favourable 
atmosphere for the Agency's work. The Treaty, 
the purpose of which was to close all doors to die 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, could bring about 
conditions in which more vigorous steps could be 
taken to achieve nuclear disarmament, and dius 
general and complete disarmament. Implementation 
of the Treaty would make it possible to use exclusively 
for peaceful purposes die scientific, technical 
and material resources devoted to nuclear energy 
activities and pave the way for a collaborative effort 
in which the Agency had a leading role to play. 
Under Article III of the Treaty, die Agency was 
called upon to act, dirough its safeguards system, 
as die organ primarily responsible for supervising 
19) See General Conference Resolution GC(XI)/RES/230. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

implementation of the Treaty. That was yet another 
recognition of the Agency's authority in international 
relations, and one which made heavy demands on 
it. The Bulgarian delegation was convinced that 
the Agency had the necessary means to carry out 
that highly responsible task successfully. Asamember 
of the Agency's Board of Governors and also of 
the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee, 
Bulgaria was prepared to play its part in a businesslike 
and constructive manner. He would like to draw 
attention to the fact that the German Democratic 
Republic had also made more than one contribution 
towards that end. It had been one of the 
first signatories of the NPT; on 19 September 1968 
its Government had submitted to the Conference 
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States a memorandum in 
which it had again emphasized its resolve to support 
the Treaty, and at the tenth regular session of the 

General Conference, the same Government had 
specifically expressed its support for the safeguards 
system. It was essential that the principle 
of universality in the Agency should be respected 
and it was most regrettable that, over a period 
of years and despite the attitude adopted by many 
States, that question had not yet been solved in 
a correct and equitable manner. The German 
Democratic Republic was a highly industrialized State, 
with notable achievements in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, which could make a positive contribution 
to the achievement of the lofty aims of the 
Agency. The fact that it was not a Member of the 
Agency was an abnormal situation, particularly in 
the light of the NPT, and he felt that the Agency 
should favourably consider any application for 
membership which that country might present. 

121. The documents dealingwith the Agency's future 
activity in the period 1969-74 gave an idea of the 
systematic efforts it was making to extract greater 
benefits from the development of nuclear science 
and technology. The formulation of long-term 
programmes would cast the Agency's activity in 
a new light, as well as making it possible for individual 
States to bring their national programmes 
into harmony with the main trends of the Agency's 
activities. He welcomed the Agency's efforts to devote 
close attention to nuclear power, technical 
assistance and the use of radioisotopes. 
122. Bulgaria was keenly interested in the Agency's 
work on radioisotope applications in agriculture, 
industry, hydrology, foodstuffs preservation and 
health. A considerable amount of useful work was 
also being done by Bulgaria and other socialist 
countries under the auspices of COMECON. 
COMECON's Standing Committee on the Peaceful 
Use of Atomic Energy was primarily concerned with 
the construction of nuclear power stations, the 
manufacture of nuclear equipment, the use of radioisotopes 
and labelled compounds, radiation safety 
and shielding techniques. 

123. In regard to technical assistance the Agency 
should comply with the terms of the resolution 
adopted at the previous session. Appreciable 
quantities of equipment had been supplied in 1968. 
Besides safeguards and INIS, which were regarded 
as major elements in the Agency's future activities, 
it was still one of the Agency's tasks to help the 
developing countries by providing fellowships, 
supplying equipment, sending experts on missions, 
holding scientific meetings and courses, etc. By 
convening conferences and symposia on the use 
of atomic energy in science and the national 
economy, the Agency performed a service of value 
not only to the participating countries but to all 
Member States; the topics discussed at such meetings 
should be those of interest primarily to the developing 
countries. The annual training courses on various 
subjects were of considerable importance for training 
young scientists, particularly in applied science. The 
regional meetings of experts, such as that held in 
Sofia from 10 to 14 June 1968 on foodstuffs irradiation, 
were also useful. Other international organizations 
should provide financial support for the 
symposia, meetings, courses and seminars organized 
by the Agency. 
124. As far as the Agency's budget was concerned, 
the Bulgarian delegation considered that the Secretariat 
had taken into account the Administrative 
and Budgetary Committee's recommendation concerning 
a certain reduction in expenditure. Another 
matter that should be carefully considered was the 
proposed programme for the Seibersdorf Laboratory, 
in order to determine that the work proposed for 
it was urgent and that no other work had higher 
priority. 
125. He again emphasized the need to continue 
to strive towards the establishment of a more favourable 
climate for international co-operation in the 
Agency, in the spirit of its Statute and the United 
Nations Charter. 
The meeting rose at 5.50p.m. 


GC 


Item of the 
agenda* 

9 

10 

GC(XII)/390. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XII)/OR.122 
17 February 1969 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
(24-30 SEPTEMBER 1968) 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 26 September 1968, at 10.50 a.m. 

President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68

Statements by the delegates of: 

Thailand 
Czechoslovakia 
Viet-Nam 
Uganda 
India 
Hungary 
Austria 
Spain 
China 


Closing date of the session 

 (continued) 

Paragraphs 

1—91 

1— 6 


7 — 15 
16 — 23 
24 — 29 
30—44 
45-54 
55—68 
69 — 85 
86 — 91 


92 — 94 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XII)/INF/103/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF 
THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 
1967-68 (GC(XII)/380,389) (continued) 

1. Mr. KUNJARA na AYUDHYA (Thailand) 
stated that his country's atomic energy programmes 
were progressing steadily. 
2. During the past twelve months, Thailand had 
acted as host to two Agency meetings in Bangkok, 
a study group meeting on the irradiation of snakevenom 
and a regional study group meeting on the 
irradiation of wood plastic combinations. His delegation 
hoped that the Agency would ensure that 
the results of those meetings were put to good 
use. 
3. The unprecedented rate of increase in the 
demand for electricity in Thailand had induced the 
Government seriously to contemplate the use of 
nuclear power for electricity generation, and the 
Agency would shortly be sending a team of experts 
to Thailand for site safety evaluation. 
4. Thailand attached great importance to the 
proposed programme on food irradiation to be conducted 
jointly by the Agency, the European Nuclear 
Energy Agency (ENEA) and the Oesterreichische 
Studiengesellschaft fur Atomenergie (Austrian Atomic 
Energy Research Organization), and would give it 
support. 
5. The Thai delegation was grateful to the Agency 
for its technical assistance. With less direct assistance 
from other sources, it was obvious that a developing 
country would look for increased support from 
international organizations like the Agency. Thailand 
regretted to hear that shortage of funds had seriously 
limited what the Agency could perform. 
6. His delegation endorsed the statement on 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weaponsl) made by the Director General2) and expressed 
itself satisfied with the Agency's safeguards 
system. In connection with the Director General's 
remarks on the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions3), 
his delegation's view was that it would in due course 
be most appropriate for the Agency as a technical 
organization to be entrusted with responsibility for 
work in that field. 
7. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) began by 
stating that his delegation in principle approved 
the Agency's activities during the past year. 
1) This Treaty, which is the subject of Resolution 
2373 (XXII) adopted by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations on 12 June 1968, is subsequendy referred 
to in this record as "the Treaty" or "the NPT". 

2) GC(XII)/OR.l 19, paras 29-34 and 48-5 3. 
3) Ibid, para.52. 


It adopted the same attitude regarding the Agency's 
Budget for 1969 and Programme for 1969-744). 

8. Having regard to the present stage of development 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, the 
proposed trend of the Agency's future activities must 
be seen as an integral part of that development. 
9. The Czechoslovak delegation maintained the 
view that the Agency's activities should take the 
following four main directions: 
(a) 
Effective international inspection and 
application of safeguards on the basis 
of the NPT; 
(b) 
The systematic dissemination of 
knowledge relating to the nuclear 
sciences, and their industrial application; 
(c) 
The co-ordination of substantial programmes 
on a world-wide scale for the 
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes; and 
(d) 
The provision of technical assistance 
to developing countries. 
10. The Czechoslovak delegation considered the 
development of the system of safeguards and inspection 
to be one of the most important of the 
Agency's activities. The immediate development and 
application of Agency safeguards were a fundamental 
prerequisite for extensive co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. His delegation therefore 
supported the proposal regarding the preparation 
by the Agency, in the near future, of a model agreement 
for application of the control measures envisaged 
under the NPT 5). He considered that a method 
and a uniform system to be followed in carrying 
out the technical and administrative activities relating 
to the conduct of inspection should be worked 
out. In connection with the NPT and the application 
of safeguards he reiterated the need to ensure the 
universality of the Agency, membership of which 
should be open to all States which were willing 
to comply with its Statute and take part in its work. 
11. The Czechoslovak delegation was in favour 
of the proposed International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) and of co-ordination of important 
world programmes on the peaceful use of atomic 
energy, particularly in the sphere of nuclear power. 
Czechoslovakia was particularly interested in the 
part of the programme devoted to heavy-water reactors. 
4) GC(XII)/385 and Corr.l. 
5) See document GC(XII)/OR.l 19, para.31. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

12. He also believed it necessary to study ways 
and means of transferring work from international 
laboratories to specialized national laboratories. The 
work of those laboratories could be co-ordinated 
from a functional point of view by the Agency. 
13. Regarding the Agency's budget for 1969 the 
Czechoslovak delegation had no major comments 
to make; it wished, however, to draw attention 
to the need for a gradual stabilization of the budget. 
14. Under the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, the Czechoslovak Government was 
making available to the developing countries 
equipment to the value of 150 000 crowns for 1969, 
and it wished to repeat its offer of five long-term 
fellowships for study at Czechoslovak higher educational 
establishments and four one-year fellowships 
for study and practical work at the scientific and 
technical institutes of the Czechoslovak Academy 
of Sciences. It also wished, once again, to offer 
its services in organizing an Agency scientific conference, 
panel or practical course in Czechoslovakia. 
15. In accordance with its policy of peaceful 
international co-operation, the Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic was prepared to continue active co-operation 
with the Agency and, to the best of its ability, to 
go on contributing to the achievement of the 
Agency's objectives. 
16. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam) said that his 
delegation had complete confidence in the Agency's 
future, not only because it had given proof 
of growing efficiency, but also because the recent 
signature of the NPT gave grounds for expecting 
closer international co-operation in the peaceful 
applications of nudear energy, which could but enhance 
the Agency's prestige and contribute to the 
welfare of mankind. 
17. During the previous year the Agency, under 
the enlightened guidance of its Director General, 
had taken a major step towards the achievement 
of its worthy objective of promoting and disseminating 
knowledge of nuclear energy activities, so that 
the benefits of nuclear fission could be enjoyed 
to an ever-increasing extent throughout the world. 
Praiseworthy efforts had been made by the Agency 
to turn to advantage the applications of nuclear 
energy which were conducive to economic and social 
progress in the developing countries. 
18. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency 
would, during the subsequent six years, pursue its 
policy of supporting the weaker countries, a policy 
perfectly justified by the fact that the developing 
countries generally did not devote the slender resources 
at their disposal to scientific projects, but 
to other projects of a more urgent nature and of 
more immediate national importance. Viet-Nam 
appreciated to the ful that support because, 
in addition to dealing with problems common to 
all the developing countries, it had to cope with 
the many difficulties created by the tragic situation 
which had existed in its territory for many years. 
It was greatly indebted to the Agency and to the 
friendly countries which had given it generous 
assistance in 1967, assistance which had enable 
it to make considerable progress in medicine, agriculture 
and nuclear legislation. Viet-Nam hoped 
that the Agency would continue to support its atomic 
energy programme, which would have to remain 
modest, albeit practical, until peace was restored 
within its frontiers. 

19. Referring to technical assistance and its vital 
role for Viet-Nam and for all developing countries, 
he urged that the Agency should not confine itself 
to recommending nuclear techniques, but should 
ensure that the receiving States were able to exploit 
the advantages they offered. The training of technical 
and scientific staff was of great importance if the 
dissemination of nuclear knowledge was to be of 
real benefit to the developing countries. The Agency 
had indeed given considerable attention to training 
and refresher courses for research workers and senior 
technicians, but a systematic solution was urgently 
needed for the equally important problem of training 
junior staff, because the existing shortage of such 
personnel was a serious handicap to the satisfactory 
implementation of nuclear research programmes. The 
best solution would be to organize regular courses 
in each developing region for young people wishing 
to work in the nuclear field. Such training courses 
should be given by Agency experts, with the 
assistance of specialists from the countries concerned, 
as part of a programme of regional co-operation 
under Agency sponsorship. 
20. The growing need for specialized staff would 
probablylead to more substantial requests fortechnical 
assistance, with a consequent likelihood of an increase 
in Agency expenditure. In that case it might 
be possible to reconsider technical assistance 
procedures in such a way that expert mission would 
no longer always be linked with the supply of equipment. 
Under such an arrangement, experts would 
be sent only if expressly requested by the countries 
concerned, or when the Agency considered that the 
presence of experts was essential for satisfactory 
use of the equipment supplied. The Agency experts, 
whose number was of course limited, could then 
take a direct and effective part in the work of the 
Agency's laboratories, whilst remaining available to 
assist Member States in solving their technical 
difficulties through a permanent consultation service 
within the Agency. 
21. The Viet-Namese delegation reiterated the hope 
it had expressed at the eleventh regular session 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

of the General Conference that the Agency would 
set up a permanent service able to provide requesting 
countries promptly with the everyday equipment 
used in nuclear research.^) Such equipment was 
practically unobtainable on the local market in the 
developing countries and lack of a spare part could 
be sufficient to hold up a research project. 

22. In connection with nu clear research, his country 
unreservedly endorsed the policy of promoting work 
by the award of research contracts, but thought that 
each developing country should be guided towards 
a specialization suitable for application in a field 
of activity of direct concern to it, while also being 
of benefit to all countries in the region concerned. 
The Agency might consider the establishment of a 
regional centre for the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, which would be responsible not only for 
training the scientific staff already mentioned, but 
also, and in particular, for managing and carrying 
out research projects oi common interest to all the 
countries in the region. The Agency's regional representative 
would then have a major role to play, 
and in the case of South East Asia Mr. F. Medina 
appeared eminently suitable for the task. 
23. The Government of Viet-Nam was resolved 
to maintain its efforts to promote the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. It had unshakeable faith in the 
international co-operation taking place within the 
Agency and was aware of its duty in the matter of 
international solidarity. As in the past, it would 
for 1969 .make a voluntary contribution to the 
Agency's General Fund based on its assessment 
ratio under the Regular Budget. 
24. Mr. BASSUDE (Uganda) considered it an 
honour to attend the Conference as representative 
of Uganda on the first occasion on which it was 
participating as a full Member State of the Agency. 
His country welcomed the admission of three new 
Members to the Agency, which would enhance the 
possibility of increasing regional co-operation in the 
East and Central African region in the application 
of radioisotopes in agriculture, medicine, etc. His 
delegation noted with pleasure the appointment by 
the Agency of a regional adviser in hydrology for 
Africa, and hoped that similar arragements might 
be made in other fields. His country was willing 
to act as host to small regional training courses 
or seminars under Agency auspices on topics of 
interest to Member States in the region. The facilities 
already established, with Agency assistance, in 
the University College and its Medical School in 
Uganda were available for such purposes. 
25. Uganda warmly welcomed the draft co-operation 
agreement between the Agency and the 
6) GC(XI)/OR.113,paia.6. 

Organization of African Unity,7) to be considered 
later in the Conference, because of the increasing 
number of African States which were becoming 
Members of the Agency and the further impetus 
it would give to increased regional co-operation. 

26. His delegation asked, as other delegations 
from developing countries had done, for increased 
participation by the developing countries, particularly 
from Africa, in the main policy-making organs 
of the Agency, especially in those concerned with 
reviewing the Agency's activities. 
27. In common with other nations in the African 
region, Uganda was closely interested in the 
maintenance of a nuclear-free zone in Africa, and 
strongly supported the Agency's safeguards system. 
28. As a pledge of its willingness to assume its 
full responsibilities as a Member of the Agency, 
Uganda was actively considering the amount of its 
contribution to the General Fund. 
29. His delegation expressed its appreciation for 
the assistance Uganda had received through the 
Agency's cechnical assistance programme. Of late 
there had, however, been delays in the recruitment 
of experts, and Uganda urged the more developed 
countries to encourage more of their scientific staff 
to serve on short-term appointments as experts overseas. 
30. Mr. SARABHAI (India) considered it a great 
privilege to lead his delegation to the General 
Conference. He congratulated the Director General 
and staff of the Agency on the excellent work they 
had done, and welcomed the new Members of the 
Agency, Liechtenstein, the Niger and Zambia. 
31. India had during the past 15 to 20 years 
laid the foundation for the use of atomic energy, 
and was now making a thorough study of its application 
in various fields of national development. 
He would not discuss in detail the use of nuclear 
power or the agricultural applications of atomic 
energy, since he would be dealing with those subjects 
in his lecture entitled "Nuclear Power in Developing 
Countries".8) 
32. The irradiation of potatoes and onions, which 
were very important crops in tropical countries, 
offered promising prospects, and he was sure that 
extensive use would be made of the facility which 
had been set up in co-operation with Canada for 
that purpose; the results obtained would be made 
available to all interested countries. 
7) GC(XII)/376, Annex. 
8) Delivered at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on 
26 September 1968. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

> 

33. Co-operation with a number of other Member 
States in joint projects, such as the India-Philippines-
Agency project,^) had been very valuable. He also 
paid a tribute to the national atomic energy 
commissions of many countries, particularly Canada, 
France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom 
and the United States of America, which had cooperated 
with India. 
34. He considered that international organizations, 
such as the United Nations Development Programme 
and the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, should evaluate the potential use of 
nuclear power in conjunction with the Agency and 
that, in many cases, its use would not give rise 
to serious financial difficulties. 
35. In the statement the Director General had 
made to the Conference two days earlier, he had 
said: 
"When the NPT is in force there will have 
to be a shift of emphasis in the work of the 
IAEA. More weight will have to be given 
to the control functions. I hope that the 
Agency will still remain a technical organization, 
although it is inevitable that it will 
become much more exposed to the political 
situation in the world".J0) 

In another context, the Director General had 
mentioned that "... the Agency's safeguards system 
would need to be adapted to the provisions 
contained in Article III of the Treaty".11) However, 
the primary function of the Agency, as laid down 
in its Statute, was to promote the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy, and safeguards activities, although 
admittedly essential, were subsidiary to that function. 
The paramount consideration was to ensure that 
the large number of countries which had not yet 
benefited from the use of atomic energy could do 
so. 

36. If the Agency was to survive, it would have 
to ensure that its work was not influenced by political 
pressure, in accordance with Article III.B.3. 
and C of its Statute. 
37. He welcomed die efforts to revise the safeguards 
system, and hoped the provisions on reprocessing 
plants would be brought into line with 
those relating to fuel fabrication. The work being 
done in the application of safeguards to isotope 
9) See document INFCIRC/56 and Add. 1. 
10) This verbation quotation is taken from that part of 
the Director General's statement that is summarized 
in document GC(XII)/OR.l 19, para.53. 
11) Ibid, para.49. 

enrichment, which played a very important pari, in 
the peacefule uses of atomic energy, should 
be speedily concluded, since delay might well lead 
to further complications. 

38. The most important function of the Agency 
was to provide services and supply materials, equipment 
of facilities on request, as laid down in 
Article III.A.l of the Statute, ^nd in that connection 
the Agency was perfectly competent to provide any 
services requested by the parties to the NPT; indeed, 
Articles VIII, IX and X of the Statute would enable 
the Agency to provide any services requested. 
39. He supported the argument that the composition 
of the Board was no longer sufficiently representative 
and believed it should be enlarged, 
bearing in mind the principles governing representation 
which had been established following lenghty 
negotiations. 
40. Turning to the peaceful uses of nuclear explosives, 
he expressed the view that all countries 
were fully entitled to carry out work in any branch 
of technology, provided they were competent to do 
so. In that connection he quoted what he had 
said in an address to the United Nations Conference 
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer 
Space, held in Vienna in August 1968.12) He considered 
the Agency was the appropriate body to 
perform the regulatory functions required in connection 
with the use of nuclear explosives for peaceful 
purposes. He hoped it would be possible to form 
a clearer idea of die role which the Agency could 
play, bearing in mind the distinction which might 
have to be made between a regulatory body dealing 
with the use of such explosives under a partial 
or complete test ban treaty and another organization 
which might help countries, on request, to provide 
the services required. 
41. He expressed concern at the lack of financial 
resources, particularly in view of the Agency's increasing 
responsibilities, and thought that the Board 
should consider the problem in detail in the light 
of probable developments over the next five years. 
Alternative safeguards procedures could be defined 
and their relative cost estimated, and savings might 
be made by allowing a degree of flexibility in certain 
circumstances in the matter of inspection. A separate 
fund for safeguards activities was desirable, and 
contributions should be based on the installed nuclear 
power in the countries concerned. One of the major 
difficulties that would arise was that developing 
countries would be obliged to pay a contribution 
in foreign exchange for services from which they 
derived no benefit. It would therefore be more 
equitable if the small contributions involved were 
12) United Nations document A/CONF.34/L.3, last two 
paragraphs. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

made by the States which benefited from the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 

42. He hoped more national laboratories would 
provide the Agency with analytical services and thus 
reduce the demands made on its funds. 
43. The provision of technical assistance was one 
of the Agency's most important activities, and unless 
some way was found to increase the technical assistance 
provided, there was little point in developing 
countries engaging in any nuclear energy activities. 
Trainees from a large number of countries had come 
to see the work started at the Tarapur Atomic Power 
Station, and India was prepared to offer similar 
opportunities to foreign nationals interested in food 
irradiation. 
44. It was his pleasant duty to pledge a voluntary 
contribution of $35 000 in non-convertible rupees, 
and he would also like to pledge to the Agency 
his country's wholehearted support and to wish 
it success in the years to come. 
45. Mr. KOLOS (Hungary) said that the present 
session of the General Conference was taking place 
at a time which was decisive for the Agency owing 
to the conclusion of the NPT. His delegation, 
speaking at previous sessions of the General Conference, 
had warmly welcomed those developments 
which had contributed to the lessening of international 
tension, the partial nuclear weapons test ban treaty 
and the treaty on the peaceful uses of outer space. 
Those instruments had had a direct and favourable 
effect on the Agency's work. 
46. The NPT, which had also been signed by 
Hungary, was of exceptional importance for the 
Agency. Its conclusion would contribute greatly 
to the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes 
in various countries and would be conducive to 
a considerable expansion of international co-operation 
in the atomic energy field, since the provision of 
an effective system of control afforded the necessary 
guarantee that the results of such co-operation would 
be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. There 
was no truth in the claim that the Treaty ran counter 
to the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
47. In his delegation's view, the proper organization 
to provide effective controls was the Agency, which 
had acquired appropriate experience in diat regard. 
On the basis of that experience, die existing safeguards 
system could, of course, be developed as 
necessary to meet the altered requirements. What 
was needed was to develop die system and not 
whittle it down, to perfect the system of controls 
and not weaken it. With a view to ensuring effective 
controls he considered it important that the 
inspectorate should be further developed on 
an equitable geographical basis. 

48. Though his delegation attached great importance 
to the safeguards system, it also considered 
that the Agency's other activities should continue 
to expand concurrently. Special emphasis should 
be placed on the importance of technical assistance 
and also on the Agency's work on documentation, 
information and the holding of conferences. In the 
Hungarian delegation's view, the provision of 
technical assistance was an important part of the 
Agency's work and should therefore be expanded. 
The Hungarian Government had accordingly doubled 
its voluntary contribution for 1969 by comparison 
with 1968. 
49. As far as documentation, scientific and technical 
information and the holding of conferences was 
concerned, the Agency was doing very important 
work. Particular importance attached to the 
recommendations it had published regarding procedures 
for the safe handling and transport of radioactive 
materials. 
50. In the Hungarian delegation's view, the 
Agency's role in formulating recommendations concerning 
such codes and regulations would grow 
in future as the peaceful uses of atomic energy were 
extended. It was natural that such recommendations 
should be formulated by an international organization, 
though account should of course be taken of the 
views of other international organizations. 
51. Turning to the Agency's research activities, 
he said his delegation was convinced that research 
carried out in the various national laboratories offered 
better prospects than research financed from the 
Agency's limited material resources, unless it was 
suitably concentrated on a few important topics, 
as was for example the research undertaken 
in connection with the formulation of international 
standards and recommendations in regard to nuclear 
measurements techniques and the purity control, 
storage and transport of radioactive substances. 
52. He extended a welcome to the Niger, Zambia 
and Liechtenstein on the occasion of dieir admission 
to the Agency. 
53. Notwithstanding the fact that the number of 
Member States now amounted to 101, the necessary 
steps had not yet been taken to make the Agency 
a truly universal organization, the Hungarian 
delegation could not regard it as normal that 
countries which had facilities where highly successful 
work was being done on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy should not be Members of the Agency. The 
German Democratic Republic, for example, was not 
a Member of the Agency, although the Government 
of that country had been one of the first to sign the 
NPT. Moreover, the German Democratic Republic 
was undertaking highly sucessful work in research on 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

atomic physics and nuclear chemistry and was a 
major producer of radioisotopes and labelled compounds, 
which were used in many States that were 
Members of the Agency; it had also been operating 
a nuclear power station for a number of years. 

54. The Hungarian Government was very interested 
in the Agency's work and was pleased with the 
positive results obtained. The Hungarian delegation 
hoped and believed that the Agency would be able 
to fulfil to an even greater extent in future 
the legitimate expectations placed in it by its Member 
States. 
55- Mr. HALUSA (Austria) said that, as in previous 
years, the general debate provided an opportunity 
to sum up the progress made, weigh up the tasks 
of the future and draw up a balance of the year's 
work. 

56. The past year had been marked by definite 
advances towards nuclear disarmament. The adoption 
by the General Assembly of the United Nations of 
the NPT, after long and difficult negotiations, was 
testimony to the widespread desire to bring about 
effective disarmament. The Treaty had met with 
such a favourable response that more than 80 States 
had signed it, with Austria among die first. Despite 
the often valid criticism which had been levelled 
against some of the Treaty's provisions, on which 
the Austrian delegation had made its stand quite 
clear in the General Assembly, he felt that 
the advantages conferred by certain provisions of 
the Treaty far outweighed the concessions demanded 
from non-nuclear-weapon States. 
57. The Austrian Government regarded the Treaty 
as a prerequisite for the adoption of effective disarmament 
measures by the nuclear-weapon Powers. 
It placed the parties to it under a real obligation 
to open negotiations aimed at ending the nuclear 
arms race and bringing about nuclear disarmament. 
It would promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and could serve as a valuable tool in the preservation 
of world peace. 
58. Austria dierefore gave its unreserved support 
to the NPT, and was convinced that it fulfilled 
the country's need for security. 
59. Clearly, every instrument concerned with disarmament 
called for a system of controls. The 
Agency had had an effective control system for some 
years, and its inspectors, and the Secretariat as a 
whole, had already gained a great deal of experience 
in die matter. Austria was convinced that there 
was an absolute need for the Agency's system of 
controls, which was constandy revised, improved 
and extended and which had already proved its 
usefulness and efficacity, and it was sure that the 
Agency would fulfil its control function under the 
NPT with competence and objectivity, and diat its 
services ought certainly to be used. 

60. At die Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States15) the Austrian delegation had stressed from 
the very beginning that the principal task of the 
Conference was to take an active part in establishing 
a balance between the mutual obligations of nuclearweapon 
and non-nuclear-weapon States by means 
of constructive proposals, addressed to the competent 
international organizations. During diat Conference 
opinions had been voiced which appeared to have 
been motivated by the lack of such a balance. His 
delegation felt that it would be wrong to ignore 
the view expressed at that Conference, diough it 
would be just as erroneous not to recognize the 
Agency's work and wealth of experience in general 
and, in particular, as regards safeguards, the exchange 
of scientific and technical information and the assistance 
given to developing countries in their 
programmes for acquiring and improving know-how 
relating to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It 
accordingly believed that the setting up of 
new international bodies of an analogous character 
would therefore be inappropriate. As far as the 
peaceful uses of nuclear explosions were concerned, 
it was for the Agency to assume die role of die 
"appropriate international body" referred to in 
Article V of the NPT. 
61. Referring in diat connection to a statement 
made at die beginning of die Conference of NonNuclear-
Weapon States by the Austrian Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, in which he had said that, without 
wishing to cast doubt on the sincerity of those 
who advocated die establishment of new international 
organizations, he was convinced of die need to utilize 
the services of an organization already established, 
he (Mr. Halusa) pointed out diat a proliferation 
of international organizations, diough admittedly less 
hazardous than die proliferation of atomic weapons, 
should still be avoided on practical, technical and 
financial grounds. 
62. The heavier burden of duties imposed upon 
the Agency under die NPT would undoubtedly require 
modification of its administrative organization 
and its structure. Great caution should be exercised 
in diat regard so to safeguard and ensure 
continuation of the progress made through the work 
done by the Agency in research and development 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, both 
in nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States. 
63. With regard to die Board of Governors' report 
to the General Conference (GC(XII)/380 and 389), 
die Austrian delegation noted that die Agency had 
13) Held at Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

continued to play a major role in supplying technical 
assistance to developing countries. Provision had 
been made for 160 experts to visit those countries 
in 1968, and to work in them for a total period 
of 671 months. Although that was a significant effort, 
it was, with some concern that he observed a growing 
discrepancy between the number of requests for assistance 
that were received and the number actually 
met. It was stated in Table 2 in the report that 
in 1968 the total value of requests received for 
expert services and equipment amounted to 
$3 600 000, whereas the total value of those approved 
was $977 000. In 1967 the corresponding figures 
had been $2 600 000 and $975 000. It was sincerely 
hoped, therefore, that Member States would strive 
to reach the target set for voluntary contributions. 
In 1969 Austria would, subject to parliamentary 
approval, contribute to the General Fund in proportion 
to its (now slightly larger) assessed share 

of the Regular Budget. 

64. Turning to the fellowship programme, he noted 
that the total number of fellowships awarded since 
the beginning, which was 3000, could be considered 
significant and that the figure of 300 fellowships 
per year had been set for the next few years. Austria 
would continue to contribute to that programme 
by making fellowships available to the Agency. 
65. Regarding the Agency's budget for 1969, he 
was glad to see that the increase in the Regular 
Budget was lower than for the previous year. The 
rate mentioned, 7.4%, was proof of a willingness 
to exercise a certain financial restraint, and his 
delegation was consequently prepared to support 
that budget. 
66. The 1969 programme showed a major expansion 
in the Department of Safeguards and Inspection 
because of the ever-growing use of nuclear energy 
in Member States. As a result of the encouraging 
progress in the industrial application of nuclear energy 
the Agency was called upon to play an even larger 
ard more active role, and it was well qualified to 
do so. 
67. With regard to the question of changing the 
composition of the Board of Governors to reflect 
the present situation, the Austrian delegation did 
not dispute the desirability of undertaking a thorough 
study of the problem. Lastly, as regards the fourth 
international conference on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, which was scheduled for 1970 or 
197114) ( he 5 ^ he hoped the Agency would play 
a fitting role in the preparations for that important 
gathering. 
14) See General Assembly Resolution 2309 (XXII). 

68. In conclusion, he stated that plans for an 
international architectural competition for the design 
of the Agency's new headquarters were making good 
progress. The results of the competition would 
be announced in the spring of 1969, and 
construction work should therefore be commenced 
soon after. 
69. Mr. BUXO-DULCE (Spain)") said that his 
delegation wished, first of all, to express the firm 
conviction that Spain was doing its part to 
accomplish the goals of the Agency. In 1967 and 
1968 Spain had continued to extend its research 
and development activities. Aerial prospecting equipment 
for large sedimentary formations had been 
perfected and intensive work had been carried out 
on the exploitation of ores, to the point where 
Spain could now claim to be one of the principal 
producers of uranium. In ore processing, efforts 
were being concentrated on the chemistry of uranium 
extraction and re-extraction and on recovery by means 
of iron-exchange resins. The Andujar uranium plant 
was soon to be joined by another plant at Ciudad 
Rodrigo, the construction of which had already been 
authorized. Progress was also being made in the 
fabrication of nudear fuels. A plant for the reprocessing 
of irradiated fuel with a capacity of 550 grams 
of uranium per day had gone into operation. A 
pilot plant for the decontamination and disposal 
of radioactive wastes had also been put into 
operation. Experimental work was being continued 
on the JEN-1 andJEN-2 reactors, and in March 
1968 the CORAL-1 fast experimental reactor had 
reached criticality. Research on the production and 
utilization of radioisotopes was likewise continuing, 
special attention being given to medical applications 
and to radiological protection. 
70. Spain was also devoting a good deal of effort 
to the construction of nuclear power stations in 
order to meet the increased requirements for electricity 
which an expanding population, together with 
industrial growth, made inevitable. At present three 
stations were under construction: the one at Zorita, 
known as the "Jose Cabrera" plant, was near completion; 
the second was at Santa Maria de Garoh£ 
and the third at Vandellos, where construction was 
proceeding rapidly. 
71. In November 1968, at Madrid, Spain was to 
act as host to an Agency symposium on nuclear 
desalination, a topic of immense importance which 
was commanding enormous interest in many 
countries, including the United States of America. 
72. Turning to the Agency's programme, he said 
that the new method of presentation — covering 
a period of six years — was satisfactory, provided 
15) In the absence of Mr. Bupco-Dulce, this statement was 
delivered on his behalf by Mr. Sanchez del Rio. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

the programme remained sufficiently flexible and 
could be adapted to the many and various new 
requirements which might arise over such a long 
period of time. 

73. The Agency's programmes were on the whole 
well-balanced, and the tendency to relinquish projects 
at an appropriate stage, allowing them to be 
continued by Member States and other organizations, 
was to be welcomed. The Agency should concentrate 
its efforts on activities which, by reason of their 
novelty or specialized character, could not so well 
be undertaken by other international organizations 
or by Member States; once a particular application 
of nuclear energy moved into the commercial phase, 
or became no more that a routine application of 
well-established techniques, the Agency should relinquish 
it and devote its resources to some new 
project. 
74. INIS was to his mind a good example of 
the type of activity the Agency should undertake, 
and it deserved unstinting praise. 
75- The most burning question of the moment 
was without doubt die new and crucial phase which 
the Agency would be entering as a consequence 
of the NPT. 

76. Spain wished to make its attitude to that 
Treaty absolutely clear. No country could reasonably 
claim that it was less dangerous to continue with 
an unrestricted nuclear armaments race than 
to regulate that armaments race in some manner. 
However, as some countries were far more advanced 
in nuclear technology than others, it would 
be virtually impossible to find a solution completely 
satisfactory to all. Such a solution would eventually 
require a new and more general approach, so 
designed as to ensure that all concerned would be 
on a comparable footing and enjoy equal opportunities. 
77. Now, to assert that it was merely a matter 
of confidence for non-nuclear countries to accept 
the new situation willingly was to misinterpret die 
heart of die matter. No doubt confidence could 
govern many acts among men, facilitating coexistence, 
and one could not insist at every stage 
on formal contracts or stipulations as a means of 
guaranteeing stability and fulfilment of obligations; 
however, in a matter so vital as that which now 
faced the world die good faith of all could be taken 
for granted; the true problem was to find reasonable 
solutions which would make it possible to attain 
die objective, and diose solutions must be based on 
mutual comprehension among all the nations concerned, 
on respect for each other's rights and 
interest. 
78. A fundamental problem was to guarantee the 
security of States that had no nuclear arms. The 
system of guarantees approved by die General 
Assembly of the United Nations, supplemented by 
the declarations of the United Kingdom, the United 
States of America and die Soviet Union, was broad, 
and founded on die best of intentions. What would 
be more complete, however, would be a legal instrument 
in which die nuclear Powers undertook 
not to attack or menace odier countries widi nuclear 
arms. Similarly, if all die non-nuclear countries 
were to have die same rights and obligations, diey 
must have unrestricted access to information on 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
79. Those were questions of no litde interest 
to die Agency, since its future work was to have 
a fundamental bearing on die practical application 
of die Treaty. In die opinion of the Spanish Government 
it would be quite unreasonable to enter diat 
new stage of work widiout first adapting the 
Agency — die organization which was to administer 
safeguards, the very foundation of the system — to 
die changed circumstances. 
80. The Treaty imposed upon the Agency obligations 
which went beyond the normal scope of its 
activities. A proof of diat lay in the limitations 
placed by die Treaty on die use of nuclear explosives 
for peaceful purposes, an area of nuclear endeavour 
that needed farther research. 
81. In his statement to die Conference, die Director 
General had pointed out diat many of die most 
advanced nuclear Powers were still hesitating to sign 
l6).

the Treaty If dieir hesitations were not overcome, 
die effectiveness of die Treaty as die cornerstone 
of a true nuclear disarmament system would 
be seriously undermined. On the odier hand, die 
80 countries that had already signed die Treaty 
would be joined by many odiers if some compromise 
solution could be found. 

82. In any event, die Agency had expressed its 
readiness to accept die responsibilities placed upon 
it by the Treaty (and by Article III in particular) 
and its decision had been received widi great satisfaction 
by die United Nations, as was evident from 
the statement made by die representative of die 
Secretary-General I7). Spain also believed quite 
sincerely diat die Agency represented die only real 
possibility of making die safeguards provisions of 
the Treaty effective. 
83. There appeared to be some concern about 
the harm which the Agency might suffer as a result 
of having politics brought into its affairs. Some 
16) GC(XII)/OR.119,para.30. 
17) Ibid, paxa.58. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

felt that any political taint whatsoever was undesirable 
to the extent that it obliged the Agency to depart 
from its fundamentally technical mission. Spain did 
not share that belief. The representative of the 
Secretary-General had recalled quite rightly that the 
Agency's Statute provided for a particularly close 
relationship with the political organs of the United 
Nations 18); that fact would take on special significance 
when the Treaty entered into force. Thus the 
political connection already existed in fact; the 
problem now was to ensure that the undeniable 
political implications of the Agency's new duties 
did not prejudice its fundamentally technical and 
specialized character. 

84. How, then, should the Agency be adapted 
to its new and important duties? One possibility 
was to revise the Statute; that would be the most 
straightforward and thorough method, and a number 
of aspects o£ the Statute which needed reform could 
be examined at the same time; that possibility 
should at least be borne in mind, as it might prove 
difficult to find a simpler or quicker method. Unfortunately, 
however, revision of the Statute would 
be a long and complicated task, and no initiative 
in that direction could be expected to bear fruit 
in less than a year, at the least, in view 
of the statutory regulations that would have to be 
observed. There was, however, an indirect procedure 
which ought to be considered and which would 
not require amendment of the Statute, namely the 
establishment within the Board of Governors of a 
special committee; such a procedure was in fact 
authorized by Article VI.I of the Statute itself. 
85. The type of committee he had in mind would 
make no real sense unless it were widely enough 
bases to correct certain representational defects due 
either to a faulty original approach or to an imbalance 
brought on by changed circumstances. The 
imbalance of which he spoke might be tolerable 
at the present stage of the Agency's work, but it 
would definitely have to be corrected for the future. 
That, at least, was the view of the Spanish 
delegation, and he would be glad to see it shared 
by others. If in the course of the General 
Conference some more definite plan were to emerge, 
similar in substance to the ideas he had expressed, 
Spain would study it with care and goodwill, in a 
sincere desire to see the Agency successfully discharging 
the new responsibilities with which it was 
now faced. 
86. Mr. YEN (China) said that his country had 
been watching with interest the activities of the 
Agency and that part of the planned programme 
for the current year which had been completed. 
18) Ibid, para.60. 

It was gratifying to note that in addition to the 
various projects carried out in many Member States 
and regions during 1968, the Agency had been 
sending experts in nuclear sciences and reactor 
technology all over the world. 

87. During the past year the Republic of China 
had been continuing its various projects in research 
and development to promote the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. It had found a vast area for the 
application of nuclear energy in the improvement 
of agriculture. The radiotracer technique had been 
widely applied in the study of plant nutrition and 
in soil science, entomology and plant physiology. 
Particular attention was also being paid to the industrial 
application of radioisotopes. Several local 
manufacturers were already using radioisotopes for 
quality control. A 3000-Ci cobalt-60 unit, which 
had been installed under the Agency's technical 
assistance programme, had been used extensively in 
the study of radiation effects on plastics and in food 
preservation. Twenty different isotopes were now 
being produced in the Tsing-Hua swimming-pool 
reactor, 95/6 of them for medical purposes. Many 
scientists and college students were engaged in basic 
research work on nuclear physics, radiochemistry, 
inelastic scattering of neutrons, the neutron energy 
spectrum and activation analysis. In all those 
activities, the Republic of China very much appreciated 
the Agency's technical assistance. In view of the 
contribution it made to the Agency's budget, he 
expected that Agency assistance to his country would 
not only continue but would expand. 
88. The Chinese delegation to the eleventh session 
of the General Conference had reported on China's 
plan for its first power reactor, of 500 MW(e) *9). 
Extensive studies on the feasibility of nuclear power 
in Taiwan and the investigation of several possible 
sites had been carried out in the current year. 
Nuclear power was essential to his country and the 
first nuclear project was very close to realization. 
89. The Republic of China had placed its reactors 
under the Agency's safeguards system and was already 
a signatory to the NPT. It was ready to co-operate 
with the Agency in any plan for the peaceful use 
of atomic energy. 
90. A successful "Atoms in Action Exhibition* 
jointly sponsored by the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission and the Chinese Atomic Energy Council 
had been held in his country early in 1968. 
91. The Republic of China supported the Agency's 
budget for 1969, and would again make a voluntary 
contribution of $10 000. 
19) GC(XI)/OR.l 15, paras 106 and 107. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

92. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure the General Conference 
had to fix a closing date for the session, on the 
recommendation of the General Committee. 
93. The General Committee had considered the 
question and had authorized him to recommend 
on its behalf that Monday, 30 September, be fixed 
as the closing date, subject to all business having 
been disposed of by then. 
94. The General Committee's recommendation was accepted. 
The meeting rose at 12.50p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XII)/OR.123 
19 February 1969 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 


Item of the 

* GC(XII)/390. 
RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
(24-30 SEPTEMBER 1968) 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 27 September 1968, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Argentina 
Chile 
United Arab Republic 
Italy 
Singapore 
Israel 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
Norway 


Paragraphs 

1 — 111 

1 — 17 

18— 26 

27— 54 

55— 65 

66— 76 

77— 89 

90 — 103 
104—111 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XII)/INF/103/Eev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1967-68 
(GC(XII)/380, 389) (continued) 

1. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said his country 
wished to acknowledge with gratitude the benefits 
which it had received from the Agency and which 
were an example of the results that could be 
obtained when activities directed towards the same 
end were combined and co-ordinated. 
2. The principal advances made by Argentina 
would illustrate his point. In May a new 5-MW 
swimming-pool reactor for research and radioisotope 
production had gone into operation. As in the case 
of its predecessors, all die design and construction 
work had been carried out in Argentina, with the 
active participation of private industry. The National 
Atomic Energy Commission had made special efforts 
to encourage such participation, making available 
technical advice, designs and special equipment. 
3. In addition to that reactor, a number of other 
installations comprising the first stage in the construction 
of the fourth Argentine atomic centre had 
been inaugurated. Those facilities included 
laboratories concerned with nuclear safety, radiological 
protection, applications of radiation and large 
radiation sources, as well as a chemical reprocessing 
plant. 
4. Plans had been made for the gradual 
transformation of that centre into Argentina's most 
important nuclear complex, in which scientists from 
other countries too would have an opportunity to 
do their work. In that connection he invited the 
Agency to make use of those new installations for 
any purpose it deemed appropriate. 
5. As the result of a feasibility study for the 
installation of a power reactor, and following an 
international competition in which 17 bids had been 
received, the Argentine Government had authorized 
the Commission to accept the offer made by the 
Siemens Company for the construction at Atucha of 
a 319-MW nuclear power plant with a heavy-watermoderated 
natural-uranium reactor, which was to be 
operating at full load by the middle of 1972. 
6. In view of the extensive participation of the 
Commission and Argentine industry, it was expected 
that the project would call for a considerable effort 
on the part of the Country's technicians once it 
was fully under way. 
7. Prospecting for raw materials had been, 
continued and evidence of the results could be found 
in the fact that the joint publication on uraniumbearing 
resources compiled by the European Nuclear 
Energy Agency and the IAEA showed that Argentina 
was among the five western countries with the largest 
uranium ore reserves. 

8. In 1967, for the first time, the number of 
experts visiting Argentina had been smaller than 
the number which it had sent abroad. His delegation 
approved in full the report of the Board of 
Governors for 1967-68 (GC(XII)/380 and 389). 
Although technical assistance had been provided by 
the Agency in a satisfactory manner, it was desirable 
that that activity should be increased for the benefit 
of the developing countries. It was a matter for 
concern that voluntary contributions had not reached 
even the target figure of $2 million. In that connection, 
he supported the request made by the Director 
General in his statement 1), and confirmed that the 
Argentine contribution would be fixed at the 
percentage recommended. 
9. It would also be necessary to devote particular 
attention to the generation of nuclear power and to 
the application of radioisotopes and radiation sources 
in agriculture and food production. 
10. The Argentine delegation emphasized the 
importance of the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) in connection with the exchange of 
information. 
11. In connection with the Agency's budget for 
1969 and programme for 1969-742) the Argentine 
delegation congratulated the Director General on the 
new presentation of the document, which had 
required considerable effort but which had succeeded 
in providing clearer and more detailed information 
on the scheduled activities and necessary investments 
and made it easier to evaluate the plans and goals 
to be achieved during a logical period of 
implementation. 
12. The available evidence indicated a definite 
increase in studies connected with the peaceful use 
of atomic energy in nearly every country in the 
world, the sums invested by Governments for that 
purpose showing a steady rise. The Agency's staff 
now had a capacity for action which would enable 
it, without any increase in numbers, greatly to extend 
the scope of its activities, especially those aspects 
concerned with improving living conditions and 
finding solutions to the problems of power shortages, 
inadequate food supply and precarious health 
conditions. 
13. In an effort to help find a solution to the 
problem of insufficient funds, Argentina, together 
with the Latin American countries participating in 
1) GC(XII)/OR.l 19, pata.41. 

2) GC(XII)/385 and Corr.l. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States'), had 
submitted a series of proposals designed to obtain, 
within the framework of the Agency, contributions 
from the United Nations Development Programme 
and the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development. Those bodies were able to make 
financial contributions which the Agency, unfortunately, 
could not.However, in those bodies atomic 
energy programmes had to compete with other 
programmes on the basis of priorities established 
by the various Governments. It was for the purpose 
of ensuring a reasonable order of priorities that a 
request had been made for a full study on all 
possible contributions of nuclear technology to the 
scientific and economic progress of the developing 
countries. Similarly, Argentina had sought at Geneva 
to prevent the proliferation of international organizations 
by urging that all international programmes 
relating to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
including nuclear explosions and an international 
safeguards system, should be centralized in the Agency. 

14. The Agentine delegation had also sought to 
have consolidated in the Agency one of the basic 
functions considered by the Preparatory Commission 
and provided for in the Statute: that of acting as 
an international supplier of fissionable materials for 
power reactors. 
15. The support which Argentina had given and 
would continue to give to the Agency was based 
on the philosophy and spirit reflected in Articles 
III.C and IV.C of the Statute. 
16. In his opinion any services which were set up 
within die framework of the Agency had to fulfil 
two basic requirements: they must not be established 
at the expense of already existing services and they 
must not infringe the existing rights recognized by 
the Statute for all Members, without discrimination 
of any kind. 
17. In conclusion, he wished to express his faith 
in the future of die Agency and his intention to do 
everything in his power to strengthen it. 
18. Mr. SERRANO (Chile) pointed out that at 
the present session of die General Conference many 
of the future problems were being considered in 
the light of die Treaty on die Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons4). Chile had joined 94 other States 
in voting in favour of the General Assembly's resolution 
commending the Treaty and, prior to that, 
3) Held at Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 
4) This Treaty, which is the subject of Resolution 2373 

(XXII) adopted by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations on 12 June 1968, is subsequently referred 
to in this record as "the Treaty* or "the NPT". 
had signed the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America and other agreements, 
such as the Treaty of the Antarctic, which banned 
atomic experiments in that region. 

19. His Government had supported tiiose treaties 
on the understanding diat diey were milestones on 
the road to nuclear disarmament, intended to eliminate 
all forms of aggression and coercion, to put an end 
to the cold war and the policy of blocs, to further 
peaceful coexistence and respect for national 
sovereignty, and to ensure non-interference in the 
internal affairs of other nations, diereby contributing 
to die creation of an international order tiiat would 
make it possible to utilize the resources of mankind, 
especially in the more technologically advanced 
countries, for die social and cultural improvement 
of developing countries. If, on die odier hand, die 
nuclear Powers gave any indication, by dieir actions 
rather dian dieir words, diat instead of helping to 
bridge intolerable and hazardous gaps in economic 
and technological development, diose treaties were 
designed to make diose gaps a permanent feature 
or consolidate die division of die world into spheres 
of influence, Chile, along with other countries, would 
be forced to reappraise its policy. 
20. His delegation supported die Agency in its 
dual role as promoter of development and guardian 
over die legitimate uses of nuclear energy. Widiout 
economic development, national and international 
tensions would not take long to find a violent oudet, 
and die most elaborate control systems would by 
themselves be of no avail. Those systems were 
bodi necessary and practical in diat they created 
conditions of mutual trust diat enabled die bulk 
of resources to be harnessed for productive purposes. 
21. He felt that the Agency should promote a 
much more ambitious technical assistance programme 
that would reflect a truer understanding by the more 
affluent Member States of die fact that the relative 
backwardness prevailing in one third of the world 
was an increasingly serious matter. But the assistance 
should not be channelled into a few sectors diat 
were already fairly well developed, but also into 
those where nuclear development was still in its 
first stages. Widi that end in view, his delegation 
pledged its fullest support for technical assistance 
programmes, and drew die Agency's attention to 
the creation, within the Latin American context, 
of a Science and Technology Programme in accordance 
widi a declaration made in April 1967 by die 
Presidents of the American Republics at their meeting 
in Punta del Este. 
22. Chile had begun construction of a scientifictechnological 
complex equipped widi suitable facilities 
for die study and development of the scientific 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

applications of atomic energy. The Agency, and a 
number of Member States, had assisted in its 
planning and design. Those facilities would be used 
in conjunction with ones already in existence or in 
the planning stage both in Chile and throughout 
Latin America. 

23. The facilities would in due course be placed 
under the Agency's safeguards system, and the Agency 
would be called upon to bear the cost involved. 
24. The use of atomic energy in Latin America 
was in a state of transition from the first stage of 
radioisotopes and research reactors, to a second 
stage involving power reactors for the generation 
of electricity and desalination of sea water. In the 
coming ten years Chile would need to have recourse 
to such facilities in coping with problems that would 
inevitably arise in the development of mining, 
industry, and the social services. 
25. His delegation consequently noted with keen 
interest the concern shown by the Agency and a 
large number of Member States for the technological 
development of such concepts as "energy centres" 
and "agro-industrial complexes", since they were 
potentially suited to the conditions prevailing in the 
mining areas and semi-arid region of Chile. 
26. The world was treading a path fraught with 
danger. Never before had the difference between 
failure and success been so striking. He therefore 
hoped that both the present session of the 
Conference, and the work of the Agency, could be 
instrumental in avoiding a tragedy and creating a 
super-civilization; for this to happen a larger number 
of countries would have to be given a chance to 
take part in die Agency's decisions, and when the 
time came he would support the resolution envisaging 
a change in the composition of the Board of 
Governors5) so as to guarantee adequate representation 
of all members of the human family. 
27. Mr. FAHMY (United Arab Republic) remarked 
that it was gratifying indeed to address the twelfth 
regular session of the Agency's General Conference 
under the presidency of a well-known scientist from 
Mexico, a country with which the United Arab 
Republic and indeed all the countries of the world 
had cordial and friendly relations, and he was glad 
to be associated once again with the Agency and 
the Director General and Secretariat, with whom 
he had in the past worked in close co-operation. 
28. It was further gratifying to note the increase 
in the Agency's membership, and he took the 
opportunity of congratulating Liechtenstein, Niger 
and Zambia on their admission. 
5) See document GC(XII)/397. 

29. It was a fact diat, under the Statue, many 
of the responsibilities of the Agency and most of 
its day-to-day work were entrusted to the Board of 
Governors and the Secretariat. That was doubdess 
a necessary arrangement when one was dealing with 
such a complex problem as atomic energy. The 
effect had been, however, that the General Conference 
appeared to have become a routine affair, without 
much substantive work to do, but that was a regrettable 
development and one which called for 
remedial action with a view to revitalizing the 
Conference's functions. 
30. Such action was required in the light of the 
increasing membership of the Agency, of the increasing 
interest being taken in the Agency's work, 
and, above all, of the epoch-making decision of the 
United Nations to conclude the first international 
instrument aimed at curtailing the spread of nuclear 
weapons, namely the NPT. 
31. Those considerations would make itnecessary, 
in his Government's view, for the General Conference 
to undertake, in 1970, a special review of the 
activities of the Agency since its establishment, and 
to scrutinize the provisions of the Statute with a 
view to adapting it to recent developments. 
32. He was not proposing that a separate or 
special session of the General Conference be held 
for that purpose; it would be sufficient if the 
fourteenth regular session were suitably expanded, 
with invitations to participate being extended to 
all countries. 
33. The United Arab Republic was therefore 
prepared to sponsor a draft resolution convening a 
session of the General Conference in the autumn 
of 1970 for the purpose of reviewing the Statute 
of the Agency and the activities of the organization 
since its establishment. 
34. Many speakers in the general debate had 
referred to the NPT. That treaty would no doubt 
place an added burden of responsibility on the 
Agency and its Members and would demand a substantial 
effort if its provisions were to be genuinely 
implemented and widely accepted. After it had come 
into force the NPT would become part and parcel 
of international life, international behaviour and 
international law, and as such would have a universal 
impact. 
35. The NPT had shown the peoples of the world 
that at last it was possible to make progress towards 
halting the production of nuclear weapons, and to 
divert to peaceful ends the effort previously spent 
on the manufacture of engines of destruction. 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

36. While the NPT did not force the nuclear 
Powers to dismantle their nuclear arsenals, it nevertheless 
indicated that the nations hoped and 
expected that they would come to an early agreement 
to do so. His country would, in every appropriate 
forum, continue to work for the final prohibition 
of nuclear weapons. 
37. Under the NPT the part played by the Agency 
would not be confined to control and inspection 
functions, and a substantial role was reserved for 
it in more positive directions. That was the 
implication of Article V of the Treaty, and the 
Agency could and should be ready to fulfil its 
obligations arising under that article. His delegation 
fully supported the view of the United States of 
America that the Agency should be the international 
organization entrusted with the implementation of 
Article V, and it therefore supported the draft 
resolution submitted by the United States requesting 
the Director General to initiate studies of the 
procedures to be employed by the Agency in carrying 
out its role under the article in question6). He 
hoped that, after review by the Board of Governors, 
the results of those studies could be circulated before 
the opening of the thirteenth regular session of the 
General Conference. 
38. Emphasis on the peaceful applications of 
nuclear explosives should of course not lead to a 
minimizing of the Agency's role in applying the 
necessary safeguards to ensure that the provisions 
of the NPT as a whole were fully respected. As 
was well known, his Government was in favour 
of a comprehensive and foolproof system of safeguards 
applied by the Agency to all nuclear energy 
activities and accepted by States not only as parties 
to the NPT but as signatories of the Agency's 
Statute. 
39. While on the subject of safeguards, it appeared 
appropriate to point out that the present Department 
of the Secretariat responsible for safeguards required 
futher strengthening so that it could effectively meet 
its new responsibilities. That was one of the major 
items to which the Board should turn its attention 
in the future. 
40. Regarding the Board itself, it had become quite 
clear that its size and composition required adjusting, 
and that need had been further confirmed by the 
proceedings of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-
Weapon States. The United Arab Republic, together 
with other countries, therefore intended to submit 
a draft resolution requesting die Board to review 
Article VI of the Agency's Statute and to submit 
to the thirteenth regular session of the General 
Conference a report on die ways and means by 
which membership of the Board could be enlarged 
so as to ensure that it adequately reflected the 
progress in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
achieved by many Members of the Agency, equitable 
geographical distribution, and the need for the Board, 
as the executive organ of the Agency, to be 
fully effective. 

41. A great deal was being said about the new 
role of the Agency following the conclusion of the 
NPT, and one of the papers submitted to the 
Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States was 
entided: "Submission of Periodic Reports by 
Countries, to an International Agency, on the Nature 
and the Extent of Nuclear Technical Assistance and 
Fissionable Material Supplied by Them to NonNuclear-
Weapon States for Peaceful Purposes". That 
paper, which had been prepared by the United Arab 
Republic Atomic Energy Establishment at the request 
of the United Nations Secretariat, thoroughly covered 
all aspects of the exchange of nuclear materials, 
and since it dealt in a number of ways, direct and 
indirect, with the prospective functions of the Agency 
under the NPT, he had forwarded it to the Director 
General in the hope that it might be found of assistance 
to the Secretariat, die Board of Governors, 
and the Members of the Agency 7). 
42. He would now refer briefly to a number of 
activities concerned with isotope applications in the 
United Arab Republic. 
43. In biology and medicine satisfactory progress 
had been achieved, particularly as regards the results 
of research on various endemic diseases. 
44. In agriculture, the water requirements of various 
crop plants in different soil and environmental 
conditions had been investigated using isotopes, as 
had nutrient supplies and the application of fertilizers. 
Isotope studies had been carried out on imported 
catde with a view to discovering their tolerance of 
heat and dryness, and useful results had been 
obtained. In entomology and insect control, attention 
had been directed towards the eradication of cottonleaf 
worm and stored-grain weevils. Groundwater 
investigations had been performed in co-operation 
with Libya and Kuwait. 
45. In industry, radioisotopes and radioactive 
sources were being used, sometimes on a routine 
basis, at oil, glass, paper, and iron and steel plants. 
46. The studies on the application of radioisotopes 
and radiation were being carried out, in close cooperation 
with the laboratories concerned, in the 
universities, the ministries, and scientific institutions 
such as the Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope 
Centre for the Arab Countries. Training was carried 
out on both a centralized and a regional basis, and 
6) GC(XII)/COM.1/107. 7) See document INFCIRC/121. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

trainees from 13 Arab and some African countries 
had found excellent training facilities at the Regional 
Radioisotope Centre in Cairo and at the United Arab 
Republic Atomic Energy Establishment at Inshas. 

47. Turning to the Agency's activities during the 
past year, he said he believed that the work done 
in the sphere of health, safety and waste management 
had consolidated existing achievements in connection 
with the establishment of health and safety standards 
and related codes of practice. Good work had also 
been done on studies and reports on the design 
and operation of nuclear facilities. While that part 
of the programme was well balanced on the whole, 
it was regrettable that the research contract budget 
in the field of health and safety was to be reduced 
in 1969. 
48. The Agency had an important part to play 
as an intermediary in die provision of emergency 
assistance in the event of radiation accidents, and 
the programme for the following years appeared to 
cover that aspect quite satisfactorily. However, the 
Agency was also called upon to provide direct assistance 
from its own resources, and he considered that 
the possibility of increasing that assistance in the 
field of health, safety and waste management should 
be investigated. 
49. The Agency's programme of feasibility studies 
on the application of nuclear technology to the 
development of agro-industrial complexes was a sound 
and balanced one. At that point he considered it 
appropriate to mention that the competent authorities 
in the United Arab Republic had completed studies 
for a dual-purpose nuclear plant for power generation 
and water desalination. 
50. The applications of atomic energy to food 
and agriculture were of great importance to the 
developing countries, and the activities of the 
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Food 
and Agriculture should therefore receive more support 
from both its sponsoring bodies. He noted that 
approximately half the work of the Joint Division 
was carried out through research contracts or costfree 
research agreements, and since research contracts 
represented a very effective means of rendering aid 
to developing countries at relatively low cost, that 
type of activity should be encouraged and further 
expanded. He felt, indeed, that the developed 
countries should co-operate with die Agency mainly 
on the basis of cost-free research agreements, so 
that the limited funds available could be increasingly 
devoted to supporting research in the developing 
countries. 
51. The fact that insufficient funds were also 
available for technical assistance projects was likely 
to reduce the effectiveness of the latter, and he would 
put forward the following suggestions as a means 
of overcoming the difficulties imposed by budgetary 
limitations: 

(a) 
Wherever the State requesting technical 
assistance had available a sufficient 
number of trained experts of its own, 
equipment should be provided by the 
Agency without the services of experts; 
(b) 
Better use should be made of the 
Agency's regular Professional staff by 
permitting them to undertake short 
technical assistance assignments in addition 
to their normal duties; 
(c) 
Greater emphasis should be laid on 
the award of fellowships and on the 
organization of training courses as a 
means of reducing the number of technical 
assistance assignments; and 
(d) 
Thought should be given to planning 
technical assistance projects on a regional 
basis, so that one expert could cover more 
than one country. 
52. In addition, he believed that effective on-thespot 
training could be achieved by permitting 
scientists from developing countries to co-operate 
in the Agency's Special Fund projects in other 
developing countries. 
53. As regards overall co-ordination, efforts should 
be made to improve and expand co-operation between 
the Agency and the other United Nations bodies 
responsible for managing Special Fund projects which 
involved the use of isotopes and radiation techniques. 
54. In conclusion, he pledged his Government's 
continued support for the Agency and its programme, 
whose purpose was to ensure that the atom was 
employed exclusively in the peaceful service of 
mankind. 
55. Mr. ANDREOTTI (Italy) said that the twelfth 
session of the General Conference marked a period 
of transition from a phase of primarily scientific 
and technical • activity to a new phase affecting the 
most important political problems of our age. In 
his double capacity as a member of the Italian 
Government and Chairman of the Italian National 
Nuclear Energy Committee, he had closely followed 
the Agency's work and had often participated in 
the reaching of decisions at the national level arising 
out of that work. He wished first of all to refer to 
the satisfactory results achieved in Italy after ten 
years of effort in sectors concerned with the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy: the installed capacity of 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

nuclear plants in Italy had reached 615 MW, a figure 
which placed Italy in fourth position in the world, 
after the United Kingdom, the United States and 
France; with 14520 million kWh produced by 
31 March 1968, Italy became third producer of 
nuclear power in the world, after the United 
Kingdom and the United States. By 1975, the 
installed power in Italy would have reached 3600MW. 
The figures he had quoted represented an annual 
plutonium output of 250 kilos in 1968, which would 
rise to several tons in 1975. Italy had already 
developed plants for fuel-element fabrication and two 
pilot plants for the reprocessing of irradiated rods. 
In the years ahead it was planning to construct 
a prototype heavy-water reactor, a fast fuel-testing 
reactor and a nuclear-powered ship. Finally, together 
with the other member countries of the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) it hoped 
to participate in the construction of a European 
uranium enrichment plant. 

56. Italy realized that its successful advances 
imposed some obligations, particularly the duty to 
share its experience and the fruit of its labour, 
so far as possible, with the less fortunate nations. 
It was in that spirit that it had concluded bilateral 
co-operation agreements in the field of nuclear energy 
with numerous developing countries and provided 
them with a considerable number of fellowships 
for study in Italian nuclear research institutes. 
However, Italy had recognized and continued to 
recognize that the main channel for collaboration 
between it and the developing countries was the 
Agency. Consequently it intended to support, by 
all means at its disposal, the studies and research 
carried out by the Agency in the fields of food, 
agriculture and biology, with a view to raising food 
standards in all areas of the world which still had 
not solved the food shortage problem, and to extending 
biological knowledge. He wished to refer, 
in passing, to the considerable effort which his 
country had made in setting up in Trieste, with the 
collaboration of the Agency, the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics, which, four years after its 
creation, had already established itself as a meeting 
place for scientists from the advanced countries and 
specialists from the developing countries. He' 
consequently welcomed the results of the discussions 
which had taken place between the Director General 
and UNESCO with a view to obtaining that 
Organization's participation in the joint effort. 
57. The scale of its participation in the Agency's 
work had placed Italy, in 1968 and 1969, in ninth 
place amongst the Member States with regard to 
contributions to the Agency's Regular Budget and 
second place with regard to voluntary contributions. 
It was therefore clear that Italy was amply fulfilling 
its international responsibilities. 
58. When a country respected its international 
duties in accordance with the principle that the 
developed countries should aid others to achieve 
their own development, that country would seem 
to have acquired certain rights within the organization 
in which such co-operation was decided upon and 
carried out. The Italian delegation remained 
convinced that the Agency was the appropriate body 
for arranging such co-operation, even though it had 
some doubts as to whether the Agency's procedures 
and various bodies were altogether adapted to the 
requirements of the times. That was in no way 
surprising, as the decisions taken in 1957 had been 
adopted by Member States representing only half 
of the Agency's current membership. It was 
consequendy clear that those decisions should be 
brought up to date. 
59. As far as the Secretariat was concerned, he 
would merely pay tribute to the outstanding achievements 
of the Director General and his staff. He 
had to point out, however, that staff for die 
Secretariat was almost always recruited from the 
same countries. 
60. On the question of the composition of the 
Agency's directing body — the Board of Governors — 
he pointed out that its structure, as provided for 
in Article VI of the Statute, appeared unsatisfactory 
for three reasons. The first was that it was no 
longer representative: die number of Member States, 
which had been 59 in 1957, had risen to 101 in 
1968, whereas die number of seats on die Board 
had risen from 23 to only 25; to be proportionate 
to die increase in membership it should have risen 
to 39. The Board ought to become more representative 
without losing efficiency, and a balance would 
have to be established between those two 
requirements. The same situation had arisen in 
the Security Council and die Economic and Social 
Council of the United Nations. 
61. The second criticism which could be levelled 
against the provisions of Article VI of die Statute 
was that diey did not allot an adequate and fair 
place to certain countries (such as Italy) which were 
amongst the most advanced in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. If that situation continued, a 
point would be reached when it would hardly be 
tolerable. 
62. Since Italy had become a Member of the 
Agency, it had achieved considerable progress due, 
no doubt, to die close collaboration with odier 
EURATOM countries and to technical and industrial 
exchanges with diose countries most advanced in 
die field of nuclear energy. It was those developments 
that had provided the basis for the work of 
Italy's scientists, wordiy successors to Enrico Fermi, 
and die successes of her technicians. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

6 3. Finally, there was a third reason why immediate 
and careful study of the matter of the Board's 
enlargement was advisable: even before coming into 
force, the NPT had opened up new prospects of 
major steps at the international level with a view 
to securing the peace and happiness of mankind; 
however, those steps also raised problems and 
difficulties because of the unprecedented restrictions 
they would impose on the national sovereignty of 
almost all the Member States. That was why precise 
assurances had to be obtained in such matters as 
the establishment of a new control system, which 
should, of course, apply only to special fissionable 
materials. 
64. For those reasons, the time had come to 
undertake a comprehensive study of the structure 
and composition of the body responsible for running 
the Agency and to ascertain whether the new tasks 
were to be carried out by the Agency with its present 
structure or by new bodies specially set up for the 
purpose. 
65. As the delegate of France had said, the point 
at issue was not to question the validity of the 
Agency's existence but rather to reaffirm its role8). 
The Agency had succeeded in triumphing over every 
difficulty that it had encountered since 1957, and 
he firmly hoped, and was indeed convinced, that 
it would continue to do so at present, when all 
its Members were called upon to play their part 
with circumspection and enthusiasm, discrimination 
and confidence. 
66. Mr. TAY SIN YAN (Singapore) said that 
although by comparison with the industrially 
developed countries, Singapore was a comparative 
newcomer as regards the application of nuclear energy, 
and an even more recent newcomer to the Agency, 
it strongly supported the ideals and work of the 
Agency in promoting the use of nuclear energy for 
the betterment of living conditions all over the world 
and \vould do everything possible to co-operate 
with the Agency in the pursuit of those ideals. 
67. Until recently his country's interest in the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy had been confined 
to medicine. The radioisotope laboratory in Singapore 
had studied the thyroid, using iodine-131, and it 
was proposed in the near future to expand those 
studies to include the use of chromium-51, iron-59 
and cobalt-58. A scanner would also be shortly 
available for kidney, liver and brain scans, using 
gold-198 and mercury-197. 
68. His country was grateful to the Agency for 
its assistance in expanding the use of radioisotopes 
for the welfare of the people. Under the 1968 
8) GC(XII)/OR.121,para.67. 

regular programme the Agency had provided the 
services of a health physicist for a period of six 
months to advise on health physics facilities in the 
new radiotherapy department of the General Hospital 
and train local counterparts in health physics 
techniques. 

69-A clinical biochemist was also to be made 
available for a period of one year to supervise the 
utilization of radioisotopes for clinical investigations 
and to train staff in the study of endocrine, haematological 
and other diseases. 

70. Singapore was a small nation with few natural 
resources. The maintenance of its national prosperity 
depended on industrialization and the availability 
of industrial services, such as ship repair. The 
Government had embarked upon an integrated industrialization 
programme, and industrial services 
facilities were rapidly being built up; to ensure that 
Singapore's industrial products were competitive in 
the world market it was intended to take full advantage 
of the latest technological and scientific 
developments in the world. He therefore expected 
that in the near future nuclear energy would play 
an increasingly important role in the maintenance 
of product quality in industrial operations and in 
industrial inspection services. In that connection 
an industrial concern in Singapore had already started 
to provide radiographic inspection of high-pressure 
welds and castings. A physicist from the Industrial 
Research Unit of the Economic Development Board 
was taking a specialized course in non-destructive 
testing under an Agency fellowship. 
71. The major difficulty in efforts to encourage 
wider application of radioisotopes in industry had 
been that local industrialists were unaware of the 
magnitude of potential applications of radioisotopes, 
largely due to the newness of that branch of science. 
He felt there was need for a Government-sponsored 
industrial radioisotope consulting service to disseminate 
basic information to industrialists and to 
assist in determining in which areas radioisotope 
techniques could be advantageously applied. 
72. A centre of that kind could also run training 
courses to ensure competent and safe operation of 
radioisotope equipment. The Science Council of 
Singapore was working towards that end and would 
welcome assistance from the Agency. In that connection, 
he was grateful for the assistance of an 
IAEA Regional Adviser on industrial applications 
of radioisotopes who had recently visited Singapore. 
73. With regard to the large-scale application of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, he was fully 
aware of the tremendous potential of nuclear power 
in providing electricity and in desalting sea water. 
The Science Council and the Public Utilities Board 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

were keeping constantly abreast of world developments 
in those fields. A preliminary investigation 
had recendy been made into the use of nuclear 
energy for electrical power generation but, having 
regard to the modest base load, it did not appear 
feasible for some time to come. 

74. He was, however, convinced that the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy would play an 
ever-increasing role in the industry and welfare of 
the country, and in that connection the Polytechnic 
would be introducing a course on nuclear energy 
for final-year students in mechanical engineering as 
a basic grounding in that discipline. 
75. Although Singapore remained a recipient 
country from die Agency's point of view, it was 
ready to co-operate within the limits of its resources 
with the Agency in promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Lying at the intersection of air, 
sea and telecommunications routes, Singapore was 
ideally suited for international conferences and the 
location of regional training and information centres. 
In November 1967 it had been host to an Agencysponsored 
research co-ordination meeting on nuclear 
waste management, and more recendy to die eleventh 
session of die Economic Commission for Asia and 
the Far East's sub-committee on natural resources 
and electric power development. 
76. In conclusion, he repeated that in its efforts 
to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy, his 
country would continue to look to die Agency and 
the more industrially advanced countries for guidance, 
and would itself co-operate with the Agency to the 
fullest extent in die pursuit of its ideals. 
77. Mr. DOSTROVSKY (Israel) said that in the 
past the emphasis in the Agency's work had been 
placed on assistance to developing countries — and 
indeed others as well — designed to make 
them better acquainted with progress in nuclear 
science and technology and to obtain for them 
a share in its benefits. Events had confirmed the 
value of that work. 
78. Unfortunately, an examination of die programme 
for die years ahead showed the danger 
of a sharp change in course which might upset die 
balance of the Agency's activities. Increasingly large 
resources in money and manpower were to be 
devoted to safeguards. Unless die income of die 
Agency were somehow miraculously increased, die 
new stress on safeguards would occur at die expense 
of more fundamental programmes, and the latter 
would tiien become, so to speak, the Cinderellas 
of the Agency's future budgets. One solution would 
be to have separate budgeting for safeguards and 
for the regular basic programmes. 
79- Everydiing possible should be done to prevent 
such a shift in balance and emphasis. If anything, 
substantially increased support should be given to 
die Agency's substantive work. Perhaps the Scientific 
Advisory Committee should take upon itself the 
task of ensuring that substantive programmes were 
not adversely affected by a diversion of funds and 
energies in one particular direction. 

80. Again, a cursory examination of the budget 
showed that the sums spent on what were called 
"policy-making organs" almost equalled those devoted 
to panels, seminars, symposia, conferences and the 
dissemination of information — activities which were, 
after all, the life-blood of die Agency and which 
provided the technical background for all its decisions 
and policies. That lack of proportion should be 
rectified; a more profitable allocation of funds could 
be ensured by reducing the number of meetings 
of die policy-making organs, including the sessions 
of the General Conference. 
81. There was another problem which was causing 
his delegation concern: the activities of the Agency 
were still marred from time to time by irrelevant 
considerations of a political nature, in violation of 
the Statute. If anything, there had been an ominous 
increase in that tendency during the past year. There 
must be no discrimination between Member States 
on political or any other grounds. The introduction 
of politics into die Agency's affairs was not a 
propitious augury for future work, nor a good 
argument in favour of entrusting the Agency widi 
additional functions. 
82. That much said, he would turn to matters 
of a very different nature. At the last session of 
the General Conference the United States delegation 
had expounded die idea of "energy centres" 
or "agro-industrial complexes".9) At die present 
session, the Conference had already heard a lecture 
entided Nuclear Power in Developing Countries 
which dealt widi related subjects 10). The idea was 
to combine, in accordance widi a careful and well 
co-ordinated plan, large nuclear power generators, 
desalting plants, farms and industrial complexes. 
Essentially, the plan was to promote the installation 
of large power and water units, exploiting 
to the best advantage die benefits derived from 
an increase in scale. 
83. Israel had been fortunate enough to have 
further discussions with Commissioner Ramey from 
the United States Atomic Energy Commission, and 
some Israeli scientists had actually participated in 
the studies carried out at the Oak Ridge National 
9) GC(XI)/OR-112, paras 9-11. 
10) Delivered at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on 
26 September 1968. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

Laboratory. Dr. E.A. Mason, the Director of the 
Oak Ridge project, had visited Israel with one of 
his colleagues, and thus it had been possible to 
go into the project in considerable detail. 

84. The Israel Atomic Energy Commission was 
franklx impressed by the prospects which the new 
concept opened up. Obviously, any reliable evaluation 
would require a detailed systems analysis taking 
into account the whole economic situation of the 
country concerned, as well as its social and demographic 
structure. A study group had been formed in 
Israel for that purpose, consisting of scientists, engineers 
and economists who were in touch with the 
Ministries of Agriculture and Development as well 
as with the Atomic Energy Commission. 
85. The study group was fortunate in having at 
its disposal a detailed report on the joint United 
States/Israel dual-purpose (power and water) project 
for Israel — the Kaiser-Catalytic Report on dualpurpose 
nuclear desalting. Taking that report as 
its point of departure, the study group had examined 
the effect of increasing the reactor's thermal capacity 
and adding power-intensive industries to use the 
extra energy, without changing the net amount of 
power and water supplied to the network. The 
main aim of the study, during its first stage, was 
to submit the various possible systems to a rough 
economic test under conditions which were highly 
favourable to the industrial component, which was 
intended to derive all the benefits accruing from 
the increased scale of operations. 
86. The preliminary report of the working group 
examined eight types of industrial production: 
the production of potash by thermal evaporation, 
magnesium by electrolysis, chlorine and caustic soda, 
chlorine by electrolysis of HC1, elementary 
phosphorus by the electrothermal process, ammonia 
from electrolytic hydrogen, aluminium and, finally, 
acetylene and ethylene by the electric arc process. 
87. To make the analysis more meaningful, only 
standard reactor sizes (and established costs) had 
been considered. The largest unit examined had 
been a 3300-MW(th) reactor producing 300 MW(e) 
for the network, supplying 400 MW(e) to the 
industrial complex and yielding 150 million gallons 
of desalted water per day. The incremental cost 
of electricity for such a complex would lie between 
2.6 and 4.1 mills/kWh, depending on the rate of 
fixed charges. The preliminary report concluded 
that four of the processes — potash, magnesium, 
phosphorus and aluminium — were most relevant 
to conditions in Israel and recommended that they 
be studied in greater detail. That study was now 
in progress. 
88. With regard to the agricultural aspects of the 
project, intensive work was under way in Israel 
on problems of water economy and irrigation efficiency. 
Good progress had recendy been made with 
an automated system which released water to the 
soil only on demand — when a moisture sensor 
indicated that the water content was too low. That 
system had made it possible to save as much as 
50% of the water available for irrigation with no 
deleterious effect on crop yield. 
89. The Oak Ridge study (ORNL-4291) indicated 
the desirability of establishing an experimental farm 
in a warm arid zone, using desalted water, to study 
"the complex problem of working out optimal yearround 
crop patterns, using the best available strains 
and practices...". In the near future there would 
be two such "farms" — Kibbutzim in fact — in the 
Negev Desert. Israel would be pleased to share 
the experience gained in those communities with 
other countries. 
90. Mr. HILL (United Kingdom) said that the 
annual report of the Board of Governors amply 
demonstrated the Agency's versatility in responding 
to the needs of its Member States. There was no 
doubt about the value of the Agency's work or 
about the enormous contribution it was making 
to nuclear science. The Agency had shown itself 
responsive to new developments and requirements, 
and it was gratifying to see diat its peaceful aims 
were becoming more and more widely accepted. 
The steady growth of the Agency's membership was 
something everyone would welcome. 
91. The United Kingdom delegation supported 
die programme and budget; there were many functions 
which only an international body with the authority 
and status of the Agency could fulfil. Many had 
referred to the Agency's responsibilities in relation 
to safeguards, but he had in mind also such duties 
as the elaboration of international standards and 
codes of practice, without which international trade 
in nuclear materials could not have made such good 
progress. 
92. The United Kingdom Government would 
continue to support the technical assistance 
programmes of the Agency as in the past. 
It expected to be able to find places for a good 
number of Agency fellows in institutions of higher 
learning, and the Central Electricity Generating Board 
would again make available free training places in 
its nuclear power stations and laboratories. 
93. The United Kingdom would again contribute 
$110 000 to the General Fund without restrictions 
as to its use. 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

94. The Agency's numerous tasks inevitably brought 
steadily increasing costs. The NPT would now bring 
new duties. That being so, it seemed that 
the Agency should not undertake research or other 
projects which could be carried out just as effectively 
by national organizations; it should rather concentrate 
on tasks which no other body could discharge. 
95. The United Kingdom Government was happy 
that the NPT had been commended by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, and delighted to 
note that no less than 80 countries had already 
signed it. The United Kingdom took pride in the 
fact that from the beginning it had played an important 
part in the negotiations leading up to the 
Treaty. 
96. The Agency had a crucial role to play in 
implementing the provisions of the Treaty. Careful 
consideration must be given to the ways in which 
the Agency would discharge its duties, particularly 
in relation to the safeguards procedures. The present 
safeguards system had evolved from intensive discussions 
over a number of years among experts 
from many countries. Their work deserved a special 
tribute. 
97. He wished to take the opportunity of 
acknowledging the services of the retiring Inspector 
General, Mr. Alan McKnight. His delegation agreed 
with Mr. McKnight that members of the Agency's 
Inspectorate should be employed on long-term 
contracts if the safeguards system was to work 
properly. 
98. Delegates were no doubt aware that the United 
Kingdom and Japan had concluded with the Agency 
a trilateral agreement providing for the application 
of Agency safeguards to transfers of nuclear materials 
and equipment between the United Kingdom and 
Japan u). The agreement, which had already been 
approved by the Board, was on a reciprocal basis; 
it would replace without any break the existing 
trilateral agreement which provided in particular for 
the safeguarding of the Tokai Mura power station. 
99. Article V of the NPT provided that any 
benefits derived from the peaceful applications of 
nuclear explosions should be made available to nonnuclear 
States parties to the Treaty without any 
discrimination. They were to be made available 
through an appropriate international body in which 
the non-nuclear-weapon States had adequate 
representation, and the United Kingdom Government 
shared the view that the Agency was unquestionably 
the best organization to carry out such a task. 
11) INFCIRC/125. 

100. Atomic energy was developing rapidly, and 
the United Kingdom authorities, like others, had 
to adapt to new problems as they emerged. In the 
United Kingdom nuclear power stations had become 
fully accepted and already accounted for over 10% 
of all power generated. Their record of availability 
and safety was excellent. The last three stations 
ordered by the electricity authorities were all nuclear, 
and Hartlepool, the latest, would actually be situated 
near one of the main coalfields, in an industrialized 
area having a large population within 10 km of the 
site. The fact that nuclear power had been selected 
for such a location indicated that the authorities were 
completely satisfied with the economics and safety 
of nuclear systems. 
101. The United Kingdom's fuel fabrication and 
reprocessing plants were working at nearly full 
capacity and on a commercial basis; at the same 
time they were being expanded and modified to meet 
the changing pattern of demand. While the United 
Kingdom could not yet match the enriched uranium 
prices of some other countries, the improvements 
and extensions planned for the Capenhurst factory 
would substantially increase the overall capacity and 
eventually reduce costs to a level which, it was 
hoped, would be internationally competitive. 
102. Much thought had been given to ways of 
integrating the activities of the United Kingdom 
Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) and British 
industry. In the past the United Kingdom had had 
four main groups for designing and building nuclear 
reactors and power stations. Three had been based 
on private industry, while the UKAEA had had its 
own team for the design and construction of research 
and prototype reactors. Those four groups were now 
being merged into two. Those changes were the 
desirable and, in fact, essential consequences of 
technological advances relating to nuclear power. 
The fuel services of the UKAEA were also to be 
given greater freedom in their operations, and it 
was hoped that they would be able to associate 
more closely with their counterparts in Europe and 
in countries in other parts of the world. 
103. Indeed, the establishment of closer links 
between the United Kingdom organizations and those 
in other countries was recognized as a major 
objective. It was to be hoped that the simplified 
structure now emerging in the United Kingdom 
would facilitate closer links with other nuclear 
engineering organizations and fuel enterprises in 
Europe and elsewhere. Obviously, while rearranging 
the domestic structure, the United Kingdom authorities 
intended to honour the collaborative arrangements 
with other countries which had been made in past 
years. The UKAEA would continue to play an 
important role and would of course implement the 
co-operative arrangements that already existed. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

104. Mr. RANDERS (Norway), referring to the 
Agency's role in relation to the NPT, said 
international organizations developed strength and 
vigour when they faced a challenge, and it 
was already clear that the Agency was beginning 
to react to the NPT, becoming stronger, more 
vigorous and even more adaptable. The existence 
of a well-defined task was the prerequisite of real 
success. Probably, other existing, or new, international 
organizations could also deal with the 
technical and scientific problems posed by the NPT, 
but the Agency had already been grappling for seven 
or eight years with similar problems, and the work 
it had done in connection with safeguards, 
for example, would prove invaluable as a basis for 
undertaking the new tasks. 
105. It was no secret that doubts had been 
expressed in other international forums concerning 
the Agency's ability to discharge its functions under 
the NPT, and those functions did indeed extend 
far beyond the present scope of Agency activities. 
However, his Government did not share those apprehensions, 
and believed that the Agency could 
certainly adapt its procedures to meet the requirements 
of the new situation. His Government would 
therefore be very glad to see the Agency entrusted 
with the new tasks which the NPT would entail, 
especially the task mentioned by the delegate of 
the United States 12), that of devising procedures 
for making available to all States signatory to the 
NPT experience gained in the peaceful use of nuclear 
explosions. 
106. While the Government of Norway did not 
favour the creation of new international bodies for 
the purpose of implementing the NPT, it would 
be ready to consider amendments to the Agency's 
working methods. He realized that research on 
safeguards procedures would lead to simplifications 
and improvements in the existing system but did not 
regard that as a reason to delay putting the Treaty 
into effect. The task of preventing nuclear military 
catastrophes would be an everlasting struggle: new 
technical and political problems would arise continually, 
and use should be made of the best safeguards 
methods that existed at any given time. 
107. One of the most important tasks of the Agency 
was to provide technical assistance to the developing 
countries. The Agency had made the best possible 
use of the limited resources available for its technical 
assistance programme, and it was to be regretted 
that many technically sound projects had been turned 
down owing to the lack of funds. The target for 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund had 
never been reached, and he urged all Member States 
which had not yet done so to contribute to die 
General Fund. 

108. The Agency had contributed gready to international 
co-operation in research on thermal reactors. 
The NORA project, a study of the physics of watermoderated 
reactor lattices on the zero-power reactor 
NORA at Kjeller in Norway, was an example of 
a successful research programme co-ordinated by the 
Agency. The NORA project had now been terminated 
after seven years of co-operative effort. The technology 
of thermal reactors had already reached the stage 
where further development was being done mainly 
by commercial firms, so that there was no longer 
the same scope for international co-operation in 
that regard. However, certain other technical aspects 
of nuclear power development still called for international 
co-operation and co-ordination. The future 
utilization of thorium was one such aspect, and 
perhaps it deserved the Agency's particular attention; 
in that connection he wanted to mention that studies 
on thorium fuel elements were being considered 
for the next experiment under the internationally 
conducted Halden programme in Norway. 
109. The rapid increase in the construction 
of nuclear power stations would lead to a 
corresponding increase in the transport of radioactive 
and fissile materials. The need for 
internationally co-ordinated regulations governing the 
transport of such materials was obvious. His 
delegation had noted widi satisfaction that almost all 
international transport organizations had adopted 
the Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport 
of Radioactive Materials. He hoped the Agency 
would continue its efforts to standardize procedures 
and equipment for the practical application of the 
regulations. A symposium or a seminar might serve 
a very useful purpose. 
110. It was generally recognized that internationally 
accepted principles were needed for the disposal 
of radioactive waste into the sea and he hoped that 
the Agency would keep under constant review the 
possibility of steps towards internationalization in 
that regard. 
111. His delegation continued to support INIS 
and considered that international centralization was 
necessary if small States were to be able to cope 
with the increasing flow of information in all 
branches of science. He hoped the Agency's initiative 
would lead to further international standardization 
of documentation procedures. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 

12) GC(XII)/OR.120,para.32. 


GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XII)/OR.124 
19 February 1969 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
(24-30 SEPTEMBER 1968) 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Friday, 27 September 1968, at 3.20 p.m. 

President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 

Paragraphs 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68 (continued) 

GC(XII)/390. 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Brazil 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Republic of Korea 
Switzerland 
Poland 
Gabon 
Ghana 
Pakistan 
Cuba 
Mexico 
Kuwait 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Sweden 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document

1 — 6 

7—22 

23— 32 

33— 42 

43— 58 

59— 63 

64— 71 
72— 80 

81— 89 
90— 97 
98 — 104 
105 — 131 
132 — 138 

 GC(XII)/INF/103/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1967-68 
(GC(XII)/380, 389) (continued) 

1. Mr. da COSTA RIBEIRO (Brazil), referring 
to the financial resources that would be available 
to the Agency in 1969, said that whereas die Regular 
Budget was increasing due to die expansion in a 
number of activities, especially safeguards activities, 
the Operational Budget — on which die technical 
assistance programme depended — showed an alarming 
tendency to remain stationary and even to 
decrease. Serious attention would have to be paid 
to that key problem in future, with a view to ensuring 
diat the increase in funds allocated for direct 
technical assistance should be proportional to increases 
in other programmes, especially those relating 
to the Agency's control functions. 
2. Brazil's position vis-a-vis the Agency's safeguards 
system had been consistent over die years: 
it approved the system in force and had concluded 
a trilateral agreement1) which would come into force 
as soon as possible. Similarly, it had secured an 
improvement in the earlier, partial safeguards system 
through a series of amendments. In other international 
gatherings, Brazil had raised objections to 
a comprehensive system of safeguards. He would 
not repeat die argument which his country had 
put forward at Geneva and which had prevailed 
in the Treaty of Tlatelolco, namely, that the 
motives inspiring countries which wanted to 
use nudear explosions for peaceful purposes 
were quite legitimate. It should be emphasized that 
the main reason for Brazil's attitude was the desire 
to eliminate obstacles of any kind to the development 
of the Brazilian programme for the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, as summarized in 
document GC(XII)/INF/10l/Rev.1. 
3. As one way of involving the Agency more 
closely in the development of power reactors, he 
recalled the suggestion that the Agency should get 
in touch with world banking organizations for the 
purpose of obtaining financing for projects submitted 
by developing countries 2). It would be for the 
Director General to decide what means were most 
suitable for making such preliminary contacts, reporting 
in due course to the Board of Governors 
on his action. 
4. Another suggestion was that advantage should 
be taken of the Agency's General Conference to 
encourage meetings on technical matters with the 
specialists who would be attending. If that idea 
met with the approval of the other delegations, it 
could be further elaborated after the fourth United 
1) INFCIRC/110. 

2) See document GC(XII)/COM.1/108. 

Nations conference on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, which would probably be held in Geneva 
in 19713). 

5. The Agency's Programme for 1969-74 
(GC(XII)/385, paras 11-15 and 32-623), as prepared 
by the Secretariat, merited high praise, even 
though some slight revisions might be made in it. In 
particular, paragraphs 463-598, dealing with safeguards, 
should be more detailed, so as to provide 
fuller information for the countries concerned. As for 
the report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68 
(GC(XII)/380 and 389) it provided Member States 
with a clear and succinct summary of the Agency's 
activities during the past financial year. 
6. Lasdy, he wished to reiterate his optimism with 
regard to the Agency's future. Despite the almost 
chronic difficulties which stood in the way of meeting 
the legitimate hopes of the developing countries, 
gradual progress towards fulfilling those aspirations 
could be perceived. Brazil sincerely hoped that that 
trend would be accelerated. 
7. Mr. PRETSCH (Federal Republic of Germany) 
observed that die Conference gave the Member States 
a welcome opportunity to appraise the work of the 
Agency which was reviewed in the report of the 
Board for 1967-68. The delegation of the Federal 
Republic of Germany approved the annual report. 
8. The draft programme for 1969-74 submitted 
to the General Conference was a valuable document. 
The large number of Agency symposia and scientific 
reports played an important part in furthering a 
world-wide exchange of information and knowledge. 
In certain fields co-operation between Member States 
could lead to the co-ordination of research efforts 
and to a dovetailing of legal rules and standards. 
9. The Agency faced new tasks with regard to 
die International Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
The International Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity 
at Monaco, too, had an important part to play in 
co-ordinating scientific information. In a number 
of scientific and technological fields, the Agency 
maintained close contacts widi other nuclear energy 
organizations. In this connection, he believed die 
exchange of information with the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM), for example, could 
be more extensive. 
10. The fourth international conference on the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, which would probably 
be held in Geneva in 1971, would give new impetus 
to world co-operation. The broad agenda prepared 
for diat Conference by the United Nations Scientific 
Advisory Committee listed die low-cost and largescale 
generation of nuclear energy as one of the 
3) See General Assembly Resolution 2309 (XXII). 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

main subjects for discussion, and to that might be 
added some consideration of reactor safety and 
selection of sites for nuclear power stations. 

11. The Agency's second most important function 
was to render assistance in the use of atomic energy 
to the developing countries. The Agency could do 
great work in that direction by providing experts 
and fellowships. The International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste, which had proved 
to be an excellent centre for the post-graduate 
training of physicists from developing countries, was 
very important in that connection. The funds provided 
for technical assistance should be increased 
so that laboratories in developing countries could 
be awarded new research contracts, giving extra 
stimulus to their research activity. The Agency's 
assistance to the developing countries must not, 
however, be impaired by growing demands in other 
fields, including that of safeguards. 
12. The demands made on the Agency with regard 
to safeguards, its third most important function, 
had been increasing in recent years, and would 
continue to do so. The present safeguards systems 
had emerged at a time when relatively small quantities 
of fissionable material were used in reactors 
and other nuclear facilities of individual countries, 
mainly for scientific purposes. The Agency's safeguards 
had accordingly been applied chiefly to single 
nuclear facilities and to limited amounts of fissionable 
material which were supplied through the Agency 
or under safeguards agreements. 
13. Now that nuclear energy had reached the commercial 
stage in several countries, the basic safeguards 
needs had changed considerably. In more and more 
countries, large power reactors, conversion plants, 
fuel-element fabrication plants and reprocessing plants 
were being constructed. In the more distant future, 
isotope separation plants might be added. It was 
not only the number and capacity of facilities which 
was growing, but also the quantity of fissionable 
material circulating between them. The fuel cycle 
was the point where economic considerations and 
technical safeguards requirements met. It was obvious 
that the classical safeguards methods would have to 
be improved in order to meet the new quantitative 
and qualitative requirements. What was needed was: 
(a) 
Comprehensive safeguards covering the 
entire fuel cycle; 
(b ) 
Rationalized safeguards mediods to keep 
the number of inspectors and costs within 
reasonable limits; and 
(c ) 
Objective safeguards to ensure that there 
would be no hindrance either to the 
scientific, technological and economic 
development of nuclear energy in 
Member States or to international cooperation, 
including the exchange of 
nuclear materia and equipment. 

14. The concentration of safeguards on the flow 
of nuclear material at strategic points and the future 
use of instruments were essential to an effective 
safeguards system. Thorough research and development 
work would be required if safeguards were to 
continue to be effectively applied. 
15. The operational systems analysis in the field 
of safeguards outlined in paragraph 570 of the Programme 
should be given priority by the Secretariat 
and should be performed in co-operation with experts 
from Member States. The relative importance of the 
different phases of the fuel cycle must be assessed 
by means of analysis, and a cost/benefit study would 
be necessary. That was the only way to establish 
the basis for effective and economic control within 
the available financial and manpower resources. 
16. At the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Centre 
research and development work was being done on 
safeguarding the flow of fissionable material, and 
that work would continue in co-operation with the 
Agency and interested Member States. 
17. More than 50 delegates to the Conference 
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States4) had recendy visited 
Karlsruhe, where the Federal Government had explained 
its ideas and showed several laboratories 
where experimental safeguards research was being 
pursued. His Government would be pleased to 
invite those delegations from States Members of the 
Agency who were interested in Karlsruhe's safeguards 
research and development work to visit the Centre. 
18. The Agency's Budget for 19695) had been 
discussed in detail by the Board of Governors and 
provided for a 7.39% increase in expenditure over 
1968, but since there was a cash surplus from the 
preceding year, Members' contributions would be 
raised by 5.296 only. His delegation agreed with 
the budget proposals, although the addition of 
39 posts for 1969 seemed rather large. New staff 
requirements should be met to a greater extent by 
reorganization within the Secretariat. 
19. He then turned to the Federal Republic of 
Germany's own nuclear programme, which for the 
years 1968 to 1972 provided for government expenditure 
totalling $1250 million. Emphasis in 
fundamental research was being placed on highenergy 
physics and on nuclear solid-state research, 
while in nuclear engineering the emphasis was on 
4) Held at Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 
5) GC(XII)/385,parasl6-31and645-685,arid385/Corr.l. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

the development of fast-breeder reactors, gas-cooled 
high-temperature reactors and fuel cycle technology. 
As of 1 July 1968, nuclear power stations with a 
total output of 2200 MW(e) were under construction 
or in operation. The nuclear ship "Otto Hahn" was 
expected to sail on its maiden voyage on 11 October. 
German industry was able to offer nuclear power 
stations at home and abroad at competitive prices. 

20. His Government again intended to make a 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund 
corresponding to its percentage share of the Agency's 
budget. 
21. For the year 1969 the Federal Government 
would offer about ten fellowships, and would like 
to establish or continue co-operation on a partnership 
basis between laboratories in Germany and 
those in other Member States. The Nuclear Research 
Centres at Karlsruhe and Jiilich were prepared to 
grant a number of additional fellowships, offering 
training opportunities in practically all fields of nuclear 
research and development. Research institutes were 
also willing to receive more fellows from the Agency. 
The Federal Government would be pleased 
to nominate more experts specializing in different 
fields to provide technical assistance to interested 
Member States on behalf of the Agency. He was 
happy to note that the Agency would be holding 
a Symposium on Advanced and High-Temperature 
Gas-Cooled Reactors at the Jiilich Nuclear Research 
Centre from 21 to 25 October. 
22. He hoped that the Agency would avail itself 
more of the experience of those Member States 
which in recent years had made considerable progress 
in nuclear research and technology and invite them 
to play a bigger part in its work and its decisions. 
Such countries should be permanently represented 
on the Agency's Board of Governors. Since 1962, 
when it had been decided to increase the number 
of seats on the Board by two, the membership 
of the Agency had risen from 76 to 98 and was 
expected to increase still further. For that reason, 
too, it would seem timely to expand the Board by 
an appropriate number of seats. 
23. Mr. YOO (Republic of Korea) expressed his 
delegation's appreciation to the Director General 
and the Agency's staff for their achievements in and 
contributions to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
It also wished to welcome the three new Member 
States: Liechtenstein, the Niger and Zambia. 
24. He would not dwell on the importance of the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 6) 
6) This Treaty, which is the subject of Resolution 2373 

(XXII) adopted by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations on 12 June 1968, is subsequently referred 
to in this record as "the Treat)'" or "the NPT". 
and its implications. He merely wished to point out 
that the Republic of Korea had been one of the 
first countries to sign the Treaty. 

25. He proposed to describe some of the work 
done by Korean nuclear scientists and engineers 
during the past year. Most of it had been carried 
out in very close co-operation with experts of the 
Agency. As one of the fastest-developing countries, 
Korea had of late also made remarkable progress 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
26. As already known, Korea was using its small 
research reactor for a number of purposes and with 
a variety of benefits. Radioactive colloidal gold and 
iodine for medical applications were being produced 
under Government licence, together with some 
30 types of radioisotopes for industrial and experimental 
purposes. Radioactive cobalt glass and zinc 
glass, irradiated in the reactor and ground to the size 
of the sand in the Korean harbours, were being used 
to determine the drift movements of sand on the 
sea bed. 
27. Recendy Korean engineers had made successful 
use of gamma radiography in the welding of the 
country's largest cement manufacturing kiln. In cooperation 
with the Argonne National Laboratory 
in the United States, Korean scientists had designed 
a small neutron chopper, which was to be installed 
at the end of 1968 and used in various thermal 
neutron experiments. Assistance in die training of 
neutron diffraction experimentalists had been obtained 
through the India-Philippines-Agency project7). 
28. All those activities had strengthened the conviction 
that a research reactor of higher power was 
required and it had therefore been decided to raise 
the existing reactor capacity from 100 kW to 
250 kW. The design and computation work involved 
was being carried out by Korean specialists 
and was proceeding according to schedule. Criticality 
would be reached early in 1969. Another important 
development had been the decision to install a Triga 
Mark III reactor in Korea. That facility, which was 
to go critical in 1971, would have a capacity of 
2 MW, with the possibility of being upgraded to 
3 MW by means of a forced cooling system. 
29. As regards nuclear power generation, the 
country's long-range electric power programme called 
for the installation of two 500 MW(e) power reactors, 
to be commissioned in 1974 and 1976 respectively. 
The relevant feasibility study was to be completed 
by the end of October 1968 and preliminary proposals 
were already being requested from the world's 
leading power reactor manufacturers. He wished to 
express sincere thanks to the Agency and to die 
7) INFCIRC/56andAdd.l. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

delegates of Member States which had provided 
valuable assistance and co-opeiation in connection 
with that programme. 

30. Developments in nuclear medicine included 
plans for the operation in rural areas, as from 1969, 
of six mobile units to provide cost-free diagnoses 
and subsequent radiation therapy for uterine-cancer 
and breast-cancer patients. The work would be 
extended later to persons of both sexes suffering 
from stomach and liver cancer. It should be 
mentioned in that connection that the latest mortality 
statistics showed that cancer was the third highest 
cause of death in Korea. 
31. In radiation breeding research, Korean agricultural 
engineers had developed two new breeds, 
a soya bean plant and a rice plant which had 
stronger stems and matured earlier, thereby satisfying 
a long-felt need in Korean agriculture. The 
new breeds were now being intensively tested. 
32. In the coming year, a number of projects 
now under way were to be continued. Requests 
for some new projects had already been submitted 
to the Agency and it was hoped that they would 
be supported. The Government of the Republic 
of Korea also wished to have die pleasure of acting 
as host to an Agency conference. 
33. Mr. HOCHSTRASSER (Switzerland) noted 
the smooth manner in which the Agency seemed 
to be functioning. The outstanding event of recent 
months had been the approval of the NPT by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations, a step 
based on the general recognition that the spread 
of nuclear weapons could be disastrous to the world. 
Unfortunately the NPT created a number of serious 
problems, which had been the reason for convening 
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States. Since 
that Conference would end only on 28 September, 
it was too early to assess all its implications for the 
Agency. Members ought to have a chance, at the 
next General Conference of die Agency, to examine 
carefully its recommendations and implications. 
34. The problems of special concern to the nonnuclear-
weapon-Powers had already been touched 
upon several times during the debate. In the first 
place, he wanted to mention the safeguards system. 
His delegation was convinced that the Agency was — 
due to its experience and the competence of 
its staff — best suited to assume the safeguards 
responsibilities, resulting from die entry into force 
of the NPT. In view of die rapid spread of the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy and of die 
economic importance of tliat new source of energy, 
it was important for safeguards procedures to be 
simple, without losing their effectiveness. The 
Agency's present system was a useful start in that 
direction, but it would require adaptation in order 
to cope widi the new situation and to make the 
fullest use of instrumentation for controlling special 
fissionable materials. 

3 5. Particular attention would have to be devoted 
to the building up of an efficient corps of inspectors 
who would know only one allegiance — allegiance 
to dieir task. In order to achieve that, it would 
be necessary to offer long-term appointments and 
career opportunities in such a corps. Furdiermore, 
competence and loyalty to die Agency, and not geographical 
distribution, should be the only criteria 
for selecting the staff for that particular activity. 
36. A further problem in connection with safeguards 
existed with regard to the financing of 
controls. If all the nuclear activities of die nonnuclear-
weapon Powers were subject to controls, 
it was obvious diat the latter could not be considered 
simply as an insurance taken out by the 
buyers of nuclear reactors or other installations. 
The safeguards system had to be considered as a 
public service similar in character to the police, 
whose cost was supported by everybody. 
37. His delegation was aware of die dangerous 
repercussions which the rapidly increasing cost of 
die safeguards system might have on die Agency's 
aid to developing countries, but he diought diat a 
means would have to be found to cope widi that 
situation which would not discriminate against nuclear 
power stations by burdening them with die cost of 
inspections. He hoped diat die problems of safeguarding 
(of which he had mentioned only a few) 
might be resolved satisfactorily within die framework 
of die Agency. 
38. Among the other tasks which might arise 
as a consequence of the NPT, the exchange of 
information was a further activity in which the 
Agency could play a useful role. The non-nuclearweapon 
countries hoped that die Treaty would help 
to open up new sources of knowledge of importance 
in die peaceful uses of atomic energy. In view of 
that, it was particularly useful that die Agency was 
developing in INIS a computerized information 
system. The problem of keeping track of a vast 
amount of documentation and! of putting it at die 
disposal of scientists and engineers efficiendy was 
not one which related exclusively to nuclear energy 
activities. In medicine and in other sciences, 
documentation systems were eitiier already in use 
or were being prepared. Since they would all require 
computers, he reminded those working on INIS 
that it was highly desirable that the specifications 
for die machines should be mutually compatible. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

39. In the discussions on the NPT, the use of 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes had received 
great attention, although it would still take 
some time before the technology necessary for their 
widespread application became available. It would 
therefore seem to be wasteful to create a special 
new organization to deal with such explosions with 
responsibility solely in that field. The present staff 
of the Agency contained a number of scientists and 
engineers who could play a useful role when 
problems of nuclear explosions had to be dealt 
with. He therefore supported proposals to entrust 
the Agency with the tasks arising under Article V 
of the NPT, which provided that the potential 
benefits of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
should be made available to non-nuclear-weapon 
States. It might be necessary, however, to adapt the 
organization of the Agency to cope with the new 
task. Such reorganization might possibly lead to 
the creation of a new Division with a special status 
reflecting its particular connection with the NPT. 
40. In view of the sizable increases in the Agency's 
activities which might result from the NPT, budgetary 
problems would become even more acute. 
Expenditure had so far grown steadily in spite of 
the commendable efforts to streamline the administration 
and to avoid a too rapid expansion. Although 
rising deficits had created a budget squeeze in 
Switzerland, his country still approved the proposed 
budget and agreed also in principle with the 
programme for 1969-1974. Furthermore, the Swiss 
Federal Council had again decided to make a 
voluntary contribution in accordance with the recommendation 
of the 1961 session of the General 
Conferences). In addition, fellowships had been given 
for advanced training in Switzerland on a case-by-case 
basis and would continue to be so granted in the 
future. 
41. The Secretariat ought to continue to do its 
best to keep the expansion of the budget under 
control. It might be necessary to introduce priorities 
to a larger extent than in the past and to reassign 
staff accordingly. But he also urged Members to 
ensure that their voluntary contributions should be 
in proportion to their assessed contributions to the 
Regular Budget and regretted that so many requests 
for assistance could not be met. The situation could 
only be changed if every country fully accepted its 
financial responsibilities with .regard to the Agency's 
assistance programme. 
42. He was happy that the United Nations planned 
to hold a fourth international conference on the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, and hoped that that 
major event would take place in Geneva. The staff 
of the Agency would undoubtedly be entrusted with 
the preparation of the meeting. 
8) GC(V)/RES/100. 

43. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) said that the 
year which had passed since the eleventh regular 
session of the General Conference had been 
characterized by increasing international co-operation 
within the Agency, with regard to the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, the provision of assistance to 
developing countries, the exchange of scientific and 
technical information and training in nuclear energy 
activities. He attached particular significance to the 
General Assembly's approval of the NPT 
and to its signature. The Council of State 
of the Polish People's Republic intended to give consideration 
in the near future to the ratification of 
the NPT, which would be the first world-wide agreement 
in the field of disarmament to comprise an 
effective international control system. 
44. In his opinion, the most important aspect of 
the NPT was the fact that its non-proliferation 
formula effectively prevented the acquisition of nuclear 
weapons, for certain States persisted in their 
endeavours to obtain, directly or indirectly, de jure 
or de facto, access to nuclear weapons and to nuclear 
status. 
45. He then proceeded to consider certain other 
aspects of the NPT which more direcdy concerned 
the Agency, particularly its provisions concerning 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
46. The question of peaceful uses of nuclear 
explosives had given rise to considerable difficulties 
in the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament, 
the United Nations Political Committee and, recently, 
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States. All 
nuclear explosives, without distinction, were covered 
by the NPT, which provided furthermore that all 
possible benefits from the peaceful use of nuclear 
explosives should be made available to all States 
parties to the NPT, without discrimination, through 
the appropriate international procedures. He believed 
that international co-operation as practised within 
the Agency constituted not only the sole possible 
solution, but also the only means of enabling 
countries lacking the necessary economic, technical 
and scientific resources to share the benefits of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear explosives. The 
attitude of the nuclear Powers in that connection 
was encouraging. 
47. One of the cardinal points in the relevant 
resolution adopted by the General Assembly 
was that the NPT must be effective. Appropriate 
measures would have to be taken for that purpose, 
and the development of the necessary controls would 
be facilitated by the fact that international machinery 
already existed in the form of the Agency's 
safeguards system. The Polish Government was 
convinced that the Agency could fulfil with integrity 
and impartiality the important task entrusted to it 
under the NPT. 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

48. As far as inspections were concerned, the 
Polish Government was in favour of an Agency 
monopoly in that field, in accordance with the resolution 
adopted by the General Assembly. As the 
annual report of the Board of Governors to the 
Conference had righdy stressed, the safeguards system 
should encompass not only inspections of individual 
reactors, but also inspections of plants fabricating 
or reprocessing nuclear fuel. At the same time, 
new measuring techniques would have to be evolved, 
and fundamental and applied research relating to 
measuring instruments further expanded. A uniform 
system of administration, inspection, reports, measurements 
and other related matters would also have 
to be established. 
49. He wished to congratulate the Director General 
and the Secretariat on the excellent work they had 
done in preparing the budget for 1969 and the 
programme for 1969-74; he noted with satisfaction 
that, in accordance with proposals made on previous 
occasions, a programme covering a period of several 
years had been worked out. It constituted an extremely 
valuable document which would facilitate 
the forward planning of certain of the Agency's 
activities and which could be revised as the need 
arose. As paragraph 14 of the programme righdy 
stressed, the conclusion of the NPT would mean 
a considerable growth of the Agency's safeguards 
responsibilities within the next few years; but the 
nature of those responsibilities was not precisely 
specified. 
50. The installed power of nuclear plants had 
increased so enormously that the volume of fissile 
materials produced would soon be very great. As 
a result, its obligations with regard to inspection 
and safeguards would set the Agency considerable 
financial problems, as well as problems arising from 
the recruitment of experts. Those problems would 
call for a careful analysis and wise decisions both 
by the Secretariat and by the Board of Governors, 
as well as for additional efforts on the part 
of Member States. The extent of the requirements 
was gigantic and would necessitate fresh organizational 
and financial procedures. 
51. As far as the annual report of the Board of 
Governors was concerned, he noted that technical 
assistance had been further expanded and that the 
expenditure shown under that heading had increased 
by 11.4% during the year under review. Such aid 
constituted one of the basic functions of the Agency, 
and he therefore hoped that that fruitful activity 
would be further developed in the future. 
52. The Agency had also organized during the 
year about a dozen scientific symposia which had, 
as usual, been attended by numerous participants; 
two of the symposia had been held in Poland. 
53. He was gratified to note the formation during 
the past year of the International Nuclear Data 
Committee, which had held its first meeting in 
Vienna and with which Polish scientists were actively 
collaborating. While the Polish delegation did not 
propose to express any reservations concerning the 
programme and budget for the following year, it 
wished to point out that the scope of certain activities 
would have to be revised in future. As the 
development of nuclear power progressed, closer 
attention and greater funds would have to be devoted 
to activities concerned with that form of power and 
to related matters. On the other hand, UNESCO, 
FAO and WHO should assume a greater role in 
financing activities relating to biology, the exact 
sciences, theoretical physics, nuclear medicine and 
radiobiology, and the Agency's budget should be 
correspondingly reduced. The Agency ought to adopt 
the principle of allocating larger sums to its main 
activities, while reducing the amounts to be spent 
on projects already well under way or which could 
be implemented or undertaken by other United 
Nations bodies. Poland was in favour of the establishment 
of INIS and wished that venture, which 
was of great international importance and extremely 
useful to Member States, every success. 
54. The effect on the demand for foodstuffs of 
the continuous growth in the world's population — 
especially in the developing countries — might 
necessitate certain modifications of the Agency's 
programme, particularly the elimination of certain 
activities of marginal importance and the intensification 
of activities connected with die peaceful 
applications of ionizing radiations in agriculture and 
stockbreeding, the preservation and sterilization of 
foodstuffs, the increase of cereals production, etc. 
Another urgent matter was prospecting for water 
resources for drinking or agricultural purposes; no 
less important was the desalination of sea water and 
the purification of water and sewage, which was 
becoming an increasingly serious problem, especially 
in highly industrialized and densely populated 
countries. 
55. In conclusion, he wished to pay tribute to 
the number and quality of the Agency's publications 
and to draw attention to the promptness with which 
the proceedings of symposia appeared. 
56. If the Agency was to fulfil its obligations, it 
was imperative that all countries willing and able 
to contribute effectively to its activities should be 
allowed to participate in them: it was for that reason 
that Poland was in favour of the admission of the 
German Democratic Republic, which was die tendi 
industrial power in the world and one of the first 
signatories of the NPT. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

57. The discussions in the General Conference 
showed that the course of socio-historical development 
presented States with major problems whose 
solution would have a considerable effect on the 
future of mankind. The NPT helped to solve those 
problems. 
58. It was therefore the duty of all States, and 
also of the General Conference, to do everything 
in their power to ensure that the NPT was signed 
by as many States as possible, and ratified and 
implemented with the least possible delay. 
59. Mr. N'GUEMA N'DONG (Gabon) said that 
his delegation had noted with great satisfaction the 
results achieved by the Agency during the past 
year — a historic one, since it had seen the 
acceptance by the General Assembly of the NPT, 
which had already been signed by more than 
80 States. It appeared both necessary and desirable 
that the Agency should, within the framework of 
the NPT, agree to an extension of its responsibilities, 
a step which was in perfect accord with its 
own objectives. Its present resources and the support 
on which it could count should enable the Agency 
to meet those new obligations. 
60. His delegation had listened with the greatest 
interest to the excellent statement by the Director 
General9) and the statement by the representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations10'. 
It had observed that the Agency was becoming increasingly 
aware that the successful development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy — which, 
it was hoped, would provide fresh opportunities 
for progress by the economically weak countries — 
might have the effect of widening the gap which 
separated the latter from the countries which were 
at present more advanced. 
61. Gabon possessed considerable reserves of 
uranium ores, its liberal financial and mining legislation 
was designed to facilitate prospecting, and 
it was already making an important contribution to 
world supplies of the raw materials required for the 
generation of nuclear power. There were good 
grounds for hoping that that contribution would 
increase still further in future years. 
62. However, Gabon benefited only to a minute 
extent from the possibilities offered by the atom, 
and the same applied to many new African States 
which did not even possess the necessary personnel 
or the economic resources to draw up a simple list 
of their requirements and their potentialities. It 
ought therefore to be a major aspect of the Agency's 
9) GC(XII)/OR.119, paras 29-5 3. 
10) Ibid., paras 54-67. 

function to study the problems peculiar to the 
developing countries. In view of the extreme diversity 
of those problems there was a need for continuous 
assessment — which could be provided only by 
experts on the spot — if the Agency was to fulfil 
its task of co-ordination and assistance and the 
Governments concerned were to be enabled to draw 
up their own programmes for personnel training 
and technological development. 

6 3. The delegation of Gabon approved the Agency's 
budget and noted that, in accordance with suggestions 
put forward by certain delegations, an ever-increasing 
number of fellowships would be made available, 
especially to developing countries. Finally, it was 
gratified to know that three new States, of which 
two were African, would in future participate in 
the Agency's activities. 
64. Mr. QUARTEY (Ghana), after sincerely welcoming 
Liechtenstein, the Niger and Zambia to 
membership of the Agency, said his delegation noted 
from the Director General's statement the preparedness 
of the Agency for the role it might be called 
upon to play within the framework of the NPT. 
It believed that role to be an important contribution 
which the Agency could make towards the fulfilment 
of one of its chief aims, that of assisting Member 
States to reap the fullest benefits from the peaceful 
application of atomic energy and bringing stability 
to a world in which moral responsibility was in 
danger of losing a needless race with scientific 
potential. 
65. Since the establishment of the Agency certain 
important changes had occurred in the general scientific 
awareness and technological standing of Member 
States, membership of the Agency had greatly 
increased and the political status and responsibility 
of a number of countries had altered. The time 
had come, as his delegation had already indicated 
at the previous sessionll), to review certain portions 
of its Statute, particularly the composition of its 
Board of Governors, in order to make the Board 
more representative of Member States and conform 
more closely to the scientific and political criteria 
laid down. Such a review could best be initiated 
within the framework of the Agency itself, and the 
earlier it was carried out, the better it would be. 
66. The delegation of Ghana welcomed the start 
which the Agency had made towards long-term programming 
and budgeting. In its view, the programme 
objectives set out for the six-year period were 
desirable goals. However, whereas the budget over 
the projected period showed a steady increase, the 
proportion of expenditure on technical assistance 
decreased progressively. Neither the developing 
11) GC(XI)/OR.117,para.l8. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

countries, nor, for that matter, the Agency itself, 
could possibly view that as a happy state of affairs. 
Undoubtedly, the atomic energy programmes of many 
developing countries depended on the technical assistance 
provided by the Agency. As far as his 
Government could see, its own programme in Ghana 
would continue to depend on that assistance for 
some time to come. 

67. His Government was grateful for the inclusion 
of one of its officers in a team of specialists from 
developing countries which the Agency had taken 
on a tour of radiation protection work in three East 
European countries in April 1968. In its view, such 
arrangements were of great practical value, and he 
would welcome any intention by the Agency to 
organize similar tours to provide experience in other 
areas of training. 
68. Ghana welcomed the increasing acceptance 
of the need for flexibility in the application of the 
"guiding principles" of the technical assistance programme 
in order to permit, in appropriate cases, 
the provision of equipment without the services of 
an expert. 
69- On the other hand, it deplored the continuing 
inadequacy of technical assistance funds, largely owing 
to the failure of some Member States to contribute 
in proportion to their assessed contributions. For 
1969 Ghana was for the first time able to pledge a 
voluntary contribution in excess of its regular 
assessment. 

70. At the last session of the General Conference 
he had reported that Ghana was currently reappraising 
its atomic energy programme, in order to achieve 
the optimum balance between it and other important 
areas of national development12). Pursuant to that 
reappraisal, his Government had informed the Agency 
that in the present situation the establishment of a 
research reactor had been indefinitely postponed. 
That decision, however, did not mean a cessation 
of all other activities in the peaceful applications of 
atomic energy. Indeed, Ghana was in the process 
of establishing a National Radioisotope Applications 
Centre. The main activity of the Centre would be 
to provide the necessary supporting services for 
institutions engaged in work involving the use of 
isotopes in agriculture, medicine, industry and other 
fields. However, the Centre should also be able to 
carry out a specific piece of research which might 
become necessary in the work of any particular 
institute. 
71. Ghana's technical assistance requests under 
its new programme had been addressed to the 
Agency under die 1969 Regular Programme. Of 
12) Ibid., para. 19. 

course, it appreciated that die Agency's funds were 
limited. He must, however, again stress the great 
extent to which Ghana's programme depended on 
the Agency's technical assistance. Ruthless application 
of routine procedure could well bring down the 
axe on some of Ghana's requests. But in special 
cases where a new programme was being started, 
the Agency had been known to consider favourably 
the programme as a whole, rather than as made 
up of so many single experts or so many single 
bits of equipment. It was in that knowledge, and 
mindful of the devoted service of the Director 
General and his staff, that he looked forward with 
confidence to a positive response from the Agency. 

72. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan) recalled that less 
than three years after the construction of Enrico 
Fermi's first nuclear pile the world had witnessed 
the emergence of the first nuclear-weapon State. 
Five years after that, a second State had acquired 
nuclear weapons, and there had been three further 
additions to the so-called "nuclear club" in the intervening 
period. With the present rate of development 
of nuclear technology, the question that loomed large 
on the horizon was whether the trend to proliferation 
would be accelerated during the next decade or so 
or whether effective joint action would be taken to 
arrest that dangerous trend. Public opinion tiiroughout 
the world had welcomed, as first steps towards 
sanity, conclusion of die partial test ban treaty during 
1963, and also the submission to die General 
Assembly of the United Nations of an agreed draft 
text of the NPT. 
73. Pakistan had voted in favour of die General 
Assembly Resolution commending the text of the 
NPT. It had also consistendy urged in the General 
Conference diat States Members of the Agency should 
volunteer to accept Agency safeguards in respect 
of all their peaceful principal nuclear facilities, whedier 
established with or without Agency assistance — 
though so far to no avail. Some Members were 
unwilling to submit their principal nuclear facilities 
to Agency safeguards unless all Members, 
whether nuclear-weapon States or non-nuclear-weapon 
States, did the same. To them the principle of 
non-discrimination was more important than the 
principle of non-proliferation. There were odiers, 
like Members of EURATOM, who thought the safeguards 
system which they had evolved as parties 
to the EURATOM Treaty was sacrosanct and that 
they were therefore under no obligation to negotiate 
any agreement on safeguards with the Agency. Finally 
there were those whose industrial infrastructure was 
so far advanced that they could establish principal 
nuclear facilities on their own territories without 
Agency assistance, with the result that unless they 
voluntarily placed such facilities under Agency safeguards, 
they could continue to breed, separate and 
accumulate plutonium which they could then divert, 
whenever they so chose, for the production of 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

nuclear weapons. And they wished to retain that 

"nuclear option". It was accordingly with great satisfaction 
that Pakistan noted that where the Agency's 
Statute failed, the NPT succeeded in that Article III 
made it obligatory for the non-nuclear-weapon States 
parties to the Treaty to accept safeguards, as set 
forth in an agreement to be negotiated and concluded 
with the Agency in conformity with the 
Agency's Statute and its safeguards system. It was 
to be hoped that Member States which were 
advanced in nuclear technology, the so-called "nearnuclear 
States", would sign the NPT and so give a 
lead to all other non-nuclear-weapon States, many 
of which were sitting on the fence to see how the 
wind blew. And only if the response of the nonnuclear-
weapon States was definite and positive would 
it be possible to bring the pressure of world opinion 
to bear on the nuclear-weapon States to stop vertical 
proliferation and move gradually towards nuclear 
disarmament. 

74. The NPT had thrown a very heavy responsibility 
on the Agency's shoulders in regard to 
safeguards, and the Agency should immediately equip 
itself to do some effective and persuasive "salesmanship", 
so that its safeguards system might be 
accepted by a large number of non-nuclear-weapon 
States without fear of industrial espionage. The 
present system was based on a very complex 
document and suffered from the defect that even 
conventional equipment came within its scope. It 
was that exaggerated suspicion on the part of those 
who had drawn up the system that prevented many 
Member States from seeking the Agency's assistance. 
He urged the Inspector General to study the report 
on the first inspection of the Tokai Mura power 
reactor published by the Atomic Industrial Forum 
of Japan so as to find means of countering the 
pertinent arguments adduced therein concerning the 
waste involved in the Agency's inspection system. 
Unless the Agency's safeguards were simplified 
without sacrificing their effectiveness, the Agency 
would not be able to negotiate a workable system 
with advanced or less advanced countries. In 
particular, they should be brought into line with 
die NPT, Article III.2 of which, by referring to 
"specially designed" equipment or material, explicidy 
exempted conventional items from safeguards. The 
Agency should also seriously examine the need for 
giving inspectors intensive and extensive training in 
various legal, technical and administrative aspects 
of their work. 
7 5. While it was perhaps inevitable that the Agency's 
increased safeguards responsibilities should give rise 
to increased costs, there seemed no reason why 
Member States which had virtually no nuclear 
programmes or facilities of dieir own should contribute 
to the additional cost on the basis of the 
present United Nations formula. His delegation 
urged die Director General and the Board to 
examine die question carefully with a view to proposing 
an acceptable formula whereby die extra funds 
would be raised from Members on die basis of die 
respective size of their nuclear power programmes. 

76. Finally, it was the general consensus of the 
non-nuclear-weapon States that the executive organ 
of the Agency responsible for administering safeguards 
under the NPT must have a more representative 
character than it had been possible to conceive for 
it 15 years previously. Of the 25 Members of the 
Board, 13 were permanent or semi-permanent, and 
there were various well-known anomalies and anachronisms 
in the provisions governing election of 
the remaining 12 by the General Conference. While 
the Board, as constituted at present, had functioned 
efficiently and impartially, Pakistan feared that with 
a large number of nuclear facilities in different parts 
of the world subject to Agency safeguards, political 
implications and overtones which called for a broader 
base and a more democratic system of election might 
become apparent in its work. He therefore urged' 
that die Board itself should undertake a fresh study 
with a view to making itself more representative of 
the membership as a whole. 
77. Though he was sure neither the General 
Conference nor the Board would allow the increased 
emphasis on safeguards to affect the Agency's technical 
assistance and other programmes, there was 
already an alarming trend towards reducing die 
voluntary contributions from which technical 
assistance was financed. In 1967 barely one third 
of the requests for technical assistance had been met. 
Moreover, in order to handle no more than 
$ 2 million worth of technical assistance, some 
$500 000 had been needed to pay the staff concerned. 
Yet the same number of staff could probably handle 
funds worth at least S10 million. The Director 
General should therefore make a wholehearted 
attempt to bring the level of voluntary contributions 
up to Uiat required to attain the target fixed by the 
General Conference. 
78. He hoped he would be forgiven if he did 
some plain speaking about the importance of atomic 
energy to the economic development programmes 
of the developing countries of the world. Among 
such countries there was a general feeling, largely 
fostered by dieir own atomic energy authorities and, 
at the international level, by the Agency, that atomic 
energy, apart from giving them enhanced status 
and prestige, was the panacea for all their ills, 
whether in agriculture, industry, power generation, 
heakh or education. In fact, any country's nuclear 
programme was twofold in nature. On the one hand 
it dealt with the harnessing of the fission energy 
of uranium or plutonium atoms for the production 

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

of heat, electricity or explosions, on the other with 
the application of radiation from the resulting radioactive 
materials to solve problems in agriculture, 
medicine, hydrology, entomology, industry and so on. 
It was important to be under no illusions: the 
second type of activity, though very important, could 
only be an aid or a means to an end, and not an 
end in itself. In agriculture, for example, there had 
so far been no major break-through as a result 
of the use of radioisotopes and radiation sources. 
In Pakistan, the production of wheat and rice had 
been tripled by using improved varieties developed 
by conventional means. Similarly, there had so far 
been no success in using radiation techniques to 
discover new sources of underground water or oil 
in arid areas, nor had any major pest been 
eliminated by the sterile male technique, with the 
sole exception of the screw-worm fly on an island 
off the United States coast. The same was true 
of medicine and other fields. In short, the isotopic 
technique helped, but did not solve the problems. 

79- There remained the generation of cheap electricity. 
The developing countries incontestably needed 
electric power for lighting homes in rural areas, for 
working simple machines and pumps to lift water 
from underground sources in order to augment the 
irrigation facilities, and for running small and mediumscale 
cottage industries. Thousands of acres of fertile 
land lay fallow for want of water and millions 
crowded onto the land for want of employment 
in industries which could grow with the availability 
of a cheap and abundant electricity supply. Electric 
power, therefore, was something fundamental to 
economic growth, yet even in that area it was only 
where power was needed at any cost, namely in the 
fuel-starved regions of the developing countries, that 
nuclear power generation could be justified. It was 
in that respect that the developing countries needed 
financial and technical assistance, and it was precisely 
in that respect too that the record of the Agency 
and the international financial institutions had been 
most disappointing. Even where the Agency had 
made pre-investment studies costing more than 
S 1 million, as it had in the case of the Philippines 
and Pakistan, the relevant projects had stagnated 
for lack of funds. Despite the provisions of 
Article XI.B of its Statute, hardly any requests for 
financial assistance for nuclear projects had been 
made to, or if made to, granted by, the Agency 
or any of the competent financing organizations. 
His delegation was therefore submitting a draft resolution 
proposing that the Agency study ways and 
means of securing outside assistance in the form of 
either grants or iow-interest-bearing loans for the 
creation of a Special Nuclear Fund for the purpose 
of financing nuclear projects found by the Agency 
to be technically feasible and economically viable 
in developing areas of the world. It was significant 
that die proposal had received enthusiastic support 

from all the non-nuclear-weapon States at present 
meeting in Geneva. 

80. If the Agency's valuable scientific meetings 
were to continue to be held mainly in Europe, 
scientists from distant lands must be helped with 
their travel and subsistence costs in order that those 
countries could participate without discrimination. 
Among the meetings held in 1968 one of the most 
daring in concept and best attended had been the 
Seminar on Contemporary Physics held in June at 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste. The Government of Italy, die Trieste authorities, 
the Director General and the Director of the 
Centre all deserved congratulations on the success 
of the seminar, which he was sure would have early 
and beneficial effects in various branches of physics. 
81. Mr. ORLANDO RODRIGUEZ (Cuba) said 
that his country's work on the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy was still at the initial stage. Cuba 
had been a Member of the Agency since its 
foundation in 1957, and had co-operated unreservedly 
in the Agency's work, especially since 1962, through 
the Nuclear Energy Working Group organized by 
the Cuban Academy of Sciences, the National Commission 
on Radiological Protection and the National 
Centre for Scientific Research, all of which dealt 
with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. During 
those years, the Agency and its Director General, 
as well as responsible officials in the several sections 
and Departments, had given all possible co-operation 
in connection with Cuba's requests for technical 
assistance and scientific advice. 
82. Now, with the Agency's assistance, and with 
the help and co-operation of the Soviet Union, Cuba 
was entering upon a planned programme of activities 
in nuclear energy. Radioisotopes had already been 
in use for several years, principally in medicine but 
also in hydrology and mining. 
83. To provide training in those disciplines, a 
sub-critical uranium/water reactor and a radiochemistry 
laboratory were being set up — two units 
which represented the first firm step in the country's 
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
84. Cuba's ultimate objective was to use nuclear 
energy for power production, for desalting sea water, 
for producing radioisotopes to be used in medicine, 
agriculture, industry and food preservation, and for 
all other peaceful applications. 
85. With regard to the NPT — which seemed to 
have become the principal theme of all statements 
before the Conference — Cuba's position had been 
made quite clear at the twenty-second session of 
the General Assembly of the United Nations: the 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

Cuban Minister of Foreign Affairs had said there 
that his Government did not share the opinion of 
those who believed that the NPT was a positive 
step on the road to general and complete 
disarmament. 

86. The Treaty divided nations into two categories, 
those that possessed and those that did not possess 
nuclear weapons, thereby maintaining the distance 
between powerful nations and small, weak nations, 
between developed and underdeveloped countries. 
87. The Treaty placed the smaller countries that 
had no nuclear weapons in a position of impotence, 
and inaugurated a complete control over the peaceful 
nuclear activities carried on by countries without 
nuclear weapons, whether they were signatories or not. 
88. Cuba would never sign a treaty which conferred 
upon one country unilateral rights of inspection and 
control over others, and would accordingly vote 
against any proposal designed to secure ratification 
or endorsement of the NPT. 
89. His delegation advocated increased technical 
assistance, principally to the developing countries. 
Apart from its objection to the NPT, Cuba was resolved 
to afford the Agency all possible co-operation. 
90. Mrs. de CASTILLO LEDON (Mexico) wished 
to mention the particular importance that the Government 
of Mexico attached to the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
(Tlatelolco Treaty), and also to the NPT which her 
country had signed simultaneously in London, 
Moscow and Washington, the capitals of the 
Depositary States, on 26 July 1968. 
91. Mexico had endeavoured to fulfil its international 
obligations, and in the case of the first 
of the above-mentioned treaties, the Government 
of Mexico had sent the Director General of the 
Agency a communication on 25 September 1967, 
informing him that on 20 September it had 
deposited the instrument of ratification relating to 
the Tlatelolco Treaty, having waived the requirements 
listed in Article 28 thereof, and that the 
Treaty was thenceforth in full effect in Mexico, thus 
making that country the first signatory State to 
acquire the status of Party to the Treaty. At the 
proper time the Mexican Government had expressed 
its desire to enter into negotiations with the Agency 
with a view to- concluding an agreement that 
envisaged full application of the Agency's safeguards 
system to nuclear activities in progress on Mexican 
territory, in compliance with Article 13 of the Treaty. 
92. Negotiations had started immediately, and had 
resulted in the formulation of a text in May 1968, 
with which both Contracting Parties had declared 
themselves in agreement13). Referring to that text, 
which the Board of Governors had approved, the 
Governor from Mexico had stressed that it constituted 
a bilateral agreement between his country and the 
Agency and, as far as Mexico was concerned, was 
not intended to act in any way as a forerunner to 
or a basis for any other similar agreement; the 
Board had endorsed that statement and also stressed 
its importance. 

93. Since the Agreement exempted nuclear 
materials in the form of ore from the application 
of the safeguards system, when giving its approval 
the Board had added a statement that such 
exemption did not constitute an interpretation of 
Article XX of the Agency's Statute. The Agreement, 
the first of its kind to be concluded with 
the Agency, had been signed on 6 September 1968. 
94. The Mexican delegation deemed it fitting to 
inform the General Conference that instruments of 
ratification had been received from Brazil, the 
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras and 
Uruguay. The striking fact should also be pointed 
out that at the request of the Government of 
Barbados, the Mexican Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
was making the necessary arrangements for that 
country to sign the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
95. Over the past ten years an area of Mexico 
covering 53 000 km2 had been prospected for 
uranium, and as a result an estimated 3 729000 tons 
of uranium ore had been discovered, containing 
approximately 3000 tons of uranium oxide. Uranium 
mines were in the initial stages of working in the 
states of Chihuahua, Sonora and Durango. In addition, 
an ore-processing plant was under construction 
at Villa Aldama (Chihuahua), capable of handling 
60 tons of ore per day. 
96. The Mexican Nuclear Centre, which was 
equipped with a Triga Mark III reactor that would 
probably achieve criticality in November 1968, was 
now nearing completion. A Mossbauer spectrograph 
had been installed for radiation chemistry studies. 
A nuclear chemistry group had been formed in 
association with the reactor, and an appropriate 
research programme drawn up. A technetium-99 
generator had been developed, and tellurium had 
been separated by solvent extraction and by 
electrophoresis. The installation, at the Nuclear 
Centre itself, of a 12-MeV tandem Van de Graaff 
accelerator and of the hydraulic, electric and highpressure 
gas systems had been completed. The 
central workshops of the Centre had built a nuclear 
spectrograph of the Mattauch-Elbeck type, as well 
as a dispersion chamber. 
13) See document INFCIRC/118. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

97. A Study Group composed of experts from 
Mexico, the United States of America and the Agency 
itself had decided at its last meeting, held recendy 
in New York, that the Northwest Project for the 
construction of a water-desalination and electricitygenerating 
plant in the extreme north of the Gulf 
of California was technically feasible. That plant 
would be of benefit to the states of Lower California 
and Sonora in Mexico, and to those of California 
and Arizona in the United States of America. The 
report compiled by the Study Group would be made 
available in due course. 
98. Mr. OMAR (Kuwait) said that since Kuwait 
had joined the Agency in 1964 it had taken an 
increasing interest in its activities. 
99. It welcomed the Agency's safeguards 
programme and considered that it had helped the 
Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament in 
Geneva to reach agreement on the NPT, which 
Kuwait had already signed. The NPT represented 
a step forward towards total disarmament and he 
regretted that it had not been signed by all the 
States in his geographical area, particularly since 
the development of nuclear weapons in the Middle 
East would have a very serious effect on the critical 
situation which obtained there. 
100. He sincerely hoped that the NPT would be 
ratified by all countries as soon as possible. As 
already reflected in the budget proposed for 1969 
and the draft programme for 1969-74, its ratification 
and the application of safeguards would lead to an 
increase in the Agency's expenditure. The provision 
of technical assistance and the dissemination of 
information were however of great importance to 
developing countries and he hoped those activities 
would be expanded to a greater extent than had 
been proposed. Since however that might be impossible 
with the funds available, he agreed with 
those delegates who had proposed that safeguards 
activities should be financed mainly from funds 
provided specifically for that purpose rather than 
from the regular budget. 
101. His country was keenly interested in nuclear 
power and desalination plants, and a preliminary 
study had been undertaken with the help of the 
Agency. From 1963 to 1968 the capacity of power 
plants had increased from 30 MW(e) to 560 MW(e) 
and the volume of water obtained from desalination 
plants from 2 million gallons to 23 million gallons 
per day. A power plant with a capacity of 5 35 MW(e) 
was to go into operation in 1970. It was estimated 
that Kuwait would need to double its power and 
water supply every three years and, consequendy, 
early consideration would have to be given to the 
possibility of developing a combined nuclear power 
and desalting plant. Kuwait was also doing its 
utmost to increase its underground water resources, 
which now yielded 22 million gallons per day, of 
which 18 million gallons consisted of brackish water. 

102. A research project had been started in cooperation 
with the Middle Eastern Regional 
Radioisotope Centre for the Arab Countries and a 
preliminary report had been published. Considerable 
progress had been made in the medical 
applications of radioisotopes, and in January 1969 
a new centre would be completed which would carry 
out work on radiotherapy, together with research 
on the use of radioisotopes. The equipment used 
would be of a highly advanced nature, and not only 
Kuwait but also the neighbouring countries would 
benefit from the centre's work. It was also hoped 
that the centre would provide training in medicine 
and physics. 
103. An extensive radiological protection service 
had been established in 1967 covering all personnel 
working with ionizing radiations in medicine and 
industry. A national radiological protection committee 
had been set up, and one of its aims was 
to formulate legislation on radiological protection 
based on the recommendations of the International 
Commission for Radiological Protection and the 
Agency. 
104. In conclusion he expressed his delegation's 
support for die draft resolution on the review of the 
Agency's Statute which had been co-sponsored by 
the United Arab Republic 14). 
105. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said that the problems of the peaceful 
use of atomic energy discussed at the present session 
of die General Conference were every year playing 
a more important part in the lives of all die peoples 
in the world. 
106. Mankind lived in a world of rapid technical 
progress, and in the light of that fact the Agency's 
activities were of particular significance. Many 
countries were setting striking examples in the rapid 
mastery of the latest technical achievements. One 
such country was the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic. 
107. In the present year the Byelorussian SSR 
was celebrating fifty years of independent existence. 
Over the half-century of the Soviet regime Byelorussia 
had seen tremendous changes in industry, 
agriculture, science and culture. In 1967 the volume 
of industrial production had been 72 times greater 
than in 1913; the output of industrial products per 
head of the population had been 57 times greater. 
At the present time enterprises in the Byelorussian 
SSR were turning out the same gross output in 
14) See document GC(XII)/397. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

five days as had taken a whole year before the 
Revolution. The Byelorussian SSR was now producing 
every fifth Soviet tractor, every eighth metalcutting 
lathe, every fifth motor cycle, and so on. 

108. The Byelorussian SSR had become the home 
of a great chemical industry. Over the last few years 
two potassium combines, one nitrogen fertilizer plant, 
one superphosphate plant and a plant producing 
synthetic fibres and plastics had gone into operation. 
Construction was at present in progress on another 
potassium combine, the largest synthetic fibre combine 
in Europe, and a complex for the production of 
caprolactam. 
109. In 1965 the Republic had begun producing 
oil. The output in 1967 had been 1 million tons. 
110. During the Soviet regime the Republic's 
agriculture had attained a high degree of productivity 
and mechanization. In 1967 therewere66100 tractors, 
17 500 combine harvesters and 48 100 motor vehicles 
in use on the collective and state farms of the 
Republic. 
111. Prior to the Great October Socialist Revolution, 
Byelorussia had not had a single higher educational 
establishment or scientific research institute. Fewer 
than 15% of children between the ages of 8 and 
15 had attended school. During the years of Soviet 
regime in Byelorussia, illiteracy had been stamped 
out. In the 1967/68 academic year the 28 higher 
and 126 secondary specialized schools of the Byelorussian 
SSR had given instruction to some 
263 000 students, i.e. one-and-a-half times as many 
as in the whole of Tsarist Russia in 1914/15- In 
1967 the Republic had employed more than 430 000 
specialists with secondary and higher education, or 
more than double the figure for the whole of Tsarist 
Russia. At the present time the Byelorussian SSR 
possessed 168 scientific research establishments, with 
the Byelorussian SSR Academy of Sciences at their 
head; 21 were entirely concerned with agriculture. 
112. In 1967, Byelorussia had generated 
10 600 million kWh of electric power. The capacity 
of the system was 2 246 000 kW, which was 2500 
times more than had been the case in prerevolutionary 
Byelorussia. Every five years the 
capacity of Byelorussian power stations was virtually 
doubled. By 1 January 1968 the power grids of 
all voltages covered a region of about 145 000 km2, 
whereas prior to the October Revolution there had 
been no transmission lines on Byelorussian territory 
at all, except in the towns. 
113. In the next few years the generation of power 
in the Byelorussian SSR was scheduled to reach 
54000 million kWh, representing an increase by a 
factor of almost five. Some of that power would be 
provided by stations operating on conventional fuel, 
but as demonstrated by an analysis of fuel transport 
systems, an increase in the capacity of the country's 
power stations above 6 million kW could best be 
attained by resorting solely to nuclear power generation. 
Thus, in the near future, nuclear power engineering 
would become in the main branch of the 
power industry in the Byelorussian SSR. 

114. Radioisotopes were being employed in the 
Republic for a variety of purposes. In particular, 
they were being used to study ways of determining 
the fields of moisture in capillaro-porous bodies, 
to investigate the mechanisms of internal heat and 
mass exchange, and to study the kinetics of the 
drying of granulated and pulverulent materials in 
the fluidized bed. 
115. For die inspection of production processes 
extensive use was being made of radioisotope 
instruments. Nuclear equipment was being used for 
research on solid-state physics, medicine, physiology, 
and many other branches of knowledge. 
116. Peaceful atomic energy applications were taking 
their place in his country among the foremost industrial 
methods and techniques. The centre of 
that work was the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences' 
Institute of Nuclear Power Engineering. During 
the past year the Institute had obtained a quantity 
of new data in connection with novel coolants for 
atomic power stations and with radiation-chemical 
processes. His delegation wished to draw the attention 
of the Conference to the fact that the results being 
obtained in radiation chemistry gave grounds for 
hoping that they could be widely applied on an 
industrial scale. At the present time the work on 
radiation chemistry was being carried out in the 
Byelorussian SSR using die IRT-2000 reactor and 
gamma installations. The parameters of various 
processes were being studied, as also were methods 
of obtaining useful products by radiation-chemical 
means. 
117. A number of processes had already been 
studied, and in particular work was going on at 
the Institute of Nuclear Power Engineering on various 
emitters, such as nuclear fission fragment emitters 
and alpha particle emitters (by the (nfit) process), 
and investigations were being made of processes 
occurring in mixed reactor radiation. The results 
of investigations in those fields were now being 
published in the Physics and Power-Engineering Series 
of the Transactions of the Byelorussian SSR Academy 
of Sciences. 
118. It had to be taken into account, in discussing 
the problem under review, that the rapid develop

ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

ment of nuclear power engineering was leading to 
the construction of nuclear power stations of enormous 
overall capacity. Estimates indicated that by the 
year 2000 the installed capacity of nuclear power 
stations throughout the world would be about 
3000 million kW(e). That number of stations would 
make it possible to produce, simultaneously with 
electricity, tens of millions of tons of useful chemical 
products. That was an undertaking which, of course, 
deserved serious attention. It could be said that 
multi-purpose nuclear power stations of that kind 
foreshadowed the industrial undertakings of the 
future, and the time had come to lay the scientific 
and technological bases for complexes of that kind. 

119. All those facts and factors bore witness to 
the rapid technical progress achieved in the Byelorussian 
SSR during the 50 years of its existence. 
120. In the peaceful uses of nuclear energy the 
Byelorussian SSR was conducting research on a 
broad front and was engaged in acquiring the most 
up-to-date experience of applying nuclear energy. 
121. In his delegation's opinion the Agency had, 
through its prolonged and many-sided activities, 
shown itself capable of solving any international 
problem associated with the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, and it therefore believed that in future also 
the Agency would successfully fulfil all the assignments 
which might be entrusted to it in that 
connection. 
122. His delegation noted with satisfaction the 
profound scientific content of the Agency's programme 
of work for the coming years. Analyses conducted 
by the Agency of scientific and technical advances 
in various branches of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy were rendering great assistance to all countries 
in making use of the latest scientific achievements. 
123. The year 1968 had been marked by an outstanding 
event — the acceptance of the NPT. The 
Agency was called upon to undertake the highly 
responsible task of supervising the implementation 
of the Treaty. The Byelorussian delegation was 
convinced that the Agency could cope with that 
task, since it already possessed considerable experience 
in the matter of safeguards. 
124. The Agency's efforts to perfect its safeguards 
system merited approval. That system was already 
leading to an expansion of die Agency's activities, 
and would do so even more in the future. In addition 
to purely scientific and technical assignments, 
the Agency would be summoned to carry out duties 
of great political significance. Thus, the volume 
and importance of the Agency's prospective work 
in ensuring effective safeguards and the training 
of qualified staff were very great. For its part the 
Byelorussian SSR was fully able and willing to 
participate in die work in question, and was 
expressing its desire to do so. 

125. His delegation regarded with satisfaction the 
admission of a number of new Members to the 
Agency. The universal character of the Agency with 
regard to die admission of new Members was one 
of its most important characteristics. 
126. In this connection mention should be made 
of the results achieved by the German Democratic 
Republic in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
The German Democratic Republic had constructed 
and, since 1966, was operating its first nuclear power 
station with a capacity of 70 MW(e). In the near 
future that country would build a further nuclear 
power station with an overall capacity of 
1 000 MW(e). 
127. The German Democratic Republic likewise 
produced and used a large quantity of radioisotopes, 
which it also supplied to a number of European 
countries. It also had a large-scale electronics 
industry, which was necessary for scientific research 
in nuclear physics and the utilization of radioisotopes. 
128. All that indicated that activities concerned 
with the peaceful uses of atomic energy were well 
developed in die German Democratic Republic, and 
that all the prerequisites for diat country's direct 
participation in die Agency's work as a Member 
were fulfilled. His delegation was therefore in favour 
of die admission of the German Democratic Republic 
to membership of the Agency. 
129. His delegation eagerly awaited die final decision 
of die United Nations regarding the fourdi international 
conference on the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, and supported die proposal to hold die 
Conference in 1970 or 1971. He was convinced 
that the Conference would have a favourable effect 
on die use of atomic energy to further die progress 
of mankind in many directions. 
130. In conclusion, he stated diat die Byelorussian 
delegation was grateful to die Agency's Secretariat 
for arranging die excellent lectures which had been 
delivered on 26 September by Dr. Sarabhai and 
Dr. Woolston. His delegation also approved the 
action taken by the Secretariat in connection with 
the organization of INIS, and was convinced that 
INIS would be of great assistance to all States 
Members of the Agency. 
131. He further wished all States Members of the 
Agency success in die peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and expressed confidence that, as in die past, die 

 GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

Agency would continue to carry out its noble task 
with credit. 

132. Mr. BRYNIELSSON (Sweden) said that he 
did not wish to discuss in detail the Agency's activities 
during the past year. His delegation had studied 
the report of the Board of Governors with great 
interest and merely wished to stress its appreciation 
of the dedicated efforts which the Director General 
and his staff had made to carry out the programme 
within the limitations of available resources. 
133. He would also refrain from describing the 
evolution of Sweden's nuclear energy programme 
during the past year; in accordance with the Director 
General's suggestion, a written statement on the 
subject had already been submitted to the 
Secretariat1'). 
134. His delegation did wish to intervene briefly 
in the general debate, however, to emphasize the 
Swedish Government's earnest belief that the Agency 
should retain the central role which it had played 
for ten years past in furthering the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. At the Conference of 
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States in Geneva some 
delegates had spoken of the possible need for a 
new international organization to deal with nuclear 
energy questions. Many others, however, both in 
Geneva and in Vienna, had expressed complete 
confidence in the Agency as the body best fitted 
to cope with the increasingly important tasks which 
nuclear energy would bring. 
135. The Agency had acquired much valuable experience 
during the first decade of its existence 
and — as the Director General had said — was 
already preparing itself to take on the new and 
larger tasks that lay ahead. To his mind, there 
were no functions provided for in the NPT which 
the Agency could not handle as well as any new 
organization, or better. The establishment of a new 
organization would unquestionably lead to duplication 
of work and to extra costs. Though Article III 
Tie meeting 

of the NPT contained the provisions most obviously 
relevant to the Agency's work, Articles IV and V 
also implied important new obligations. 

136. Through its scientificconferencesandsymposia, 
and through a sizable publications programme, the 
Agency had made a valuable contribution to the 
distribution of technical information. The only 
limitation on the technical assistance it could provide 
stemmed from its restricted budget; that being so, 
he wished to echo the hope, expressed by the 
Director General, that all Member States would 
contribute to the best of their ability to the General 
Fund. 
137. The use of nuclear explosions for peaceful 
purposes also called for a brief comment. He wished 
to record the strong belief of the Swedish Government 
that a non-discriminatory formula for prohibiting 
nuclear explosions was needed, and that the NPT 
should be followed by a comprehensive test ban 
treaty which would prohibit, in principle, all nuclear 
explosions, military and peaceful alike. Such a treaty 
would obviously have to contain provision for some 
exemptions so that useful explosions could be carried 
out when necessary—but under international management 
and control. That was a view which his 
Government had expressed and an objective which 
it would continue to work for in the Eighteen-
Nation Committee on Disarmament and in the 
General Assembly of the United Nations. 
138. Experts were generally agreed that the 
technology of peaceful nuclear explosions was still 
in the development stage. Accordingly, it seemed 
unwise to create new machinery for a task, the 
ultimate requirements of which were as yet unknown. 
The Swedish Government hoped that the Agency 
would become the "appropriate international body" 
mentioned in Article V of the NPT. It had confidence 
in the Agency's ability to adapt itself to the 
new requirements, and would therefore gladly support 
the draft resolution in which it was proposed that 
the Director General should initiate studies on the 
procedures which the Agency should employ in discharging 
such duties16). 
rose at 6. J p.m. 

15) See document GC(XII)/INF/101/Rev.1. 16) See document GC(XII)/RES/245. 


GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XII)/OR.125 
19 February 1969 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

Paragraphs 

1—34 

1 — 23 
24 — 29 
30 — 34 

35—42 

43—44 

45 —46 

47 — 48 

49 — 52 

53 — 54 

55 — 56 

Item of the 

3(b) 
11 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 

GC(XII)/390. 

ENGLISH 


RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
(24-30 SEPTEMBER 1968) 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 30 September 1968, at 10.50 a.m. 


President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Turkey 

Iraq 
Report of the Credentials Committee 
Opening date of the thirteenth regulary session 
The Agency's accounts for 1967 
The Agency's relations with intergovernmental organizations 
The Agency's annual reports to United Nations organs 
Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 
Voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 1969 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XII)/INF/103/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1967-68 
(GC(XII)/380, 389) (continued) 

1. Mr. PASECHNIK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said that several important questions 
concerning the Agency's work had been raised requiring 
consideration at the twelfth regular session 
of the General Conference, particularly with regard 
to the basic trends for the five-year period 1969-74. 
2. Generally speaking, theprogrammesubmitted1) 
correctly reflected the main lines and the ways and 
means by which international co-operation for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy could be achieved 
within the Agency. The Agency would have three 
main tasks during the next few years: 
(a) 
Implementation of the safeguards 
system, a task of particular importance 
in view of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons2); 
(b) 
The organization of international cooperation 
in the use of the experience 
gained throughout the world with regard 
to nuclear power and the application 
of isotopes and radiation in industry, 
agriculture and the health services; and 
(c) 
The granting of technical assistance to 
the developing countries to enable them 
to use atomic energy for the advancement 
of their national economies and improvement 
of the well-being of their 
people. 
3. Those were the activities on which the Agency 
should concentrate during the next few years. On 
the whole, the Ukrainian delegation approved the 
draft programme and the draft budget 3), but it did 
have some comments to make. 
4. The programme and budget document did 
not adequately reflect the fact that the approval 
of the NPT by the United Nations marked the 
beginning of a new stage in the activities of the 
Agency. The Treaty created even more favourable 
conditions for a wide international exchange of 
experience and knowledge in various branches of 
nuclear science and technology. At the same time, 
it aimed at preventing the diversion of nuclear 
material from peaceful, creative uses to the production 
of means of destruction. 
1) GC(XII)/385, paras 11-15 and 32-623, and 385/Corr.l. 
2) This Treaty, which is the subject of Resolution 2373 

(XXII) adopted by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations on 12 June 1968, is subsequently referred 
to in this record as "the Treaty" or "the NPT". 
3) GC(XII)/385,paras 16-31 and645-685,and 385/Corr.l. 

5. Under the NPT, the Agency was to conclude 
with non-nuclear-weapon States which were parties 
to safeguards agreements arrangements designed to 
ensure implementation of the Treaty. 
6. His delegation shared the opinion held by 
most delegates that the Agency possessed the 
knowledge needed to perform its control and safeguards 
functions. The safeguards system had been 
tested on 66 reactors and assemblies in 29 countries. 
However, new efforts on a large scale would have 
to be made by the Board and the Secretariat, and 
all countries would have to show good will and 
increase their exertions. 
7. The Board should not wait for the entry into 
force of the NPT but should immediately start 
working out agreements with the non-nuclear-weapon 
States which were parties to the Treaty, in order 
to find solutions to a number of important problems 
and thereby ensure that the Agency was in a position 
to fulfil all its control obligations without delay. 
8. Statements by the delegates of the Soviet 
Union, Czechoslovakia, the United States and other 
States that were Members of the Board of Governors 
and by the Director General showed that the 
governing bodies of the Agency were anxious to 
arrange for implementation of Articles III and IV 
of the NPT. 
9. In the years since its formation, the Agency 
had achieved definite success in arranging international 
co-operation for the peaceful uses of nudear energy 
and had established itself as the most highly qualified 
international organization in nuclear matters. 
10. Analysis of the available information concerning 
the Agency's activity during the past year showed 
that it was concerned mainly with problems of 
extending the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Considerable attention had been given to providing 
the developing countries with technical assistance, 
studying the technological and economic aspects 
of nuclear power development, water desalination 
and the use of isotopes. 
11. The Secretariat had done a great deal of work 
in drawing up and preparing the programme. On 
the whole, the programme was of a high scientific 
and technical standard and covered many important 
problems, in particular nuclear power and reactors, 
safe management and disposal of radioactive waste, 
the use of isotopes for various purposes, and so on. 
12. New horizons had been opened up for the 
execution of national nuclear power programmes 
by the Soviet delegation's announcement that the 
Soviet Union was prepared to enrich uranium up 
to 2.5-5% for non-nuclear States4). 
4) 
GC(XII)/OR.121,para.27. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

13. Special reference should also be made to the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
Member States had taken great interest in the 
project. The use of computers for INIS would 
provide Member States with a means of carrying 
out an active exchange of useful nuclear data. 
14. The Ukrainian SSR supported that activity 
and was prepared to take an active part by making 
available appropriate data in its possession. 
15. With regard to the Agency's work on the 
exchange of experience in connection with the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, mention should be made of 
one important item — the organization of scientific 
conferences dealing with such problems. The 
Ukrainian delegation supported the proposal to hold 
a fourth international conference on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in 1970-715). 
16. His delegation considered that the Agency 
would achieve better results if it were possible to 
eliminate certain negative factors which handicapped 
its work and hindered the achievement of effective 
international co-operation. 
17. For several years, the universal nature of the 
Agency as foreseen in the Statute had not been 
respected, so that various sovereign States had not 
been able to become Members of the Agency. The 
German Democratic Republic, for example, had 
never been granted membership, although it was 
well known that scientists of that country 
had made substantial contributions to nudear science 
and, from the very beginning, the Government of 
the German Democratic Republic had done everything 
possible to help secure the conclusion of the NPT 
and had been one of the first to sign it. Such 
discriminatory practices merely brought discredit on 
the Agency. 
18. The Secretariat's personnel policy needed 
considerable revision, as it was still far from ensuring 
proper geographic distribution. Not one person 
had been recruited from the Ukrainian SSR. 
19. The Ukrainian SSR had participated in the 
implementation of a joint programme of technical 
assistance provided by the socialist countries through 
the Agency, under which a number of developing 
countries had acquired radiological centres. 
20. The Ukrainian delegation suggested that in 
addition to giving technical assistance in the form 
of equipment and the setting up of nuclear centres, 
it was important to train national scientists, engineers 
and technicians. Without specialized staff, it was 
impossible to achieve technical progress in any field, 
including nuclear energy. 
5) See General Assembly Resolution 2309 (XXII). 

21. Over 4000 persons from the developing 
countries were at present receiving training in the 
Ukraine. Over 10000 nationals of the developing 
countries had trained or extended their training 
in Ukrainian institutes of higher or secondary 
education and scientific research institutes during 
the preceding seven years. 
22. Courses had been held to pass on experience 
in mastering new technological processes and 
advanced methods of operation in large plants. 
Nationals of 22 developing countries had improved 
their qualifications in such courses. 
23. The joint work of two institutes, the Academy 
of Sciences of the Ukrainian SSR and the Cairo 
Nuclear Centre, afforded an example of effective 
assistance to developing countries in the training 
of scientific staff. Over a period of several years, 
up to 12 Ukrainian scientists and engineers had 
been carrying out research on reactors, nuclear physics 
and plasma physics with Arab colleagues in the 
laboratories of the Cairo Centre. The very important 
work of training specialists and scientists for the 
developing countries would continue. 
24. Mr, ISTINYELI (Turkey) said that various 
events which had occurred in 1968 — in particular 
the resolution adopted by the General Assembly of 
the United Nations concerning the NPT, the approval 
by the Board of Governors of the agreement with 
Mexico for unilateral submission to the Agency's 
safeguards6), and the decision taken by the Board 
to extend the Agency's safeguards system to conversion 
plants and fabrication plants — bore witness 
to the increasing scope of the Agency's activities 
and programmes in the field of safeguards. 
25. Turkey regarded the conclusion of the NPT 
as a positive and significant step towards the 
elimination of the dangers of a nuclear war. 
26. At the same time, those new developments 
would probably alter the existing balance between 
the various activities which had been assigned to 
the Agency under its Statute. 
27. The Turkish delegation had always asserted 
that the Agency should devote a considerable 
proportion of its efforts and resources to those 
activities which were likely to further the progress 
of the developing countries, and it had at all times 
attached particular importance to the part the Agency 
could play in narrowing the ever-widening technological 
gap between the advanced countries and the 
other members of the international community. 
28. The question of priorities was likely to assume 
increasing importance in the future. It should 
6) See document INFCIRC/118. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

therefore be examined by the Secretariat and Member 
States with the close attention it merited, in order 
that a judicious balance between the various activities 
of the Agency might be preserved. Some delegations 
had already drawn the attention of the General 
Conference to the Agency's activities in connection 
with the application of isotopes in hydrology, which 
constituted a most important and fruitful field for 
the developing countries and one in which, he 
hoped, the Agency would continue to play an 
active part. 

29. As far as technical assistance was concerned, 
Turkey believed that the Secretariat should undertake 
studies to assess existing potentialities and resources 
and to determine how they might be used more 
effectively. Priority among those studies should be 
given to an examination of the possibility of the 
advanced countries and the international financial 
organizations providing assistance in the form of 
gifts and long-term credits at low interest rates. 
30. Mr. AL-ZAHAWIE (Iraq) welcomed the new 
Members of the Agency, Liechtenstein, the Niger 
and Zambia. 
31. In addition to making use of atomic energy 
in agriculture, medicine and industry, Iraq was 
carrying out research with a view to narrowing the 
technological gap between the industrially advanced 
and the developing countries. The establishment of 
research centres would enable developing countries 
to benefit from the technological advances made 
in the use of nuclear energy and help to reduce 
the "brain drain", which was largely attributable 
to the lack of proper research facilities. 
32. It should be borne in mind that the Agency 
would be called upon to play a major part in 
ensuring the survival of mankind and that the 
necessary steps should be taken to enable it to 
do so. At the tenth regular session of the General 
Conference the Director General had drawn attention 
to the possible need for a revision of the Statute 
to "bring it more into line with reality"7); the Iraqi 
delegation had urged Member States on that occasion 
to carry out a general review of the Statute8), and 
that review was now long overdue. 
33. The Agency would have to assume increased 
responsibilities in applying safeguards under the 
NPT, and he could not accept the argument that 
it should concentrate more on providing Member 
States with material benefits than on its safeguards 
activities. Without proper safeguards, there might 
well be no material benefits to speak of. Any 
Government which took it upon itself to recommend 
7) GC(X)/OR. 101, para. 33. 
8) GC(X)/OR.108, para. 58. 

that the Agency should concern itself less with safeguards 
should show its good faith by co-operating 
closely with the Agency in the matter of safeguards 
and making all its atomic installations available for 
inspection. His country attached particular importance 
to safeguards because it was situated in a part 
of the world in which large-scale armed conflicts 
had taken place during the past 20 years, extensive 
areas were under military occupation and there was 
an imminent danger of war, in which nuclear 
weapons might well be used. 

34. The Governments of the Arab States welcomed 
the NPT and had already expressed their readiness 
to declare the Middle East a nuclear-free zone. That 
gesture had, however, not yet been reciprocated by 
other States in the area, in which there were large 
atomic reactors with a high potential output which 
were, significantly, not made available for inspection. 
Having regard to the explosive situation in the 
Middle East, all Member States should do their 
utmost to prevent the introduction of nuclear weapons 
into the area and thus avoid a nuclear armaments 
race which could have catastrophic results for all 
mankind. 
REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE 
(GC(XII)/398) 

35. The PRESIDENT announced that the 
Credentials Committee had examined the credentials 
of delegates in accordance with Rule 28 of 
the Rules of Procedure; its report, containing two 
draft resolutions, was to be found in document 
GC(XII)/398. 
36. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said that, following on the signature 
of the NPT by a large number of countries, it was 
more than ever necessary to ensure that the principle 
of universal representation was applied in the Agency. 
Since many countries which were not States Members 
of the Agency had signed, or intended to sign, the 
NPT, and thereby accepted the Agency's safeguards 
system and agreed to admit its safeguards inspectors, 
it would be inequitable if such countries were 
prevented from participating in the Agency's work. 
37. The German Democratic Republic, which had 1 
been one of the first signatories of the NPT, had 
not been allowed to become a Member of the 
Agency, although it was technologically very advanced 
and was making a very valuable contribution 
to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It had already 
affirmed its readiness to accept the Agency's 
safeguards system 9) and had undertaken to fulfil 
9) See document GC(X)/INF/91. 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

its obligations under the NPT 10). Its Constitution 
prohibited "any misuse of science directed against 
peace, international understanding, against the life 
and the dignity of man" and its Law on the Use 
of Nuclear Energy laid down that die work of 
scientists and technicians working in the field of 
nuclear energy would be "directed at using nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes and for the benefit 
of all mankind" n). The refusal to admit it to the 
Agency was therefore unjustifiable, and all the more 
regrettable since it could play a very useful role 
in the provision by die Agency of technical assistance 
to developing countries. 

38. Mr. PELE (Romania) regretted that the 
problem of representation of China had not been 
solved, since the Chiang Kai-shek group did not 
represent that country. It was essential diat the 
People's Republic of China, with its 700 million 
inhabitants and immense technological resources, 
should no longer be debarred from membership, 
particularly since the Agency would be required 
to play a major role in implementing the NPT 
and in achieving nuclear disarmament. 
39. Mr. TCHEN (Republic of China) recalled that 
the General Assembly of the United Nations had 
on a number of occasions reaffirmed his Government's 
legal right to represent China and that the 
Credentials Committee had accepted the validity 
of the credentials issued by it. Accordingly he would 
merely point out, in reply to the fallacious argument 
which sought to challenge that right, that his 
Government had been chosen in free elections, in 
accordance with the Constitution, to represent the 
people and bring about, as soon as possible, the 
liberation of their compatriots on the mainland from 
a regime which followed a policy of violence and 
aggression. 
40. Mr. MURAD (Pakistan) could not accept the 
validity of the credentials issued by the Republic 
of China since he considered that the People's 
Republic of China was entided to representation 
in the United Nations and related international 
organizations, including the Agency. 
41. The PRESIDENT said he understood that 
the majority of delegates was in favour of draft 
resolution I and that no delegate wished to speak 
to draft resolution II. He accordingly assumed that 
die Conference wished to adopt the two draft 
resolutions in document GC(XII)/ 398. 
42. The two draft resolutions were adopted. 
10) GC(XII)/INF/105, part V, fourth paragraph. 
11) Ibid, part II, third paragraph. 

OPENING DATE OF THE THIRTEENTH 
REGULAR SESSION 


43. The PRESIDENT said that the General 
Committee had requested him to recommend to 
the Conference on its behalf that die opening date 
of die diirteendi regular session should be Tuesday, 
23 September 1969. 
44. The recommendation of the General Committee was 
accepted. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1967 
(GC(XII)/392) 

45. Mr. MOREL (Gabon), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced the 
Committee's report on the Agency's accounts for 
1967(GC(XII)/392). 
46. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XII)j392 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 
(GC(XII)/393) 

47. Mr. MOREL (Gabon), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced die 
Committee's report on the Agency's relations with 
intergovernmental organizations (GC(XII)/393). 
48. The two draft resolutions contained in document 
GC(XII)/393 12) were adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORTS TO 
UNITED NATIONS ORGANS (GC(XII)/382) 

49. The PRESIDENT drew attention to draft 
resolution A submitted by the Board of Governors 
in document GC(XII)/382 relating to the Agency's 
report to the General Assembly of the United 
Nations for 1967-68. As it was couched in the 
same terms as similar resolutions adopted by die 
Conference in die past, he suggested that it be 
adopted. 
50. The draft resolution was adopted. 
12) Relating respectively to the co-operation agreement 
between the Agency and the Organization of African 
Unity and to representation of intergovernmental 
organizations at the thirteenth regular session of the 
General Conference. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

51. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
consider draft resolution B, also submitted by the 
Board in document GC(XII)/382, concerning the 
Agency's report to the Economic and Social Council 
of the United Nations for 1968-69- Since that 
resolution too was analogous to past resolutions 
on the Agency's reports to the Council, he thought 
the Conference would wish to adopt it. 
5 2. The draft resolution was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF 
PENSION COMMITTEE 

53. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members and 
two alternates elected by the Conference. One of 
the members, Mr. B. Vachata of the Czechoslovak 
Socialist Republic, was unable to continue in office, 
and Mr. Z. Nejedly had been nominated as his 
successor. 
54. Mr. Nejedly {Czechoslovakia) was elected a member 
of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 
GENERAL FUND FOR 1969 
(GC(XII)/388/Rev.4) 

55. The PRESIDENT said that by 5 p.m. on 
27 September the Director General had received 
pledges of voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund for 1969 from 51 Member States to a total 
equivalent of SI 233951, as stated in document 
GC(XII)/388/Rev.4. Since then, the Netherlands 
had increased its pledge by SI000, and Portugal 
had pledged an amount of S3600. 
56. He pointed out that the total pledged was 
far short of the proposed target of S2 million 
recommended by the Programme, Technical and 
Budget Committee in a draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XII)/395, Annex II. 
The meeting rose at 12.5p.m. 


GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency GC(XII)/OR.126 
20 February 1969 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

Item of the 
agenda* 

12 
9 
13 
14 
20 

GC(XII)/390. 

RECORDS OF THE TWELFTH REGULAR SESSION 
(24-30 SEPTEMBER 1968) 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 30 September 1968, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 

Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1967-68 (continued) 
The Agency's budget for 1969 and programme for 1969-74 
Scale of Members' contributions for 1969 
Closing of the session 

Paragraphs 

1 — 15 
16 — 25 
26 — 31 
32 — 33 
34 — 42 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XII)/INF/103/Rev.2. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD 
OF GOVERNORS (GC(XII)/391/Rev.1) 

1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the report 
of the General Committee on election of Members 
to the Board of Governors (GC(XII)/391/Rev.1), 
in paragraph 1 of which the Committee notified 
the Conference that five Members had to be elected 
to the Board during the session. The Committee 
specified the geographical areas in respect of which 
elections were required, and invited attention to 
the fact that the elections had to be conducted with 
due regard to equitable representation on the Board 
as a whole of the Members in the geographical 
areas specified in Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. 
Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure provided that 
elections would be by secret ballot and that there 
could be no nominations. 
2. At the invitation of the President a member of the 
Austrian delegation and a member of the Thai delegation 
acted as tellers. 
3. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect two Members from the area of Latin America. 
4. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Members to be elected: 2 

Ballot papers returned: 115 

Invalid votes: 1 

Abstentions: 6 

Valid votes: 108 

Required majority: 28 

Votes obtained: 

Venezuela 54 

Argentina 5 3 

Uruguay 1 

5. Having obtained the required majority, Venezuela 
and Argentina were elected Members of the Board. 
6. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Africa and the 
Middle East. 
7. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 66 

s 

Invalid votes: 0 

Abstentions:

 2 

Valid votes:

 64 
Required majority: 3 3 
Votes obtained: 


Iran 60 
United Arab Republic 3 
Tunisia

 1 

8. Having obtained the required majority, Iran was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
9. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of South East Asia 
and the Pacific. 
10. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the rusult of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 67 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 62 
Required majority: 3 2 
Votes obtained: 


Singapore 62 

11. Having obtained the required majority, Singapore 
was elected a Member of the Board. 
12. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
fill the remaining vacant seat on the Board. 
13. A vote was taken by secret ballot, the result of 
which was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 66 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions:


 1 

Valid votes:

 65 
Required majority: 3 3 
Votes obtained: 


Italy 64 
Yugoslavia

 1 


ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

14. Having obtained the required majority, Italy was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
15. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Article VI.D of the Statute, the Members just elected 
to the Board would hold office from the end of 
the twelfth regular session of the General Conference 
until the end of the fourteenth regular session. He 
congratulated Argentina, Iran, Italy, Singapore and 
Venezuela on their election, and thanked the tellers 
for their work. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1967-68 
(continued1), to permit discussion of document 
GC(XII)/397) 

16. Mr. SALVETTI (Italy) presented the six-Power 
draft resolution on a review of Article VI of the 
Statute, of which his delegation was one of the 
sponsors (GC(XII)/397). In view of the great 
advances in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
that had taken place in several countries since the 
establishment of the Agency, and in view also of 
the considerably increased membership of the Agency 
since 1957, the question arose whether the 
composition of the Board of Governors fully reflected 
the present situation in the Agency and whether 
the Agency would be capable of discharging the new 
responsibilities which would devolve upon it in the 
coming years. 
17. Mr. SERRANO (Chile) said that the object 
of the draft resolution, of which his country was 
also a co-sponsor, was to prepare the way for an 
amendment to Article VI of the Agency's Statute, 
relating to the composition of the Board. 
18. His delegation thought it essential that the 
composition of the Board should reflect the 
quantitative and qualitative changes that had taken 
place since 1956 and 1962, the years in which the 
provisions of the present Article VI had been 
adopted. Having regard to the principle of 
proportional representation, the increased membership 
of the Agency called for the participation of 
a greater number of States in the work of the Board. 
Moreover, in addition to the increased number of 
Member States, the activities of those States in 
connection with the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
were continuously developing. 
19. In order to facilitate the indispensable exchange 
of ideas, it would perhaps be useful to set up 
working groups in which States not represented on 
the Board could participate. 
1) See document GC(XII)/OR.125, paras 1-34. 

20. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) stated that in the 
present stage of development of nuclear energy, 
and having due regard to the implications which 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons would have for the Agency, his Government 
was not opposed to an inquiry as to whether die 
present composition of the Board was satisfactory. 
However, his delegation would not support any 
draft resolution which would prejudge the issue. 
He thought it would be inadvisable for the Conference 
to instruct the Board as to how it should 
set about its deliberations or to restrict those 
deliberations in any way. If the draft resolution 
were to be amended in the light of what he had 
said, his delegation could support it, but in its 
present form it could not do so. 
21. Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) said that 
his delegation was in favour of the six-Power draft 
resolution. 
22. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said that his delegation had not been 
able to study the matter in full and could not 
therefore adopt a final position regarding the draft 
resolution. It would inform the Board of its opinion 
if die question were referred to the Board. However, 
if the draft resolution was to be put to the vote, 
his delegation would have to abstain. 
23. His Government was opposed to any change 
in the Statute intended to terminate the political 
compromise on which the composition of the Board 
was based and which thus far had been an indispensable 
element in the functioning of that body. 
24. The PRESIDENT noted that three delegations 
had spoken in favour of the draft resolution and 
one against it, and that another delegation had 
announced its intention of abstaining, if the draft 
resolution were put to the vote. He would have 
been grateful if other delegations had made known 
their opinion, but since no further statements were 
forthcoming, he assumed that the Conference wished 
to adopt the draft resolution. 
25. The draft resolution in document GC(XII)/397 
was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1969 AND 
PROGRAMME FOR 1969-74 
(GC(XII)/395, 396, 399). 

26. Mr. HAAS (Netherlands), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's three reports on the 
Agency's budget for 1969 and programme for 1969-74 
(GC(XII)/395, 396 and 399). 

GENERAL CONFERENCE: TWELFTH (1968) REGULAR SESSION 

27. The draft resolution in Annex I to document 
GC(XII)/395 {Regular Budget appropriations for 1969) 
was adopted. 
28. The draft resolution in Annex II to document 
GC{XII)/395 {Operational Budget allocations for 1969) 
was adopted. 
29. The draft resolution in Annex III to document 
GC{XII)/395 {Use of the Working Capital Fund in 
1969) was adopted. 
30. The recommendation in paragraph 9 of document 
GC{XII)j 396, relating to a draft resolution on the financing 
of nuclear projects, was accepted. 
31. The draft resolution annexed to document 
GC{XH)/399 {The Agency's responsibility to provide 
services in connection with the peaceful use of nuclear 
explosives) was adopted. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS 
FOR 1969 (GC(XII)/394) 

32. Mr. HAAS (Netherlands), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the scale of 
Members' contributions for 1969 (GC(XII)/394). 
The Committee recommended the Conference to 
adopt the draft resolution at the end of the report. 
33. The draft resolution in document GC{XII)j394 
was adopted. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

34. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) said he took 
pleasure in conveying to the President the gratitude 
of the delegations of countries in the area of South 
East Asia and the Pacific for the outstanding way 
in which he (the President) had conducted the work 
of the session. A distinguished scientist, Mr. Sandoval 
Vallarta had also shown himself to be a skilful 
diplomat and had given evidence of both firmness 
and tolerance, that had enabled the Conference to 
perform work of particular importance. 
35. Mr. TRIVEDI (India) unreservedly endorsed 
what had been said by the delegate from Australia 
and wanted to thank the President, on behalf of 
the countries of the area of South Asia, for the 
authoritative, competent and courteous way he had 
conducted the discussions during a session which 
was of particular importance for the Agency's future. 
36. Mr. DUCCI (Italy), speaking on behalf of 
the countries of Western Europe, praised the 
President's outstanding qualities, which had enabled 
the Conference to conclude its work successfully 
and to carry out its duties in highly favourable 
circumstances. 

37. Mr. IVANCHEV (Bulgaria) welcomed the 
opportunity to thank the President, on behalf of 
the delegations of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, 
Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for 
directing the work of the session with wisdom as 
well as with competence and efficiency. He also 
thanked the Director General and the Secretariat 
for the care with which they had prepared the work 
of the Conference. 
38. Mr. da COSTA RIBEIRO (Brazil), speaking 
on behalf of the whole of America, joined wholeheartedly 
in the tributes paid to the President for 
the brilliant way he had accomplished his task, and 
stressed that it was largely due to the President's 
efforts that the Conference had been so fruitful. 
He also thanked the chairmen of the committees 
and the Secretariat for their valuable co-operation, 
which had contributed to the success of the session. 
39. Mr. TORKI (Tunisia), speaking on behalf 
of the delegations of Members from Africa and the 
Middle East, praised the remarkable way in which 
the President had carried out his duties. He also 
thanked the Director General, whose dynamic activity 
had enabled the Agency to play an increasingly 
important role in international life. He noted with 
satisfaction that the number of African States in 
the Agency was increasing and welcomed the cooperation 
agreement between the Organization of 
African Unity and the Agency which the Conference 
had approved that morning2). 
40. The PRESIDENT said he was touched by 
the words of praise which had been addressed to 
him, but wanted to stress that the Conference had 
been able to carry out its work successfully and 
within the specified time only because of the goodwill, 
understanding and spirit of collaboration shown 
by all the delegations throughout a particularly fruitful 
session. 
41. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer and meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

42. The PRESIDENT then declared the twelfth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 5p.m. 

2) See document GC(XII)/OR.125, para.48. 


