GC(XIII)/OR.127 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

6 January 1970 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR(23-2 9 SEPTEMBER 1969) 
SESSION 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna 
on Tuesday, 23 September 1969, at 3.10 p.m. 
Temporary President: Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) 
President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 
Item of theprovisional 
agenda* 
123(a)
4567CONTENTS 
Opening of the session 
Election of the President 
Appointment of the Credentials Committee 
Election of the Vice-Presidents 
Appointment of the General Committee 
Applications for membership of the Agency 
Statement by the Director GeneralStatement by the representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations 
Paragraphs 
1— 4 
5—12 
13—14 
15—19 
20—23 
24—28 
29—48 
49—36 
GC(XIII)/400. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/114/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.127 

OPENING OF THE SESSION

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the 
thirteenth regular session of the General Conference 
open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited the Conference to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
the delegates from Member States, the observers 
from States which were not yet Members of the 
Agency and the representatives of the United Nations 
and other intergovernmental organizations and 
of non-governmental organizations who had come to 
take part in the work of the session. The Conference 
was also honoured by the presence of the Vice-
Chancellor of the Republic of Austria and the State 
Secretary in the Federal Chancellery, as well as 
senior officials of the Federal Government and of 
the City of Vienna. He thanked them for the interest 
they were taking in the Agency's work and for 
attending die meeting in spite of the heavy demands 
on their time. 
4. On his country's and his own personal behalf, 
he thanked the General Conference once more for 
the confidence it had shnown in him at die last 
session; he felt sure it would show the same confidence 
in his successor, to whom he wished every 
success in the fulfilment of the tasks before him. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President. 
6. M. HIRSCH (France) nominated Mr. Torki, 
the delegate of Tunisia, who was a specialist in 
nuclear energy. For many years Mr. Torki had been 
closely associated with the work of the Agency and 
had held a post in the Secretariat's Division of Research 
and Laboratories; subsequently, Mr. Torki 
had represented his country on the Board of Governors 
and had also served as one of its Vice-
Chairmen. In 1962, Mr. Torki had been appointed 
General Commissioner for Atomic Energy in Tunisia 
and, later, Director of the Tunisian Institute of 
Atomic Physics. 
7. M. HULUBEI (Romania) and Mr. ETEMAD 
(Iran) supported die nomination. 
8. Mr. Torki {Tunisia) was elected President of the 
General Conference for its thirteenth regular session by 
acclamation. 
Mr. Torki ( Tunisia) took the Chair. 

9. The PRESIDENT thanked the General Conference 
for die honour it had done his country in 
electing him President. He regarded his election 
as recognition of the efforts made by Tunisia in 
regard to the peaceful uses of atomic energy and 
of die ceaseless endeavours of President Bourguiba 
to consolidate peace throughout the world. 
10. Thanks to its activities in promoting nuclear 
sciences and techniques, the Agency continued to 
play a very important part in international cooperation 
and in bringing together all nations, whatever 
their level of development. The Agency's 
programme included a great many concrete tasks 
covering nearly all aspects of the nuclear sciences 
but, nevertheless, the Agency now seemed to be 
at a crossroads. The orientation of its future activities 
would certainly be affected by the deliberations 
on several of die items on the Conference agenda. 
For that reason the session that had just begun 
assumed special importance. 
11. However, the full effects of die Agency's activities 
would become apparent only in the more distant 
future, and only then would it have a clearer picture 
of the course it should follow. He hoped that human 
intelligence, which had been able to extract 
enormous energy from the smallest system known 
in the universe and to range over cosmic distances 
in a way that had never been conceived of in the 
past, would find the necessary moral strength to 
bring the nations still closer together and thereby 
to consolidate peace and security throughout the 
world. 
12. That activity should be carried out not only 
on the scientific plane, but also on the plane of 
human relations. For several years, various countries 
had been taking such steps on a regional scale. 
By way of an example, he would refer to the treaty, 
known as the Tlatelolco Treaty, for the prohibition 
of nuclear weapons in Latin America. Mexico to 
whose delegate he expressed the Conference's thanks 
for having served as Temporary President, had made 
a significant contribution to the progress he had 
in mind by the support its Government had given 
to the Treaty. That Government had already concluded 
an agreement with the Agency under tlie 
Treaty1), giving it the important function of applying 
safeguards. The majority of the Latin American 
States had already ratified the Treaty, and a regional 
agency for supervising its application had just been 
established. He hoped that, with the co-operation 
of all the delegates, the General Conference would 
carry out its tasks in such a way as to enable the 
Agency to make a greater contribution to efforts 
of a similar character to eliminate the danger which 
nuclear weapons represented for humanity. 
fj Reproduced iri' document INFCIRC/118.— 
2 — 


APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALSCOMMITTEE

13. The PRESIDENT proposed, in accordance with 
Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, that a Credentials 
Committee should be appointed consisting of the 
following nine Members: Jordan, Peru, Philippines, 
Poland, Spain, Thailand, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, the United States of America and 
Uruguay. 
14. The proposal was adopted. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

15. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 
34 of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference was 
required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the election 
of the Chairmen of the two Main Committees. He 
therefore intended to suspend the plenary meeting 
for a short time to enable the two Committees to 
elect their Chairmen. 
The meeting was suspended at 3.35p.m. and resumed 
at 3.50 p.m. 

16. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President of the Conference. 
17. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) nominated the 
delegates of the following Members: Australia, Bulgaria, 
Chile, France, Italy, Japan, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and the United States of America. 
18. Mr. OBUA-OTOA (Uganda) seconded the 
nominations. 
19. The delegates nominated were declared elected to the 
eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL 

COMMITTEE 

20. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the General 
Conference was required to elect four additional 
members to the General Committee. He invited 
nominations. 
21. Mr. MALU( Democratic Republic of the Congo) 
nominated the delegates of Canada, Hungary, Nigeria 
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland. 
22. Mr. YEO CHEE HEE (Singapore) seconded 
the nominations. 
23. The delegates of the Members nominated were 
declared elected to the General Committee, which was thus 
duly appointed in compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 
of the Rules of Procedure. 
GC(XIII)/OR.127 

 APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY (GC(XIII)/413) 

24. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
consider the recommendation of the Board of Governors 
concerning the application for membership of 
the Agency made by Ireland in document GC(XIII)/ 
413 and the relevant draft resolution in that document. 
25. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) supported 
the application made by Ireland, which was already 
a member of other organizations in the United 
Nations family. 
26. The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 
27. The PRESIDENT stated that Ireland would 
become a Member of die Agency as soon as its 
instrument of acceptance of the Statute had been 
deposited with the United States Government in 
accordance with Article XXI.C of the Statute. 
28. Mr. HOLMES (Ireland) expressed his Government's 
gratitude and stated that Ireland undertook 
to observe the objectives of the Agency as defined 
in Article II of the Statute. In anticipation of its 
participation in the Agency's work, it was taking 
certain steps relating to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy and was at present setting up a Nuclear 
Energy Board. It was also providing for die training 
of personnel who would be responsible for operating 
a nuclear power station when the time came. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

29. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that the 
past year might well be described in the history 
of the Agency as the "Year of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States", as it had enabled countries not possessing 
nuclear weapons to assess the consequences that 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT) would certainly have on their position 
and their membership of the Agency. That reawakened 
interest indicated an increased desire on 
the part of those countries to participate in die work 
of the Agency, as a result of which there might be 
an expansion of the operational programme parallel 
to the expansion of the safeguards system. In that 
connection technical assistance and the funds for 
its provision were of special interest to non-nuclearweapon 
States and had, moreover, been dioroughly 
examined by the group of Experts appointed by 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations to review 
"all possible contributions of nuclear technology 
to the economic and scientific advancement of the 
developing countries"2). In its report, the group of 
Experts had invited Member States to increase their 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund and 

2) General Assembly Resolution 2456A (XXIII), para.8. 

-3



GC(XIII)/OR.127 

had drawn attention to the fact that projects of a 
pilot plant and pre-investment type would have to 
be financed under UNDP; it had suggested that 
recipient States, which themselves fixed the orders 
of priority, should be invited to accord higher priority 
to nuclear power projects which frequently required 
financing beyond the scope of Agency or 
UNDP funds3). 

30. Several of the resolutions adopted by the Conference 
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States (CNNWS )4) 
had been reviewed by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, which had not merely confined itself 
to noting the Agency's annual report, as was the 
usual practice, but had expressly referred to two 
resolutions adopted by the General Conference in 
1968, the one on the composition of the Board of 
Governors and the other on procedures in connection 
with the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions^). 
We wished to refer in particular to the review of 
Article VI of the Statute, the Agency's responsibility 
to provide services in connection with nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes, and the fund of 
special fissionable materials; it was expected that 
those matters would be considered by the appropriate 
committees. 
31. There was general agreement as to the desirability 
of a modest expansion in the size of the Board 
to meet the aspirations of non-nuclear-weapon States, 
but the manner in which such an expansion might 
be achieved was not so easy of solution. However, 
progress so far made should enable an early solution 
of the problem to be reached. 
3 2. Peaceful nuclear explosions had been discussed 
not only in the General Assembly and the Agency 
but also at the highest technical level between the 
Soviet Union and the United States. It was perhaps 
at that level that the aspirations of the non-nuclearweapon 
States could best be met. For his part, 
he shared the expectation of many Member States 
that nuclear explosions would in future be used with 
advantage in both developed and developing countries 
for large-scale engineering projects such as the 
excavation of canals and building of tunnels, or 
recovery of gas, oil and minerals from low-grade or 
otherwise inaccessible deposits. There would then 
be no obstacle to the establishment, within the 
framework of the Agency, of an international service 
for nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes under 
appropriate international control. In the meantime, 
the Agency's contribution would probably be limited 
to an information service pending clarification of the 
technical and financial aspects of nuclear explosions. 
3) See United Nations document A/7568, paras 260 and 
261. 
4) Reproduced in United Nations document A/7277 and 
Corrigenda 1 and 2. 
5) GC(XII)/RES/241 and GC(XII)/RES/245 respectively. 

33. In connection with the item of the provisional 
agenda relating to the establishment of a fund of 
special fissionable materials he observed that it had 
perhaps not been sufficiendy realized that quantities 
exceeding 5000 kilograms of fissionable materials 
including uranium-235 had been made available to 
the Agency almost since its inception, but had been 
utilized only to a very limited extent6). Bearing in 
mind CNNWS Resolution H, part III, he had, however, 
invited the major suppliers to increase supplies 
of fissionable materials to the Agency. The United 
States had stated that it was willing to supply materials 
through the Agency on the same conditions 
as under bilateral agreements. Member States could 
then obtain a supply of fissionable materials for 
up to 30 years, a supply of enriched uranium for 
up to five years in advance of actual needs, and 
make toll-enrichment arrangements. France had also 
indicated its willingness to consider requests for 
fissionable materials in excess of presendy available 
supplies and there was reason to believe that two 
other major suppliers, namely the Soviet Union and 
the United Kingdom, would respond favourably to 
the Agency's request. 
34. The financing of nuclear power plants from 
international sources was a problem that continued 
to face developing countries. The results of efforts 
during the past year had not been at all encouraging, 
as was clearly evidenced by the reply of the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
to die request by the Secretary-General of die United 
Nations for a report on die action taken by United 
Nations organizations to implement the recommendations 
of CNNWS. In reply to a similar request 
the Agency had communicated the result of the 
relevant discussions wifhin the Secretariat and die 
Board to the Secretary-General for submission to the 
General Assembly. 
35- The Agency had extended its full co-operation 
to the Secretary-General in the preparation of die 
report to the General Assembly on the contributions 
of nuclear technology to the economic and scientific 
advancement of developing countries. On the invitation 
of die Agency the group of experts appointed 
by die Secretary-General held its first meeting 
in March 1969 at the Agency's Headquarters. 

36. Among odier United Nations activities which 
could not fail to have a bearing on the Agency's 
work, he referred to the decision taken by the General 
Assembly last year to organize in 1971 a fourth 
international conference on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy7). Responsibility for drawing up die 
programme would rest with the Agency, as in the 
case of the third conference. The arrangements for 
the conference and particularly the choice of scientific 
6) See document GC(XIII)/409, para.18. 
7) General Assembly Resolution 2406(XXIII). 


topics to be discussed had been reviewed in three 
meetings of the United Nations Scientific Advisory 
Committee, at which the Agency had been invited 
to be present. The Committee had also discussed 
the conference on problems of the human environment 
to be held in 1972. That was a subject of 
particular interest to the Agency in so far as it 
related to contamination by radioactive materials. 
It was perhaps regrettable, in that connection, that 
undue prominence had been given to irradiation and 
radioactive contamination in the Secretary-General's 
report to the General Assembly. It might also be 
of interest to recall that in its report for 1966 the 
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the 
Effects of Atomic Radiation had stated that lowactivity 
wastes released by facilities using nuclear 
technology for various purposes contributed only a 
negligible fraction of the doses received by human 
populations and that accidents at nuclear establishments 
had only been of local significance. From the 
inception of the use of atomic energy no other potential 
source of environmental contamination had been 
so carefully controlled or subjected to such rigid 
legislation. Indeed nuclear energy, if used in substitution 
for other sources of power, could even 
limit pollution. On the other hand, atmospheric 
contamination through the uncontrolled use of solid 
and liquid fuels was an extremely serious problem, 
whose solution would be facilitated, however, by 
the further development of atomic energy and 
especially of nuclear fusion. 

37. The past year had been one of pessimism in 
some parts of the world, caused by the delay in the 
construction of nuclear plants, largely as a result 
of the considerable increase in orders for such plants 
over the past three years. New commitments had 
been made in that direction, particularly in Western 
Europe and Asia. Unfortunately, however, the number 
of nuclear power stations under construction in 
developing countries was less than 2% of the total, 
thus contributing to what would become an energy 
gap in the future. The problem continued to be 
that of the economic size of reactors and the Agency 
was carrying out an investigation on the technical 
and cost aspects of small- and medium-power reactors. 
The concept of dual-purpose reactors providing 
desalted water cheaply enough for agricultural uses 
as well as power for energy-intensive industries had 
been discussed at a Symposium on Nuclear Desalination 
which had been organized by the Agency in 
November 1968. The Agency was continuing to 
co-operate with the United States in the study of the 
feasibility of agro-industrial complexes in countries 
in die Middle East. It had to be recognized that 
the enthusiasm for nuclear desalting had been tempered 
by realistic considerations of cost and a great 
deal had yet to be done before nuclear desalting 
could become a reality. In that connection it would 
be interesting to know the results obtained from 
GC(XIII)/OR.127 

the first large-scale nuclear desalting plant in the 
Soviet Union. 

38. At the twelfth session of the General Conference 
great enthusiasm had been shown in connection 
with the conclusion of NPT, which had at 
that time been signed by 81 States. Unfortunately, 
the pace of signature and ratification had since 
slowed down, and so far only a further 10 Member 
States had signed the Treaty. It had been ratified 
by only 20 States, 16 of them Members of the Agency. 
The date of entry into force of NPT had a direct 
bearing on the staffing of the Department of Safeguards 
and Inspection, and careful judgement would 
have to be exercised because of the Agency's 
advanced budget planning. 
39- He had stated at the twelfth session of the 
Conference that a period of transition of a year or 
so would be required before the Agency could be 
called upon to perform control functions under 
NPT 8). The Agency's budget for 1970 was not 
geared to the requirements of NPT but the Secretariat 
had already made an effort to examine the 
legal and technical implications, together with the 
financial obligations, which die new functions of the 
Agency within the framework of NPT might involve. 
The adaptation of the Agency's safeguards system to 
NPT could be facilitated by a thorough exchange 
of views between Member States, for example in a 
committee of the whole. In that connection he 
wished to pay tribute to the group of consultants, 
who had prepared a very valuable report on criteria 
for safeguards procedures, and to the Governments 
of Canada, Denmark, Hungary, the Soviet Union, 
the United Kingdom and the United States for 
generously providing the services of the consultants. 

40. He wished to express his gratitude to Canada 
and the United States for their offer to keep the 
Agency continuously informed of the results of their 
joint project on safeguards research and development. 
The Board had approved a total of 40 safeguards 
agreements with 30 Member States and 64 inspections 
had been carried out in 11 Member States. 
41. The past year had witnessed a major event 
in the field of disarmament, the entry into force, 
for 14 States, of the Treaty for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Tlatelolco Treaty). 
The Agency had participated in the recent conference 
convened to set up a regional agency under 
the Treaty and he expected close collaboration between 
the two agencies in the matter of the application 
of safeguards under it. As the President had 
mentioned^), Mexico had been the first country to 
conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency 
8) See document GC(XII)/OR. 119, para.32. 
9) See para. 12 above. 

-5



GC(XIII)/OR.127 

covering all its nuclear activities, and it was to be 
hoped that similar agreements with other countries 
would follow. 

42. The Conference was called upon to examine 
the Agency's programme for 1969-70 and the budget 
for 1970, which again showed only a very modest 
increase. An effort had been made to complete 
existing programmes and to introduce new programmes 
having an immediate economic interest, 
particularly to developing countries. In its laboratory 
work the Agency was emphasizing support for 
its scientific programmes in medicine, agriculture, 
hydrology etc. and, to a limited extent, studies in 
connection with safeguards. It was still his opinion 
that plutonium analysis should be contracted out to 
national laboratories, analytical control being carried 
out, however, at Seibersdorf. Any extension of 
those activities would require a substantial increase 
in laboratory space and staff. The agreement with 
the Principality of Monaco concerning the Laboratory 
of Marine Radioactivity had been extended. The 
programme of that laboratory had been reorientated 
to meet problems arising from radioactive waste 
disposal. In respect of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics a co-operation agreement with 
UNESCO had been concluded10); the future programme 
of the Centre would shordy be considered 
by a group of eminent scientists. 
43. Many other activities of the Agency were worthy 
of mention. The International Nuclear Information 
System would start its work in 1970, and an 
agreement had been concluded with the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) relating 
to the use of its thesaurus of key-words by the 
Agency. In July, on the occasion of the occasion of 
the Symposium on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy in Africa, held at Kinshasa, the Agency had 
given assistance to the Organization of African Unity. 
44. The Agency's Scientific Advisory Committee 
had been re-appointed for a further three years. 
Serious consideration had been given to enlarging 
it, and it had been generally agreed that it would 
be desirable to change its composition from time to 
time in order to reflect the changing importance 
of the various scientific disciplines represented on it. 
45. Gratitude was due to the Austrian Government 
which had informed him that, pending the 
construction of the new permanent headquarters and 
taking into account the impact of NPT on the Agency's 
activities, it would make available additional 
office space without charge. In addition, the Foreign 
Minister had decided that the cost of leasing space 
in the Hofburg would be reduced to a point which 
could be regarded as nominal. 
10) Subsequently reproduced in document INFCIRC/32. 

46. A trend had developed in the international 
organizations which, unless it were kept under control, 
might limit the amount of effective work which 
they could achieve. He was referring to the process 
of self-examination to which United Nations organizations 
were perpetually subjected. Bodies had 
been set up to keep under review the various aspects 
of those organizations. During the last six years, 
the activities, programmes and structure of the 
Agency had been subjected to three searching reviews. 
He did not wish to question the value of 
that self-examination, but it would be unfortunate 
if its frequent repetition were to be at the expense 
of programme operations. The conclusions drawn 
from the investigations concerned would of course 
be taken into consideration to the maximum extent 
in the administration and future programmes of 
the Agency. 
47. He welcomed the interest shown in the Agency 
by the General Assembly in its discussions on 
CNNWS. The Agency recognized its responsibilities 
to those States and indeed to all its Member States. 
It was looking forward to be time when it would 
be required to discharge its responsibilities under 
NPT. Article IV of NPT was of particular importance 
by reason of the pledge by the technically advanced 
countries to help their co-signatories and 
assist developing countries to further the development 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
48. It was the responsibility of the General Conference 
and the "Pn _ 1 <o discuss the Agency's programme 
and struc:'..;e, bearing in mind the tasks 
which it was intended to entrust to it. NPT and 
CNNWS confronted the Agency with a new challenge; 
its response to that challenge would do much 
to determine its future effectiveness as an organization 
for promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS 

49. Mr. WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI (Representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations) 
said that the Secretary-General had asked him to 
convey his best wishes for the success of the General 
Conference. 
50. The report on the Agency's activities submitted 
by the Board of Governors11) showed the importance 
of the work which had been performed under the 
Agency's auspices since the twelfth session. Many 
aspects of that work were of interest to the United 
Nations and the specialized agencies. The United 
Nations and the Agency were at present preparing 
11) GC(XIII)/404. 

-6



GC(XIII)/OR.127 

the fourth international conference on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. The Agency would certainly 
play the same important part on that occasion as 
it did in the 1964 conference. 

51. He stressed the Agency's part in the preparatory 
work for NPT. The functions entrusted to the 
Agency by the Treaty could have important political 
repercussions in the future. In the opinion of the 
Secretary-General, the Agency's activities under the 
Treaty would increase the effectiveness of the Agency 
and the United Nations in the sphere of disarmament. 
52. The relationship existing between the United 
Nations and the Agency had recently been illustrated 
in connection with die preparation of a number of 
reports requested by the General Assembly. The 
Director General of the Agency had assisted the 
Secretary-General by making every possible contribution 
to the preparation of the report referred to in 
Resolution 2456 C (XXIII) of the General Assembly, 
relating to the establishment within the Agency of 
an international service for nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes. The Secretary-General had received 
views on diat subject from 40 Governments 
and he had also consulted various specialized agencies. 
In Resolution 2456 A (XXIII), the General 
Assembly had requested the Secretary-General to 
appoint a group of experts to prepare a report 
on the applications of nuclear technology to the 
economic and scientific advancement of developing 
countries. Those experts, selected with the Agency's 
assistance, had met in Vienna and again in New 
York, and had derived considerable advantage from 
the Agency's experience and knowledge. In the 
same resolution, the General Assembly had requested 
the Secretary-General to submit a report on die 
implementation of die decisions and resolutions 
adopted by CNNWS. The Agency had oudined the 
action it had taken in that respect in a detailed 
progress report. The Secretary-General had presented 
his report to the General Assembly and the Agency's 
contribution to it was of considerable importance. 
The Agency's support would be of great value for 
The meeting 

the further work of the General Assembly in that 
field. 

53. The Second Development Decade would also 
call for co-operation between the two organizations. 
The Decade would serve as framework for a great 
many different activities which would require to be 
synchronized. The organizations in the United Nations 
family had helped to discover natural resources, 
to train specialists, to increase productivity, to develop 
educational and research institutions and to 
stimulate investments. The Second Decade would, 
in a sense, constitute a strategy aimed at co-ordinating 
all those efforts witli a view to ensuring maximum 
effectiveness. 
54. The Agency would be able to play an important 
part during the Decade since some of die techniques 
it advocated were of immediate interest to 
numerous developing countries. That was particularly 
true in regard to the use of radioisotopes in medicine, 
agriculture and also industry. Various more 
complex and more cosdy processes might not be 
of immediate practical importance for some of the 
developing countries, but even so one should try 
to avoid any delays in transferring those techniques 
so that the countries concerned would be able to 
employ them as soon as they were in a position to 
benefit from them. 
55. None of the efforts to bring the benefits of 
technological discoveries to all countries would get 
beyond the stage of good intentions unless Governments 
and peoples succeeded in establishing the 
political will to make of the United Nations system 
an active and even revolutionary instrument capable 
of building a new international order, and not an 
instrument for the defence of selfish national 
interests. 
56. It was to be hoped that the results of the 
work of the General Conference would mark a further 
step forward on the road to peace and stability 
in the international community. 
at 4.50 p.m. 

-7



GC(XIII)/OR.128 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

21 January 1970 
General Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(23-29 SEPTEMBER 1969) 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 24 September 1969, at 10.35 a.m. 
President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 
CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda* 
89 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items for initial discussion 
General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1968-69 
Paragraphs 
1— 3 
4—120 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 
South Africa 
Ceylon 
Finland 
Belgium 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Jamaica 
5— 23 
24— 46 
47— 
61— 
74-
60 
73 
93 
94—111 
112—120 
GC(XIII)/418. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/ll4/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.128 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND 
ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL 
DISCUSSION (GC(XIII)/417) 

1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
report by the General Committee in document 
(GC(XIII)/417) on its consideration of the provisional 
agenda for the session1). 
2. In the absence of any comments, he proposed 
that the Conference approve the agenda as set forth 
in that document and also accept the Committee's 
recommendations regarding the allocation of items 
for initial discussion. 
3. It was so decided. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1968-69 
(GC(XIII)/404,416) 

4. The PRESIDENT drew attention to a revised 
statement on the status of financial contributions 
to the Agency (GC(XIII)/416), which was up to 
date as of 22 September and accordingly superseded 
that contained in Annex E to the Board's report 
(GC( XIII )/404). He then invited delegates to participate 
in the general debate. 
5. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) 
expressed deep gratification that Dr. Eklund had 
agreed to serve as Director General for another 
term. 
6. He wished to read the following message 
to the Conference from the President of the United 
States: 
"I am happy to take this opportunity to greet 
the delegates to the Thirteenth General Conference 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. This 
Agency is deeply involved in one of the most important 
areas of international co-operation in which 
we participate, with great and increasing responsibilities 
and opportunities in ensuring that the benefits 
of the peaceful atom are widely shared, under proper 
safeguards against diversion to military uses. 

"The death earlier this year of President 
Dwight D. Eisenhower was a loss not only to me, 
personally, and to my nation but to all those in 
many lands who devote their lives and careers to 
advancing the peaceful uses of atomic energy. I 
am proud that the Atoms-for-Peace programme and 
the establishment of this great international agency 
was a proposal of President Eisenhower in his 
historic message before the United Nations General 
Assembly in December 1953. The development of 
this Agency and of the peaceful uses of atomic 

1) GC(XIII)/400. 

—

energy during the intervening years has been deeply 
impressive. 

"I should like to reaffirm my country's dedication 
to continued support of the Agency and 
of the principles of its Statute. I should also like 
to renew our pledge to support the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty, which constitutes yet another step in furthering 
our common goal of harnessing the atom for peaceful 
uses. 

"I send you my congratulations for the past 
accomplishments of this Conference and this Agency, 
and the best wishes of the people of the United 
States for your future endeavours." 

7. Much had been accomplished in the common 
effort to harness the atom to serve man in many 
important and unique peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. Co-operation, both bilaterally and through 
the Agency, had been — and would continue to 
be — an essential condition for progress in that 
direction and a way of enabling all countries, regardless 
of their stage of development, to share in the 
benefits of the peaceful atom. 
8. The United States had pioneered in developing 
and pursuing an unparalleled programme of cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
over the last 15 years. Its international programme 
had stressed the activities specified in the Statute 
and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) — the exchange of scientific and 
technical information, materials and equipment. Most 
important of all, perhaps, was the policy of supplying 
uranium and uranium-enriching services to other 
countries under attractive terms to satisfy their longterm 
needs for nuclear fuel. 
9. Reviewing briefly the principal milestones in 
his Government's programme of bilateral and multilateral 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy he recalled that the United States had undertaken 
a major effort to share existing and potential 
benefits of the peaceful atom. One of the principal 
steps taken had been to bring about the creation 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
10. The United States had been a vigorous 
supporter of the Agency since its inception. Its 
direct financial support of the Regular and Operational 
Budgets had thus far totalled about 
$27.5 million. That amount had been supplemented 
by approximately $5 million in the form of costfree 
fellowships, services of experts, equipment grants, 
and support for training courses. In addition, 
$500 000 worth of special nuclear material had thus 
far been provided as gifts for use in Agency-approved 
projects. 

2



GC(XIII)/OR.128 

11. Over 700 persons from 5 5 countries had been 
trained in the United States under the Agency's 
fellowship programme. An additional 5400 individuals 
from 69 countries had received training there 
under other arrangements, while 26 research reactor 
grants averaging about $350 000 each had been 
made. Co-operation was increasing between several 
of the nuclear centres established around such research 
reactors. For example, a number of centres 
in South East Asia were actively considering various 
regional projects of interest to the countries concerned. 
It was to be hoped that those efforts would 
encourage similar co-operation elsewhere. 
12. The willingness of the United States to share 
its scientific and technical information with other 
countries was well known. For nearly 15 years 
virtually all research conducted or financed by the 
United States Atomic Energy Commission in the 
civil uses of nuclear energy had been unclassified 
and the results published and made widely available. 
The United States had strongly supported the 
establishment of the Agency's International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), believing that the project 
would bring about a substantial increase in the exchange 
of nuclear scientific and technical information 
among the Member States. 
13. As to the future, there was a proposal before 
Congress which, if approved, would enable the United 
States to increase above the level of previous years 
its cash contribution towards meeting the $2 million 
target for the General Fund under the Operational 
Budget. In addition, his Government would continue, 
to the best of its ability, making contributions in 
kind, in the form of cost-free experts, services, 
training opportunities at United States institutions 
and various items of equipment. 
14. The United States supported the regular programme 
and Regular Budget which had been recommended 
by the Board of Governors for 1970, 
and hoped other Member States would do likewise. 
It also urged all Members to support the Operational 
Budget to the fullest extent possible. 
15. The United States would continue supplying 
special nuclear materials to other countries through 
the Agency for fuelling reactors or for research purposes, 
on the same attractive terms and conditions 
as were applicable to materials supplied on a bilateral 
basis for similar purposes. For the eleventh consecutive 
year it was making available, as a gift, up 
to $50 000 worth of special nuclear material for use 
in Agency projects in research and medical therapy. 
16. The United States Government fully endorsed 
the Board's report on the Agency's role in connection 
with nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes2\ 
2) GC(XHI)/410. 

-3-

That report presented a very good analysis of what 
the Agency could do and it reinforced the conviction 
that the Agency was the most appropriate organization 
to foster international co-operation in such activities 
and to assume the responsibilities and functions 
foreseen for an international organization under 
Article V of NPT. 

17. The report noted that the technology of nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes was at an early 
stage of development and that progress was likely 
to be made gradually. His delegation agreed with 
the Board's view that the organization of the Agency 
should be kept under review and adapted as 
necessary to enable it to meet die expected increase 
in its responsibilities in that field. The United States 
was contributing to the development of the Agency's 
competence for carrying out that task by providing 
it widi extensive information on the experimental 
"Plowshare" programme and by making experts 
available to assist the Agency as necessary. The 
United States had already submitted a summary 
report on the current status of the technology of 
the peaceful applications of nuclear explosions, which 
the Director General had circulated to all Member 
States. It had provided an expert to assist in preparing 
an agenda and programme for the first panel 
meeting on the subject planned by the Agency. 
In addition, it had recently made available a scientist 
from its "Plowshare" programme to serve on the 
staff of the Agency. He wished to reiterate his 
Government's intention, once it was technically and 
economically feasible, to make available peaceful 
nuclear explosion services, pursuant to Article V 
of NPT, under attractive conditions which it hoped 
would be of interest to other countries. Charges 
would be as low as possible and would not include 
the extensive costs of research and development 
involved. 
18. Another important role for the Agency under 
NPT related to safeguards. He wished to reaffirm 
the pledges made on behalf of his Government 
at the preceding session of the General Conference 
that it would do everything in its power to support 
the Agency's activities in that important area^l United 
States research and development programmes for 
the improvement of safeguards technology were continuing 
and new instruments were being devised 
for non-destructive assay measurements on a wide 
variety of fissionable materials. Those instruments, 
which would be mounted in trailers to facilitate 
mobility, were to be on display during a symposium 
on safeguards which was to be held at Los Alamos 
Scientific Laboratory on 27-30 October 1969 and 
to which the Agency had been invited to send representatives. 
The safeguards training courses at 
Argonne National Laboratory, to which the Agency 
3) GC(XII)/OR.120, paras 21 and 22. 


GC(XIII)/OR.128 

and individual countries had sent safeguards 
personnel, were being continued. 

19. Over the past year, a number of important 
studies and reviews bearing directly on the functions 
and future of the Agency had been initiated. Largely 
through the stimulus ofNPT, the non-nuclear-weapon 
States had stressed their desire to be assured that 
they would have continued access to the benefits 
of the peaceful atom. At the request of the General 
Conference, the Board had been carrying out a comprehensive 
review of its own composition to determine 
whether any changes were necessary. There was an 
understandable desire on the part of some States 
to rectify those anomalies that existed in the composition 
of the Board and to make it more 
representative. While his delegation could sympathize 
with that desire, it believed that the complexity 
of the problem must be realistically recognized and 
appreciated. There was already broad agreement that 
some modest expansion of the Board was warranted. 
He hoped that in the coming year it would 
be possible to arrive at an amendment to the Statute 
that would be sufficiently attractive to command 
the necessary two-thirds majority. The United States 
would give the fullest support to such efforts. 
20. A problem that had to be confronted in 
connection with the increasing use of modern 
technology in present-day societies was the possible 
effects of such technology on the environment. Today, 
as nuclear power and other beneficial uses of nuclear 
energy were beginning to demonstrate their 
tremendous promise, there was in some parts of 
the world a renewed public questioning of the effects 
of those activities. That questioning stemmed, in 
part, from a widespread concern that many of man's 
activities were having injurious effects of sometimes 
unknown magnitude on his own environment. The 
United States delegation was confident that a presentation 
of all the farts would support the 
conclusion that nuclear energy, when experdy applied, 
would enhance efforts to preserve for future generations 
the beneficial features of the existing environment. 
21. To some extent there had been a failure to 
communicate to the disturbed public well-known 
facts which would have helped reassure it. His 
delegation believed that the Agency could make 
a major contribution in improving public understanding 
of the question. He urged the Director 
General and the Secretariat to assign a high priority 
to the matter, since failure to solve the problem 
might postpone for many years the enjoyment of 
the benefits of nuclear energy which people everywhere 
had a right to expect. 
22. As one possibility the Agency could consider 
including in its programme of conferences and 
symposia a meeting on the environmental aspects 
of nuclear power reactors. The United States would 
be willing to serve as host for such a meeting. The 
Agency should participate fully in the preparatory 
work for the United Nations Conference on the 
Human Environment which was being planned for 
1972. 

23. In conclusion, he wished to reiterate his 
country's conviction that the Agency and its Member 
States could look forward to an increasingly meaningful 
future as far as the peaceful applications of 
nuclear science and energy were concerned. The 
United States would continue to give its full support 
to international co-operation in those fields. Success 
in attracting support for soundly developed nuclear 
projects would depend in large part on the priority 
assigned to such projects by individual countries 
in their over-all development plans. 
24. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) said that at the 
outset he wished to express his Government's gratification 
at the re-appointment of Dr. Eklund as 
Director General for a further four years. During 
the latter's years of office the South African delegation 
had been particularly impressed by his approach 
in deliberately eschewing the somewhat flamboyant 
expansionism indulged in by certain other international 
agencies and concentrating on a policy of 
planned development in keeping with the evolution 
of peaceful nuclear applications on an international 
basis. It looked forward with confidence to a continued 
period of stable growth and consolidation 
of the Agency and its activities under his proven 
guidance. 
25. Each year the Conference met with the object 
of reviewing the Agency's progress and achievements 
during the preceding twelve months, of criticizing 
constructively the steps taken by the Board and 
the Secretariat in implementation of the duties 
assigned to them at its preceding session and of 
assessing whether the direction in which the Agency 
was moving was in accordance with the needs of 
Member States and with the spirit of the Statute. 
26. It was perhaps the fulfilment of the last of 
the above-mentioned obligations that constituted the 
Conference's major task, and it must serve to guide 
and motivate the Conference to take its decisions 
in a logical and impartial fashion with a view to 
achieving both short-term and long-term objectives. 
27. Thoughtsat last year's session had undoubtedly 
been largely dominated by the Conference of NonNuclear-
Weapon States4) and NPT and their implications 
for the Agency. Enthusiasm had been 
running high in the belief that not only was the 
possibility of nuclear conflict no longer as menacing 
as it had been, but also that the universal availability 
4) Held at Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 


GC(XIII)/OR.128 

of all the potential benefits of the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy was within sight. In the face 
of that optimism there had been lone voices 
cautioning that there was undoubtedly a tendency 
to under-estimate the time scale for the reconciliation 
of national aims with international objectives and 
for the translation of scientific plans and possibilities 
into workable realities. All had had a year in which 
to give sober and objective consideration to the 
wide and far-reaching implications arising from those 
deliberations, and his delegation believed that the 
general magnitude of the detailed problems to be 
solved — problems which by their nature must be 
fully defined and investigated by all concerned before 
true progress towards the common goal could be 
achieved — was now becoming apparent. 

28. With that in mind, his delegation welcomed 
the Secretariat's deliberate approach towards the 
administration of safeguards under NPT, its appreciation 
of the burden which the Agency would be 
called upon to bear when the Treaty came into force 
and its willingness to promote and encourage research 
into the widest possible use of instruments for the 
application of safeguards. Only by the fullest use 
of the most modern scientific techniques could that 
aspect of the Agency's work be prevented from 
growing into a mammoth sub-organization with a 
staff so enormous that it would make it impracticable 
effectively to limit interference in national development. 
Only in that way too could the spectre of 
industrial espionage, which was a strong inhibiting 
factor, be at least partially laid. 
29. South Africa had from the outset played an 
active role in the evolution of the Agency's 
safeguards system. From the outset, too, it had 
been among the few which, while co-operating fully 
and constructively in the consultations, had considered 
it necessary and desirable to develop its 
own ideas on the priorities to be established in the 
formulation of a safeguards system rather than accept 
as obiter dicta the pronouncements and views of 
the nuclear Powers. It believed that by following 
that line, which was always based, it should be 
emphasized, on the desire to be constructive, not 
obstructive, it had made a useful contribution to 
international thinking on several facets of the safeguards 
problem. Inter alia, it had drawn attention 
to the legitimate concern felt about certain aspects 
of the system by countries with a considerable 
capacity for nuclear development for peaceful purposes 
but which had no desire or intention to become 
so-called nuclear Powers. 
30. His delegation believed that that process of 
consultation and exchange of views must continue, 
and in a more intensified form, for various reasons. 
The first and the most obvious was the advent 
of NPT, in connection with which he only wished 
to emphasize that the present safeguards system 
was based on the voluntary submission of selected 
materials and facilities to Agency safeguards, whereas 
NPT deprived the non-nuclear Powers of any options 
and made inspection by the Agency mandatory. 
In other words, the present system had not been 
planned with something like NPT in mind. But 
quite apart from NPT there had been considerable 
evolution in international ideas and thinking on 
safeguards procedures since the Agency had produced 
its first safeguards document. It had been inherent 
in the Agency's approach to safeguards from the very 
beginning that the Agency should from time to time 
review its procedures in the light of scientific and 
technological development as well as of changing 
international circumstances. He wondered if the 
time had not arrived for such a review to be set 
in train and for appropriate procedures to be worked 
out whereby all States with an active interest in 
such matters would be invited to participate in the 
same way as, for example, all States had been invited 
to participate in the review of Article VI of the 
Statute. Obviously that would be no easy task, 
as was illustrated by the difficulties experienced by 
the Secretariat in endeavouring to frame what had 
become known unofficially as the Draft Model Agreement. 
The very divergences of opinion on that 
first draft showed that was only one subject with 
regard to which a vast amount of endeavour must 
be expended before common agreement on that 
particular field of activity could be reached. 

31. Furthermore, it wasnot sufficient for the pattern 
to be set by those who were at present vitally 
affected by such conditions as might be decided. 
Today it was the developed States whose interests 
were immediately concerned; tomorrow, today's 
developing countries would be numbered amongst 
the developed, and it was essential that the world 
picture of the future be taken into account when 
framing conditions to suit States party to NPT which 
today had perhaps scant conception of nuclear 
accounting. 
32. Linked with NPT was the question of peaceful 
nuclear explosions. South Africa had adhered firmly 
to its contention that the Agency was unquestionably 
the appropriate body to perform the essential tasks 
concerned with the control and promotion of peaceful 
nuclear explosions. There again, however, there 
was a long road ahead, for the art of applying those 
explosives for peaceful purposes was still a long 
way from being perfected. All could indeed be grateful 
to the United States of America for the vigorous, 
imaginative and successful research programme which 
it was pursuing at its own cost and which, to judge 
from published literature, was unparalleled anywhere 
else in the world. 
33. But the technology and the techniques must 
be known, proved and established before any 
institutional machinery needed to be developed to 

GC(XIII)/OR.128 

administer those tools for the widespread benefit of 
the world. It was his conviction that only when 
peaceful nuclear explosions had become a practical 
and an economic fact should the Board consider 
whether, and if so what, institutional machinery 
should be established within the framework of the 
Agency to perform those tasks which it was so 
well equipped to undertake, while ensuring as far 
as possible that the spirit as well as the letter of 
the relevant provision of NPT was respected. 

34. That should not however be construed as 
implying that the subject should be relegated to 
a status of virtually academic interest only. Peaceful 
nuclear explosions were of immense potential value, 
and it was most important that Member States should 
be kept informed of progress and development in 
that field to enable them tp plan ahead viable 
projects involving such explosions. Such an information 
service was well within the present capability 
of the Agency, and the Agency, in providing it, 
would catalogue much essential information which 
would contribute to a "state of readiness" for the 
time when it was called upon to administer the 
application of that new technique. 
35- While information in itself went a long way 
towards enabling non-nuclear-weapon States to prepare 
for the use of peaceful nuclear explosions, it 
was at the best still second-hand and might well 
be incomplete in respect of those techniques which 
were essential for undertaking such explosions in 
regions which differed significantly with regard to 
climate, geology, topography and the like, from 
the areas in which the published techniques were 
evolved. In research and development no amount 
of words could ever effectively serve as a substitute 
for the knowledge and skill acquired by actual 
physical involvement in the building-up of "knowhow", 
yet it would appear to be the intention of 
NPT that non-nuclear-weapon States should be debarred 
from working on peaceful nuclear explosives 
as such. That was tantamount to preventing their 
participation in the development of the entire 
technology and constituted a distinct obstacle to 
progress in far-sighted nuclear development. There 
appeared however to be a possible way to surmount 
that obstacle safely, namely by calling on those 
nuclear-weapon States which had such research programmes 
to accept for training in the technology 
of peaceful nuclear explosions scientists from nonnuclear-
weapon States. He was prepared to concede 
that such a proposal might be far-reaching and have 
difficult implications, but perhaps the Secretariat 
could explore the concept on behalf of the many 
Member States threatened with exclusion from such 
a promising field of research. 

36. It was perhaps not out of place to draw attention 
to a matter which was particularly important 
in relation to issues which were the concern of both 
the Agency and other organizations in the United 
Nations family, namely the need for the same, or 
at least co-ordinated directives to be issued by 
Governments to their various representatives in 
different agencies discussing the same matter. The 
absence of co-ordination within Governments themselves 
was leading to a potentially harmful, even 
dangerous, difference of approach to such problems 
in the various organs where they were discussed. 
Most of those present would recall the wide 
divergence between views expressed by certain States 
at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States 
and the views of the same States as reflected in 
comments — or the lack of comments — submitted 
to the Agency on the issue of peaceful nuclear explosions. 
To judge from statements made in Vienna, 
there had always been overwhelming support by 
Members of the Agency for its basic role in connection 
widi peaceful nuclear explosions, but the same 
support had not always been reflected in the 
comments made by representatives of the same 
Governments in Geneva or New York. 

37. To many Governments the Agency would 
appear to be a somewhat nebulous organization 
concerned with that rather abstract matter, atomic 
energy. The hard fact that the Agency could and 
did bring enormous potential benefits to all its 
Members had not, even after more than a decade, 
been fully appreciated at all levels, and all too often 
the views and recommendations of nuclear authorities 
appeared to be subordinated to other, possibly political, 
considerations. The results could be unhappy, 
both for the Agency and for the countries concerned. 
The solution lay in informing and educating the 
policy-making departments, and the responsibility 
for that rested not on the Secretariat of the Agency, 
but on those who, as delegates and delegation 
members, represented their Governments at the 
General Conference and other conferences and, in 
consequence, were in a position to bring home to 
their Governments the full capabilities of the Agency, 
which was unique, and to interpret the immediate 
and long-term implications of the Conference's 
deliberations and of any projected Government policy 
within the context of the Agency. He wished, 
therefore, to appeal to all those present to spare no 
effort to render the fullest possible support to the 
Agency in discharging its widening responsibilities 
for peaceful applications of nuclear energy throughout 
the world. 
38. Care should also be taken at all times to 
avoid regarding the Agency as a milch cow. It was 
a truism that, in any project, one got out just as 
much as one was prepared to put in, and that was 
more than valid in the case of the Agency. The 
more enthusiasm and support, which undoubtedly 
included financial support, which could be injected 
both in Vienna and at home, the more benefit could 
be expected to be reaped. Such benefits must of 

GC(XIII)/OR.128 

necessity take various forms. The developing 
countries could look forward to a more rapid pace 
of national nuclear development, a progressive rise 
in standards of living for their people and enhanced 
material improvements in terms of technical assistance. 
The more developed States, which by virtue of their 
technological advancement had more to give than 
to receive on the technical side, stood to gain in 
wider and more stable international co-operation, 
in the growth of mutual understanding and confidence 
and, above all, in the satisfaction of helping mankind 
on its onward path by the widespread peaceful 
application of nuclear energy for general betterment 
and in particular for the alleviation of human 
suffering in its many forms. 

39. One of the more involved problems which 
had arisen and with which many had been concerned 
during the past year had been that of a 
possible amendment of the Agency's Statute to provide 
for a modified composition of the Board of 
Governors. The reasons were well-known to all, 
and there was no call to repeat them. Nevertheless 
no one could but be struck by the complexity of 
that issue, which appeared to be resulting in an 
increasing measure of confusion. In such circumstances, 
the truly scientific approach would be to 
examine afresh the basic premises upon which the 
whole demand for change rested and to ensure that 
the work had not been started with preconceived 
ideas. An initial objective assessment of the real 
needs was essential to guarantee that whatever decision 
was ultimately taken, it would be the right 
decision, uncoloured by irrelevancies. Should the 
valid requirements not be accurately and clearly 
defined before examining the ways and means, the 
Agency would lay itself open to a charge of adopting 
an illogical and even unscientific approach. 
40. South Africa had participated actively in die 
deliberations in the Board and in the Ad Hoc 
Committee of the Whole to Review Article VI of 
the Statute. Since it had initiated the first amendment 
to that Article5), which had provided additional 
seats for Africa and the Middle East, it had had firsthand 
experience of the time and patience needed 
to develop a wide consensus on the exact nature 
of any change to be made in the composition of the 
Board. The first amendment had been a comparatively 
simple and not very controversial one, yet 
it had taken two years to bring it to the stage where 
it could be approved by the General Conference. 
The review which was at present being made was 
infinitely more complicated and affected a much 
greater number of national interests. It was therefore 
not asking too much that the Board should 
be allowed a period of longer than die one year 
which had already elapsed to seek a consensus which 
would both satisfy the terms of reference given to 
5) GC(V)/RES/92. 

the Board in the resolution adopted by the 
Conference the previous year6) and at the same time 
be of such a nature diat it would be sure of 
obtaining not only the votes, but also the ratifications, 
of the overwhelming majority of Member States. 
The importance of ratification should be stressed 
because, in other organizations, amendments had 
been approved somewhat hurriedly by the required 
constitutional majority but had failed to secure die 
requisite number of ratifications because reflection 
had shown that the amendments in question did 
not in fact represent a true and abiding consensus, 
but only the outcome of over-hasty consultations. 

41. In the light of the continual shortfall in the 
funds available for the Operational Budget, Soudi 
Africa had been actively exploring the possibility 
of raising the target for voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund, but unfortunately without 
success. It was its consistent practice, whenever 
the opportunity arose in the Board, to urge strongly 
that all Member States should contribute to the 
General Fund on the basis of their assessed percentage 
contribution to the Regular Budget. There 
appeared to be general agreement that that principle 
was acceptable, and those cases of reluctance to 
back up acceptance of the concept with concrete 
contributions could only be deplored. Indeed, it 
had been shown that scrupulous conformity with 
that approach would place the technical assistance 
budget on an almost healthy footing and enable 
the Agency to meet many more of the deserving 
requests for such aid. It was, moreover, noteworthy 
that the Secretariat had pertinently drawn attention 
to the fact that apart from eight Members, all 
developed except one, which had contributed amounts 
substantially less than their assessed percentage contributions, 
by far the largest part of the shortfall in 
the voluntary contributions for 1968 had been due 
to diree large developed countries having failed to 
make any pledge whatsoever7). In the view of his 
delegation, that was in no way compatible with the 
standing of developed countries which were Member 
States of the Agency. 
42. As to the Agency's efforts to encourage Member 
States to assist in meeting requests for technical 
assistance which could not be met from the Agency's 
resources, the response, according to information 
published in February, had been disappointing, and 
it was regrettable that only some five developed 
States had seen their way clear to meet the appeal. 
Perhaps the Secretariat could bring the appeal to 
the attention of Member Governments more incisively 
and more frequendy, now diat there had been at 
least some positive reactions, with a view to inducing 
greater participation. South Africa was one of those 
6) GC(XII)/RES/241. 
7) See document GC(XIII)/406, Part III, paras 22 and 
23 and Part IV, Schedule D. 


GC(XIII)/OR.128 

endeavouring to supplement the Agency's efforts 
in the field of technical assistance by offering to 
consider sympathetically direct requests for such 
aid from Member States in the African and Middle 
East region. At least one Member State was at 
present making use of the service of a medical 
scientist under that scheme, and his Government 
was confident that that contribution to alleviating 
the Agency's financial problems would steadily increase 
from year to year. 

43. In view of the constant shortage of funds, 
it was a matter of some satisfaction to his delegation 
that the practice was being initiated of undertaking 
a desk-by-desk survey of priorities in the programme 
with a view to making adjustments where warranted, 
re-allocating manpower and eliminating wastage. Provided 
that survey was wisely and diligently carried 
out, it should prove a valuable step towards promoting 
further efficiency within the Agency, and 
it was desirable that a report on any re-allocation 
and innovations introduced should be presented 
to the Board in February. Similar surveys might 
with advantage be periodically undertaken in all 
spheres of the Secretariat's activities so as to ensure 
that wasteful and inefficient practices and procedures, 
such as were inevitably liable to take root in large 
international organizations, did not become established 
imperceptibly. 
44. South Africa was looking forward with keen 
anticipation to the next United Nations conference 
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy in 1971. 
He understood that planning and preliminary preparations 
for the conference were well advanced 
and his delegation was glad that the Secretariat 
was playing a substantial part in those arrangements. 
Indeed it felt that the stage had now been reached 
where it was the Agency and not the United Nations 
which should bear the primary responsibility for 
organizing those large conferences. The Agency now 
had a membership of over 100 from all parts of the 
world; that had not been the case during the earlier 
Geneva conferences and the task might then have 
exceeded its capabilities. The Agency had developed 
substantial expertise not only in the subjects to 
be discussed but, more important, in the practical 
aspects of organizing and establishing the facilities 
required for the smooth running of such major 
international gatherings. It was therefore logical, 
appropriate and desirable that it should be responsible 
for arranging the next conference after the one to 
be held in 1971. According to the present timescale, 
that should be towards the end of the 1970s 
and consequently, with the experience of the forthcoming 
conference supplementing that alreadygained, 
there would be more than adequate time to overcome 
the relative difficulty which the Agency's 
limited resources presented. 
45. With regard to conferences, symposia and 
seminars, he wished to warn against the insidious 
danger of insularity. Nuclear energy by its very 
newness had for a good many years been the 
preserve of scientists and technologists. The age 
of competitive nuclear power and of everyday application 
of radioisotopes to many facets of man's daily 
existence had clearly arrived. Research and development, 
while still of vital necessity, were being overtaken 
by industrial and commercial exploitation, 
and the emphasis was shifting to the sphere of 
production. Should more definite steps not be taken 
to draw more attention to industry by accentuating 
the industrial and commercial aspects of nuclear 
energy to a greater extent in the various technical 
meetings arranged each year by the Secretariat, and 
by encouraging experts from the world of commerce 
and industry to participate as fully as possible? With 
such a broadening of perspectives, both developing 
and advanced Member States would stand to gain, 
the manufacturing and power-generating industries 
would have a wider picture of the international field 
of nuclear energy and the ordinary people of the 
world would more rapidly acquire a deeper appreciation 
and understanding of the capabilities of the 
atom. 
46. The underlying theme of his statement had 
in general been "festina lente", a principle which, 
with the ever-increasing tempo of modern life, was 
daily more difficult to sustain. The men who had 
founded the Agency had laid the foundations well 
and wisely, and in all that it did, the Agency should, 
as a comparatively young organization, avoid the 
common failing of youth, namely to want to rush 
forward before consolidating previous progress and 
without considering all the implications of any projected 
action. The Agency was on the threshold 
of large new developments and responsibilities, and 
their impact on its resources, finance and operations 
would be felt over a long period in the future. 
Member States should therefore try to achieve the 
maximum co-operation between themselves and with 
other organizations and so enhance the standing 
of the Agency and its objectives, which were such 
a power for good throughout the world, and beyond 
its terrestrial confines. 
47. Mr. PEIRIS (Ceylon), after thanking the 
Austrian Government for its hospitality, extended 
his delegation's congratulations and best wishes to 
Ireland on its admission to membership of the 
Agency. 
48. Ceylon had received useful assistance from the 
Agency during the past year in the form of technical 
assistance, equipment and training, and was confident 
that the requests for assistance during the coming 
year would receive the sympathetic consideration of 
the Secretariat. The country had hitherto suffered 
from the disadvantage of not having a central 

GC(XIII)/OR.128 

authority to handle and co-ordinate requirements 
and planning in the field of nuclear energy. 
Parliament had now remedied that defect by setting 
up an Atomic Energy Authority, which would be 
responsible for research and development activities 
relating to the production of nuclear energy, the 
utilization of fissionable and radioactive materials 
for medical, agricultural, industrial and other peaceful 
purposes, and for the protection of the health 
of persons likely to be exposed to radiation hazards. 

49. The Ceylonese Atomic Energy Authority would 
also make arrangements with universities, other 
institutions and individuals within or outside Ceylon 
to conduct research into atomic energy matters, 
would distribute information and organize educational 
and training programmes on atomic energy, and 
would also prepare regulations governing the import, 
transport, storage, handling and use of radioactive 
materials and the disposal of radioactive wastes. 
50. Ceylon was anxious to benefit from the advances 
that had been made in nuclear technology, 
and had requested the Agency to undertake a study 
of the possibilities of developing the uses of nuclear 
energy in Ceylon on a long-term basis. The study 
would be made with special reference to the 
industrial development of the country and would 
also include such subjects as the application 
of isotopes in agriculture and medicine. 
51. Ceylon accepted the principle of regional cooperation 
as formulated at a meeting at Manila 
recently arranged by the Agency8), and hoped that 
the proposals made there would receive wide 
acceptance. Representatives of the developing 
countries had stated on many occasions that the 
greatest need was for experts, equipment and technical 
training. They had also urged that maximum possible 
use be made of existing institutions such as, for 
instance, the Radioisotope Centre in Ceylon. 
52. He wished at that stage to renew the plea 
his delegation had made so often before that 
advanced countries should consider making bigger 
contributions to the General Fund, that other 
countries which had not yet made any contribution 
should offer at least a token amount, and that the 
advanced countries should consider giving assistance 
on a bilateral basis in cases where the Agency could 
not meet the requirements of the developing countries 
owing to the shortage of funds. 
5 3. The Agency was in the process of preparing 
itself to discharge certain obligations which would 
devolve on it when NPT came into force. Ceylon 
had signed that treaty — although with certain re8) 
Organizational Meeting for a New Regional Co-operative 

Project to Succeed the IPA Project, held on 14 to 16 

March 1969. 

servations — in the hope that it would contribute 
to world peace and security and enable all the 
nations of the world to benefit fully from the peaceful 
applications of atomic energy. The super Powers 
had repeatedly stated that acceptance of NPT would 
create a proper climate for more nations in the 
world to reap the benefits of nuclear technology. 
His delegation felt that nuclear technology in the 
industrialized countries had now reached a stage 
where it could make substantial contributions towards 
accelerating the economic and social development 
of less advanced countries. Indeed, if one examined 
nuclear programmes in various States Members of 
the Agency, one was driven to the conclusion that 
the gap between the advanced and the developing 
countries was widening day by day. 

54. It might be appropriate to recall the words 
of President Nixon on that subject when he had 
addressed the General Assembly of the United Nations 
a few days previously: 
"As the United Nations looks toward the 
beginning of its Second Development Decade, it 
faces a time of enormous challenge but enormous 
opportunity. We can only guess at the new scientific 
discoveries that the 70s may bring, but we can 
see with chilling clarity the gap that already exists 
between the developed economies and the economies 
of the developing countries, and the urgent need 
for international co-operation in spurring economic 
development.^)" 

55. It was up to the Agency to grasp that 
"enormous opportunity" in so far as assistance to 
developing countries was concerned. 
56. In order to reduce the glaring disparity between 
the advanced and the developing countries, to which 
he had just referred, the Agency should play a more 
constructive role in bringing the benefits of nuclear 
technology to the latter. One of the greatest 
obstacles in achieving that goal was the lack of 
capital resources for undertaking nuclear projects 
in such countries. That was why his delegation 
had repeatedly urged the Secretariat to make a comprehensive 
study of financing nuclear projects in 
developing countries. Unfortunately, the matter did 
not seem to have received adequate attention so 
far, and his delegation therefore proposed to take 
it up, in association with other interested countries, 
in the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee. 
57. There seemed to have been a certain drift 
and change in the Agency's programmes and in 
the emphasis it placed on its various statutory 
obligations. Its work appeared to be increasingly 
dominated by safeguards activities. While Ceylon 
had always supported the Agency's safeguards and 
9) United Nations document A/PV.1755. 

-9



GC(XIII)/OR.128 

their application, it had at the same time urged 
that the Agency should retain a reasonable balance 
in its programmes so that it could serve the best 
interests of its entire membership. However, over 
the past year the net resources made available for 
technical assistance activities had diminished, at a 
time when the needs of the developing countries 
were greater than ever. Ceylon was apprehensive 
that over-emphasis on the safeguards functions of 
the Agency would result in a further reduction in 
the amount of technical assistance provided. The 
selective emphasis which the Agency seemed to be 
placing on one aspect of its obligations was causing 
serious concern among developing countries and 
eroding the confidence which was a vital factor in 
efficient operation. For example, when the Agency 
was approached for technical and economic assistance 
for nuclear projects in fields where the technology 
and techniques had been fully developed, the applicants 
were told that the projects were capital-intensive 
and beyond the resources of the Agency. On the 
other hand, the Agency painted a glowingly 
optimistic picture of the positive role it could play 
in areas where the technology was not yet available, 
as for instance in the field of peaceful nuclear explosions. 
There seemed to be a paradox there: 
the Agency apparently could not afford to provide 
what was in fact now available — but promised 
the benefits of what might become available in the 
future. As a result, a credibility gap was developing 
between the Agency and a large number of 
its Members, and he would appeal to the advanced 
countries to take that situation into account when 
exercising their influence in shaping the Agency's 
policies. 

58. His delegation fully supported the Agency's 
role as a supplier of fissionable materials under 
appropriate safeguards. It was convinced that that 
role would grow in importance as nuclear power 
programmes expanded. The availability of fissionable 
materials through the intermediary of the Agency 
would not only accelerate the introduction of nuclear 
power but would also enable a number of countries 
to select their power reactor systems on the basis 
of economics rather than of other considerations 
such as assurances of the availability of enriched 
uranium. 
59. Ceylon looked forward to the day when, as 
a result of the disarmament regotiations now taking 
place, the super-Powers would agree to limit their 
stockpiles of nuclear weapons and thereby release 
sizable quantities of fissionable materials for the 
peaceful programmes of Member States. It was 
hoped that the supply of such materials would be 
channelled through the Agency. Such a development 
would strengthen the Agency, while at the same 
time promoting the application of its safeguards 
system. 
60. One of the most important items on the 
Conference's agenda was the proposed revision of 
Article VI of the Statute. The crux of the matter 
was that the present wording of Article VI was 
intended to meet a situation that existed in 1956. 
It was futile to argue that the same situation still 
existed. The terms of Article VI should therefore 
be amended to meet the present requirements of 
the Agency, whose membership had changed so 
greatly since 1956. Apart from the question of 
the arithmetical changes required in the composition 
of the Board, the basic provisions of Article VI 
were outdated. There was no justification for 
according an entrenched or privileged position to 
some countries, as was the case at present; the 
governing bodies of equally important organizations 
functioned efficiently without the privilege of such 
permanent membership being extended to certain 
pre-selected members. In the discussions on 
Article VI much had been said about the need to 
preserve the "delicate balance" which was said to 
reside in the current wording. In the view of his 
delegation, the balance should rather be struck so 
as to take account of the membership of the Agency 
as it now was, and of the need for the Agency to 
fulfil all its obligations under the Statute while at 
the same time maintaining the confidence and support 
of all its Member States. More would undoubtedly 
be said about the matter in the discussions that 
would follow, and at that stage he would only make 
a plea that effective representation be accorded to 
Asia, in keeping with its representation in other 
organizations in the United Nations family. 
61. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) said that as Tunisia 
had been the first country with which Finland had 
concluded an agreement on development cooperation, 
Mr. Torki's election to the office of 
President of the General Conference had given the 
Finnish delegation particular pleasure. 
62. After 12 years the underlying ideas of the 
Agency continued to reflect a powerful urge to enable 
all mankind to benefit from the peaceful applications 
of nuclear science. At the same time they reflected 
a sense of obligation to guide and control the 
development of nuclear science so that the increasing 
knowledge and expanding capacity in the nuclear 
industry would not be used for military purposes. 
In that context the most remarkable development 
so far had been NPT, the implementation of which 
would give the Agency difficult and challenging 
responsibilities. 
63. He wished to announce the Finnish Government's 
decision to construct the first nuclear power 
station in Finland. On the basis of a protocol, 
concluded a fortnight previously between the Governments 
of Finland and the Soviet Union, the two 
countries would co-operate in the construction of 
the 440-MW plant. The technical and commercial 
— 10

GC(XIII)/OR.128 

conditions would be agreed upon in detail later 
by the Finnish power company Imatran Voima 
Osakeyhtio and the Soviet Technopromexport 
organization. 

64. In Finland, where the first steps in the application 
of nuclear power on a large industrial scale 
were now being taken, there was, understandably, 
great interest in the development of the international 
safeguards system. When entering into bilateral agreements 
with various countries it had been the wish 
of the Government of Finland to make it possible, 
with the agreement of the other parties, to put 
all her nuclear activities under Agency safeguards. 
65. The Agency would be developed as a central 
organ for the application of safeguards, and several 
different solutions of the problems arising might 
be arrived at in international political agreements. 
It was therefore Finland's earnest desire that NPT 
should be brought into force as soon as possible. 
66. The technological breakthrough in the case 
of nuclear power had undoubtedly taken place during 
the current decade, but the 1970s would be the 
decade of the economic and truly revolutionary breakthrough 
in atomic energy. Furthermore, until now 
nuclear power had principally been the subject of 
more or less ambitious national programmes, but 
from now on it would be a significant element in 
international transactions. In that connection 
commercial co-operation between countries would 
grow rapidly, and the Agency, and in particular the 
countries introducing nuclear power, would face many 
complex problems. 
67. At that revolutionary stage, a country's power 
authorities were faced with quite new requirements. 
The main cause of those problems lay not so much 
in the novelty of nuclear technology as in the fact 
that economically sound use of nuclear power was 
possible only if large units could be fitted into the 
power system of the country. In addition, public 
opinion in all countries demanded that nuclear power 
plants be absolutely safe, a requirement which was 
absent in the case of, say, conventional power plants 
or automobiles. A further heavy burden on nuclear 
power plants was the need to submit them to safeguards 
control. 
68. He was convinced that the most revolutionary 
effect of nuclear science would be in the supply 
of energy. New problems would not be technological, 
but would be connected with the economic structure 
of the country, with its administrative system and 
with its international commercial relations. 
69. He himself was a scientist, but had also been 
closely concerned with problems of industry, administration 
and legislation. On the basis of his 
experience he ventured to say that the purely 
scientific and technological problems could be more 
easily mastered than the apparently much simpler 
problems of organization, administration, rules of 
practice in international trade, safeguards, etc. 

70. The Agency had not neglected such aspects 
as insurance, transport and administrative problems. 
However, Finland felt that even study of the special 
features of several special problems was not enough 
to help a Member State to solve the immense 
problems connected with large-scale applications of 
atomic energy. All such questions should be dealt 
with as parts of a whole, that is in the national 
framework of an entire country, with due consideration 
of the economic and administrative conditions 
prevailing in it. In the Finnish view, case studies 
throwing full light on those problems could be most 
valuable. 
71. The varied experience of the individual Nordic 
countries in the application of nuclear energy had 
already provided and would continue to provide 
knowledge which could comprise and important 
contribution to the development of Member States. 
At the same time the study of that experience could 
be of help in the creation of a system of worldwide 
rules, whether connected with NPT or with 
safeguards philosophy in general, with problems 
of transport, insurance, safety, etc. The application 
of such rules would not then represent too heavy 
a burden on those who tried to promote the wellbeing 
of their nations through the use of atomic 
energy. 
7 2. The background he had discussed should not 
be forgotten when considering enlarging the membership 
of the Board. The question of revision of 
Article VI of the Statute had been an important 
item on the agenda of the Board, although, 
to Finland's regret, the problem had not yet been 
solved. 
73. Certain developing regions were underrepresented 
on the Board. The revision of Article VI 
of the Statute was a far-reaching and politically very 
important matter. A solution must therefore be 
found on the broadest possible basis, and it should 
be well thought out in order to make it unnecessary 
to revert to the matter again. As none of the proposals 
presented so far for revision of Article VI 
had met with sufficiently wide support, his delegation 
favoured further study of the problem in order to 
find a formula generally acceptable to Member States. 
74. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) observed that during 
the past year nuclear energy developments had continued 
to be the subject of particular attention in 
Member States and that that fact had been reflected 
in the work carried out by the Agency throughout 
the period under review. 
-11 — 


GC(XIII)/OR.128 

75. He wished to make a few remarks concerning, 
in particular, safeguards, the level of the budget, 
INIS, the peaceful use of nuclear explosives and 
the revision of Article VI of the Statute. 
76. Belgium, as a member of the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM), found itself in 
a special position regarding the negotiations required 
under Article III of NPT, which were to be 
conducted between EURATOM and the Agency. 
However, it attached just as much importance to 
everything connected with the formulation of the 
agreements to be concluded between the Agency 
and individual Governments for the application of 
the safeguards laid down in Article III. In his 
opinion, it would be advisable to set up an ad hoc 
committee of the Board, membership of which would 
be open to all Members wishing to take part, to 
draw up a draft model safeguards agreement between 
the Agency and those of its Member States which 
were parties to NPT. Such an agreement could not, 
however, be formulated until States had agreed upon 
the principles which were to govern it. The aims 
fo NPT were not exactly those of the Agency: the 
Treaty was intended solely to prevent the use of 
raw or fissionable materials for purposes other than 
peaceful ones. Consequendy, the problem should 
be precisely defined in terms of the obligations 
undertaken by the parties and not in terms of the 
action taken by the Agency to carry out its statutory 
functions. 
77. As it was unfortunately probable that initially 
not all the Members of the Board would be parties 
to the Treaty, special provision should be made 
by which it would not be die Board as a whole 
which would have authority to check whether the 
parties to the Treaty were complying with their 
obligations and, if they were not, to put an end 
to that state of affairs, but a special body consisting 
exclusively of representatives of States parties to 
the Treaty. 
78. The presentation of estimated expenditure on 
safeguards under a new budget Sectionio) not only 
satisfied a wish frequendy expressed by the Belgian 
delegation but also fulfilled the recommendations 
for the establishment of programme budgets put 
forward by the General Assembly's Ad Hoc Committee 
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the United 
Nations and the Specialized Agencies11); it would 
be of help to the members of the proposed ad hoc 
committee of the Board to supply an answer to the 
following question: "Since the Agency was to carry 
out control functions under the Tlatelolco Treaty12) 
10) See document GC(XIII)/405, THE BUDGET, part II.C, 

Section 12. 
11) United Nations document A/6343. 
12) The Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 

Latin America. 

and NPT, how should it proceed in order to carry 
out that role in the best and most economical way?" 

79. More generally speaking, the establishment 
of programme budgets would provide more information 
on the financial implications of the Agency's 
programmes and would also enable a just balance 
to be maintained between those programmes by 
taking careful account of the functions devolving 
on the Agency under its Statute and the financial 
resources likely to be available to it. 
80. Reference to financial resources naturally led 
one to speak of the budget. The rate of increase 
of the Agency's budget continued to cause concern 
to the Belgian delegation. It was true that the 
budgets of odier international organizations were 
growing at a similar rate, if not a greater one, but 
such arguments were not convincing. 
81. The increase proposed for 1970, even though 
reduced in relation to the preliminary estimates, 
was still too high, and at 8.8%l?>) was not in line 
with the rate of expansion of Member States' 
national incomes. Already some Member States, 
including Belgium, had had to defer, stagger or 
even cancel a large number of scientific projects 
during the previous months in order to keep the 
growth in expenditure to a level compatible with 
income. 
82. Two features of the increases in the Agency's 
budget were of particular concern to the Belgian 
delegation, namely, those for staff salaries and the 
Laboratory. 
83. Certainly, the Agency was under an obligation 
to adjust salaries to meet the increase in the cost 
of living. However, in view of the mobility of staff, 
it should be possible more strictly to limit the effects 
of that increase on the Agency's budget as a whole. 
A well-balanced rotation of staff, through which 
young officials could be engaged at salary rates 
naturally lower than diose applicable to more senior 
ones, would also to some extent offset the effects 
of the cost-of-living increase. Moreover, it should 
be frankly acknowledged that a job was done when 
it was done, and that consequendy either the official 
concerned should then be found another assignment 
or his services should be terminated. 
84. As regards die Agency's Laboratory at Seibersdorf, 
the criticisms made in the past remained valid. 
Most of die work carried out in the Laboratory 
could not be justified in the light of the Agency's 
functions. "Research" should not be financed from 
Agency funds. The Belgian delegation did not share 
the views of die group of scientific and administrative 
experts, which had met in Vienna form 1 to 
13) See document GC( XIII )/40 5, para. 3. 

— 12

4 October 1968, which had recommended an increase 
in laboratory facilities for various activities, such 
as the storage of agricultural and isotopic materials; 
the Laboratory should not attempt to become a 
standardization organization or a central bureau for 
nuclear measurements, and all the work carried out 
at the request of other United Nations bodies should 
be charged for. 

85. He then drew the Conference's attention to 
the need to avoid an excessive inflation of the 
Regular Budget, with the aim, commendable in itself, 
of increasing the resources of the Operational Budget. 
In fact, there was some risk that national financial 
authorities would lump together the contributions 
they made, whether in the form of contributions 
to the Regular Budget or of voluntary contributions, 
and fix the increase in the authorized overall 
contribution at a particular ceiling, the end result 
of which would be that the extra amount required 
for the Regular Budget would be deducted from 
the part reserved for the voluntary contribution. 
Thus, instead of an increase in the amount available 
for the Operational Budget, the opposite would 
be achieved. 
86. The decision to set up INIS on an operational 
basis in 1970 had been taken by the Board 
in February subject to certain conditions, one of 
which was that operations would commence with 
a limited subject scope capable of being extended 
step by step, while another was that the operation 
of INIS would be reviewed annually by an advisory 
committee. Though it had still had many doubts 
regarding the practical and financial aspects of the 
way in which INIS would develop, Belgium had 
supported that decision, but only on condition that 
the INIS project remained experimental in nature; 
it had not regarded the decision as irrevocable. 
In view of the considerable commitments which 
countries invited to participate in INIS would have 
to accept from both the financial and technical points 
of view, the standing advisory committee would 
be of vital importance, and its membership should 
reflect the interests of the various parties concerned. 
87. As a member of EURATOM Belgium welcomed 
the fact that co-operation had been established 
between the Agency and EURATOM with a view 
to getting INIS under way and it hoped that the 
two organizations would collaborate in regard to 
the programmes for training indexing staff as well 
as in compiling the thesaurus or drawing up programmes 
with a view to the retrieval of information 
stores in INIS. Such co-operation alone could prevent 
duplication in the work undertaken by each of the 
two organizations. 
88. Many States Members of the Agency attached 
enormous importance to the advantages which might 
result by the mid-1970s from the peaceful uses 
GC(XIII)/OR.128 

of nuclear explosives. In his view the Agency was 
the appropriate organization to discharge the role 
envisaged in Article V of NPT. 

89. For that purpose the Agency should set up 
a special department. However, that should not 
mean adding to its staff, since the necessary 
personnel could certainly be taken from other departments, 
which had already kept abreast of the 
published material, in particular that relating to the 
"Plowshare" operation in the United States. 
90. In view of the fact that the technology of 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes was still 
in its infancy, international action in that respect 
should consist primarily in collecting all the information 
which would enable Member States to evaluate 
the usefulness of those new techniques and to have 
recourse to them in due time under appropriate 
international control. 
91. As the devices used would remain in the 
custody and under the control of the nuclear-weapon 
State which supplied the services, the Agency's role 
would be mainly that of an intermediary, namely 
to arrange with one of its Members, specifically 
one of the nuclear-weapon States, to supply another, 
viz. a non-nuclear-weapon State, with the nuclear 
explosives and services needed to carry out the 
explosions in question. 
92. It therefore seemed essential for the Agency 
to be able to obtain from the nuclear-weapon States 
all information resulting from their present experiments 
in order that there might be no 
technological gap between States which had renounced 
possession of nuclear weapons and those which had 
joined in the nuclear armaments race. The Agency 
should also do what it could to collect for its 
Members information relating to the scientific and 
technical results deriving indirectly from the use 
of nuclear explosives for peaceful purposes, i.e. in 
the fields of geology, palaeontology, seismology, 
hydrology, nuclear physics, etc. All those points 
would, in his country's opinion, have to be kept 
in view in implementing Article V of NPT. 
93. Belgium, realizing how important the question 
of membership of the Board was both for the present 
and for the future, had felt it its duty to take an 
active part in the work which had been undertaken 
to implement the resolution on the subject adopted 
by the General Conference in 1968. In presenting 
its proposals, it had sought to take into account 
the fact that quite apart from the increase in the 
Agency's membership, the nature of the relations 
between its Member States was in process of 
developing in the sense that the co-operation in 
which they were at present engaged, which had 
to do with the dissemination of knowledge and 
techniques, was being supplemented by a second, 
3



GC(XIII)/OR.128 

at least equally important, form of co-operation which 
related to the action to be taken to prevent the 
dissemination of nuclear weapons. The effect of 
NPT would be to lead a large number of States 
to accept, in the overriding interests of mankind, 
restrictions on their sovereignty, the practical scope 
of which would be all the greater in that such States 
had attained, or would sooner or later attain, an 
advanced stage of development in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. The membership of the Board 
should reflect that new situation and, while the 
representation of States which stood to gain most 
from the dissemination of knowledge relating to 
nuclear science and technology must be improved, 
so must also that of States which, without necessarily 
being nuclear-weapon Powers, had already acquired 
a broad basis of knowledge. Admittedly some of 
those groups of States would inevitably form only 
a single group, after a process which one should 
do all in one's power to , accelerate. The new 
structure of the Board must be such as to 
accommodate tiiat process without itsbeingnecessary 
every so often to revert to the question of 
the Board's membership. Stable yet flexible formulas 
were needed. Such were the considerations underlying 
the proposals made by Belgium during the discussions 
in the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole to Review 
Article VI of the Statute, which had met in April, 
June and also on the previous Friday. 

94. Mr. PRETSCH (Federal Republic ofGermany) 
said it was a well-established practice of the General 
Conference to look back upon die achievements 
of die year past, and to discuss the aims of die 
Agency's future activities and the mediods that should 
be applied in carrying them out. The Board's annual 
report served as a good basis for an exchange of 
ideas between delegations and the Secretariat. 
95. In the past year the Agency had again done 
excellent work in a number of scientific and 
technological fields, an achievement which deserved 
all the more appreciation as die financial resources 
available for the Agency's programme were still small 
and had to support activities of many kinds. Moreover, 
the number of requests for assistance by 
Member States was steadily increasing. 
96. The annual report emphasized die growing 
importance of the Agency's safeguards work. Clearly 
safeguards would have to be adapted to the rapid 
progress being made in the utilization of nuclear 
energy. They should be effective and should not 
hamper the operation of nuclear installations. Their 
cost should be kept as low as possible and should 
not become a source of economic discrimination. 
His delegation had accordingly been pleased to learn 
of the new Division of Development set up within 
the Secretariat's Department of Safeguards and Inspection, 
which would be responsible for developing 
modern safeguards methods and for testing new 
procedures. 
97. On the other hand, the Agency's increasing 
inability to meet the growing need for technical 
assistance was regrettable. The value of requests 
had jumped from $1.5 million to $3.7 million in 
seven years, but the assistance actually provided 
had risen only from $750 000 to just under $1 
million, an amount which had remained practically 
unchanged for diree years. Thus die proportion 
of requests that could actually be met had dropped 
from 50 to 25%. Under those circumstances the 
Agency would have difficulty in ensuring adequate 
planning, selection and continuity in its technical 
assistance activities; the only solution was for more 
Member States to contribute to the General Fund 
in the amounts expected of them. 
98. Promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy was after all the Agency's main responsibility 
and should continue to be so regardless of the 
requirements of more specialized work. Representatives 
of the Agency had emphasized that, despite 
its increased responsibilities in relation to safeguards, 
the Agency would continue to be primarily a 
technical organization dedicated to the task of promoting 
the peaceful applications of nuclear energy 
in its Member States. The delegation of the Federal 
Republic of Germany shared that view. 
99. The world-wide exchange of information was 
another major task of the Agency, and diere could 
be no doubt that direct exchanges of information 
between specialists in many working groups and 
symposia had proved wordi while. To those exchanges 
should be added international co-operation 
between documentation services. In view of die 
flood of publications and reports, it was particularly 
important to devise a system whereby the work 
of documentation and communication in relation to 
nuclear energy could be shared. Those Member 
States which produced most of the information should 
participate in the system, and all countries desiring 
such information should have easy access to it. 
EURATOM, which had already been co-operating 
effectively with the Agency in information work, 
should participate in INIS, as the delegate of 
Belgium had already emphasized, and should do 
so direcdy; INIS would then have access to 
documentation relating to die nuclear programmes 
of EURATOM as well as to the scientific and 
technical reports published by Member States of 
EURATOM. 
100. With regard to die peaceful application of 
nuclear explosives, a new sphere of interest, the 
compilation and dissemination of information would 
also constitute an important element of international 
co-operation during die next few years; and the 
Agency was certainly die appropriate organization 
for such a task. In that field, as in others, the 
recommendations of die Conference of Non-Nuclear-
Weapon States should be regarded as a useful con-
14



tribution to any discussion of the Agency's future 
tasks. 

101. If the Agency was to be successful in 
performing its tasks, it would have to provide for 
the additional expenditure of 8.8% envisaged in 
its budget for 1970, an estimate which the German 
delegation considered justifiable. Although the 
addition of 45 posts was no negligible increase, 
the German delegation would approve the budget. 
102. Turning to the nuclear energy programme of 
the Federal Republic of Germany, he pointed out 
that the Federal Republic had, on the commercial 
side, reached a stage where orders were being placed 
by power supply companies for the construction of 
big commercial nuclear power stations; the chemical 
industry, too, was interested in purchasing nuclear 
reactors for the generation of process heat. Nuclear 
engineering had become a part of the German 
economy. Nuclear power plants with a total output 
of 2200 MW(e) were under construction or 
in operation. Another six power plants, which 
would generate 3500MW(e), were being planned. 
A pressurized water reactor plant with a rating 
of 1100 MW(e), to be built near Biblis on the 
Rhine, had been ordered in May 1969- Under a 
joint programme involving research centres, industrial 
firms and power supply companies in Germany, 
Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, a 300MW(
e) sodium-cooled fast breeder reactor was being 
designed. The United Kingdom, the Netherlands 
and the Federal Republic of Germany were planning 
a joint project for the development and application 
of the gas centrifuge method of uranium enrichment. 
103. New facilities were being set up for basic 
nuclear reserach: particularly deserving of mention 
were the heavy ion accelerator to be built near 
Darmstadt; the 3-GeV intersecting storage rings for 
the Electron Synchrotron DESY near Hamburg; and 
the institutes of solid-state physics proposed for 
construction at Julich and Stuttgart. The work being 
done at the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Centre 
for the development of advanced nuclear safeguards 
methods, to which he had referred at the previous 
session of the General Conference14), was also of 
great interest. It was based on the assumption 
that now, since the use of nuclear energy had 
reached the commercial stage in several countries 
and a large number of nuclear installations were 
being built, the conditions for application of safeguards 
had undergone a basic change. Fissile materials 
passed through several nuclear installations during 
a fuel cycle, the quantities involved were larger than 
in the past and, under conditions of free competition, 
the commercial interests of the various countries 
were bound to come to the fore. That being so, 
a control system was needed which would safeguard 
14) GC(XII)/OR.124, paras 16 and 17. 

GC(XIII)/OR.128 

the flow of fissile materials by means of instruments 
and other techniques at certain key points. 

104. The most important areas covered by the 
development work at Karlsruhe were systems analysis, 
control experiments, and direct and indirect control 
methods. Two control experiments completed at 
the Eurochemic reprocessing plant at Mol (Belgium) 
and at the ALKEM fabrication plant at Karlsruhe 
had proved that the new concept worked and that 
it was possible to exercise effective control at 
relatively low cost. In view of the favourable results 
obtained so far, the Agency was preparing a 
symposium on the technological aspects of safeguards, 
to be held at Karlsruhe in the summer of 1970. 
105. The Federal Republic of Germany endeavoured 
to give active support to the scientific and technical 
programme of the Agency. During the past year 
many German experts had taken part in the Agency's 
symposia and in nearly all of its panel meetings 
and working groups. An International Training 
Course on the Use of Radiation and Isotope 
Techniques in Horticultural Research, organized by 
the Agency in co-operation with FAO, had been 
held at Hanover from July to September 1968. 
Four hundred experts had participated in the 
Symposium on Advanced and High-Temperature Gas-
Cooled Reactors, held at Julich in October 1968. 
A Conference on Clustering Phenomena in Nuclei 
had been held at Bochum, in July 1969, under the 
auspices of the Agency. In August the Symposium 
on the Utilization of Large Radiation Sources and 
Accelerators in Industrial Processing had taken place 
in Munich. The Agency intended to hold a Meeting 
of Specialists on In-Core Instrumentation for Sodium-
Cooled Fast Reactors at Karlsruhe in October. Ten 
German research institutes were participating in coordinated 
research programmes undertaken by the 
Agency, programmes which were described in detail 
in the Board's annual report. In 1968 the Agency 
had sent nine German experts to developing countries 
and had made use of 45 fellowships offered by 
Germany. Physicists from Trieste had been sent 
to Heidelberg under a partnership agreement concluded 
between the Agency's International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste and the Max Planck 
Institute of Nuclear Physics at Heidelberg. The 
Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Centre had been awarded 
two research contracts by the Agency for the development 
of safeguards, one of them concerning a reprocessing 
facility and the other pressurized heavywater 
reactors. In June 1969 about 60 members 
of the Board, of delegations and of the Secretariat 
had visited Karlsruhe and learnt something of the 
work on fissile material flow control being done 
there. 
106. In 1968 the Federal Republic of Germany 
had made a volutary contribution of $133 400 to 
the General Fund and had contributed equipment 
-15



GC(XIII)/OR.128 

worth $26000. It wished further to intensify its 
co-operation with the Agency, and once again would 
make a volutary contribution to the General Fund 
corresponding to its percentage assessment under 
the Regular Budget. 

107. In addition the Federal Republic intended to 
offer fellowships for 1970 — the number of which 
would initially be unlimited — covering the whole 
sphere of nuclear research and development. It 
would continue to provide an increasing number 
of experts to render technical assistance to interested 
Member States on behalf of the Agency. Finally, 
the Federal Republic intended to give a spectrophotometer 
worth $10 000 to the Laboratory of Marine 
Radioactivity at Monaco. 
108. If the Agency was to function with maximum 
efficiency, its structure should, in the opinion of 
his delegation, be adjusted to changing circumstances. 
One such adjustment would be an enlargement of 
the Board, and in that connection he wished to 
discuss the review of Article VI of the Statute. The 
Federal Republic of Germany deplored the fact that 
the Board had been unable to comply with the 
request made in the resolution adopted by the Conference 
at the previous session. Like others, it had 
welcomed the appointment of an ad hoc committee, 
in which interested countries were given the opportunity 
to present their views. Discussions within 
that committee had doubtless served to clarify the 
different aspects of the problem, but it had also 
become obvious thatdelegationsinterpreted differently 
the three criteria laid down by the Conference. 
109. The first of those criteria related to progress 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy — the progress 
achieved by many Members of the Agency since 
its foundation. Member States which had made 
considerable progress in nuclear research and 
technology and had thus enhanced their intellectual, 
material and financial contribution to the Agency's 
activities should, in accordance with that criterion, 
be given an adequate share in the framing of the 
Agency's decisions. Adequate representation of the 
technologically advanced countries in the Board would 
certainly give them greater encouragement to contribute 
to the Agency's scientific programme and to 
technical assistance. The participation of an 
appropriate number of such countries in the Board's 
activities would seem to be the best way of promoting 
the Agency's work. In recent years, most 
governing bodies of organizations in the United 
Nations family had increased their membership, and 
they had applied functional criteria in selecting new 
members. 
110. But, while emphasizing the importance of a 
country's technological standard, he wished at the 
same time to stress the need for equitable 
geographical distribution — the importance of which 
had also been underlined at the previous session 
of the Conference. His delegation was therefore 
in favour of increased representation for the developing 
countries, in particular for the nations of Africa, 
the Middle East and Latin America. Of course, 
neither of the two criteria mentioned should be 
pursued to the exclusion of the other; a balance 
must be struck between them. The Federal Republic 
endorsed the proposal submitted by Italy because 
it appeared best suited to fulfilling the requirements 
originally laid down by the Conference. 

111. In conclusion, he said that his delegation was 
pleased to endorse the proposed re-appointment 
of Dr. Eklund as Director General. The Federal 
Republic of Germany wished to assure Dr. Eklund 
again of its confidence, trusting that under his experienced 
guidance the Agency would succeed in 
adapting its programme and its structure to the 
challenges of the future. The Government of the 
Federal Republic was prepared to give the Director 
General and the Secretariat every assistance to ensure 
the success of the Agency's future activities. 
112. Mr. SCOTT (Jamaica) said that considerable 
changes had been witnessed in the world social 
and economic situation since the Agency had first 
been founded. Mutual suspicion had given way to 
mutual co-operation and the initially small number 
of sovereign developing countries had considerably 
increased. 
113. Addressing the forty-seventh session of the 
Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, 
the Agency's Director General had indicated that 
emphasis should be placed on the activities which 
were primarily of interest to the developing countries. 
Not only should the planning and implementation 
of existing scientific and technical programmes be 
continued, but the Agency should also .be in a 
position to effect the rapid transfer of practical 
technological knowledge to developing countries. 
114. The Agency could play its role most effectively 
by modifying the content and orientation of its main 
programmes, including the preparations for NPT 
responsibilities, and also by modifying its structure. 
115. The review of Article VI of the Statute was 
still occupying the attention of the Board and an 
ad hoc committee. Whatever the reasons for the 
criteria on which the size and composition of the 
Board had been based in 1956, the changing 
circumstances of today had made them somewhat 
out-dated. No solution had yet received the unanimous 
support desired, but whatever criteria were eventually 
adopted, they must provide above all for flexibility, 
while ensuring that the Agency became a more 
effective instrument of development. 
-16



GC(XIII)/OR.128 

116. His delegation also recognized that there had 
to be the closest co-operation between the Agency 
and the specialized agencies, for example in the 
co-ordination of programmes as opposed to administrative 
co-ordination. Although significant progress 
had been made in that respect in the case of programmes 
carried out jointly with FAO, UNESCO and 
WHO, there was still much to be done, for example, 
as regards co-operation with the Intergovernmental 
Maritime Consultative Organization on measures to 
prevent the continued pollution of the sea. The 
steps taken in relation to waste management and 
the monitoring of radioactive wastes were now more 
effective, and the Agency had an important role to 
play in solving some of the problems of the human 
environment. 
117. The Agency had a creditable record in the 
application of nuclear science to food and agriculture, 
the life sciences, physical sciences, and health, safety 
and waste management, and Jamaica had already 
benefited from such activities. That record of achievement 
pointed the way to further activities for the 
benefit of more and more developing countries. 
118. As far as nuclear power and reactors were 
concerned, the results had been most disappointing. 
The annual report of the Board to the General 
Conference contained figures indicating that of 300 
plants in operation, under construction or firmly 
ordered, onyl 10 were located in five developing 
countries. Unless that trend was reversed, the 
technological gap that so sharply divided the rich 
from the poor countries would continue to widen. 

119. He felt that that situation was in part due 
to the limited functions and resources of the Agency 
itself, and the policies adopted by the more advanced 
countries, and that it was also due in part 
to a lack of information and expertise in the 
developing countries. A remedy had to be found, 
and the Agency's report to the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations relating to recommendations 
made by the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States, in which it was stated that an increase in the 
Agency's resources would have a cumulative effect 
in introducing the applications of nuclear energy 
into developing countries15), was relevant in that 
connection. 
120. Among the other questions to which the most 
careful and patient consideration would have to 
be given were the Agency's safeguards system and 
the use of nuclear explosives for peaceful purposes. 
But the way ahead would be made much easier if 
the Agency were to draw up a policy for the benefit 
of all developing countries, and that could best 
be done if each country had a say in the formulation 
of such a policy. 
The meeting rose at 1.5p.m. 

15) GC(XIII)/INF/110,para.l07. 

17



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

21 January 1970 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(23-29 SEPTEMBER 1969) 
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 25 September 1969, at 10.40 a.m. 
President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 
Item of theagenda* 
9CONTENTS 
General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1968-69 (continued)
Statements by the delegates of: 
MexicoDemocratic Republic of the CongoUnited Arab RepublicViet-NamUnion of Soviet Socialist RepublicsFranceUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
Paragraphs 
1—98 
1—15 
14—34 
35—56 
57—62 
63 
64—81 
82—98 
GC(XIII)/418. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/114/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.129 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1968-69 
(GC(XIII)/404, 416) (continued) 

1. Mr. SANDOVAL VALLARTA (Mexico) said 
that his country had been studying the advantages 
of installing a nuclear power station and, in the 
light of the present demand for power and the increase 
in demand foreseen over the next few years, 
had come to the conclusion that it was appropriate 
to consider the installation of a 600-MW(e) station. 
Tenders from constructors of nuclear power reactors 
had already been solicited and a first, preliminary 
selection had already been made. If a decision was 
taken in favour of a nuclear power station, the final 
choice would be made and the order placed in the 
near future. The Agency had recently sent a mission 
to Mexico to advise on the selection of a site for the 
reactor, and should a nuclear power station be installed, 
his Government intended negotiating a formal 
contract with the Agency for the supply of the fuel 
necessary for the power reactor in accordance with 
the terms of Article XI of the Statute. 
2. The Mexican Government had followed with 
great interest the question of the review and amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute. It had submitted 
a memorandum to the Board proposing amendments 
that would bring up to date the provisions of Article 
VI, bring them into line widi present-day realities, 
and, above all, take into account die increased 
responsibilities which devolved upon the Agency 
pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
(Tlatelolco Treaty), which was already in force. 
3. The anxieties of the non-nuclear-weapon States 
had been brought to light in the debates at die 
Conference of those States1) at the United Nations 
a year previously and were reflected in Resolution 
GC(XII)/RES/ 241, in which the General Conference 
had requested the Board of Governors to review 
Article VI of the Statute. The Board had established 
an Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole to study the 
problem, but no satisfactory solution had yet been 
found. 
4. In the final analysis, the proposals of the 
Government of Mexico were based on the following 
two criteria: the progress made in nuclear technology 
for peaceful purposes, including the production of 
source materials and the ability to supply those 
materials; and an equitable geographical distribution. 
Added to that was the wish that the final text of 
Article VI would make it possible to introduce gradual 
changes in the composition of the Board so 
that the situation existing at any given moment 
would always be reflected. 
1) Held in Geneva from 29 August to 28 September 1968. 

5. At the beginning of that month, the first part 
of the first series of meetings of the General Conference 
of the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL) had been 
held in Mexico City. Under the terms of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty the Latin American States had 
decided to establish that organization, whose principal 
organs would be a General Conference, a Council 
and a Secretariat. OPANAL and its principal organs 
were already in operation. U Thant, Secretary-
General of the United Nations, and Dr. Sigvard 
Eklund, Director General of the Agency, had been 
present at the inaugural session of the OPANAL 
General Conference. 
6. Up to the present, the following States had 
become Members of OPANAL: Barbados, Bolivia, 
Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El 
Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay. 
7. In its Article 13, die Tlatelolco Treaty provided 
for the conclusion by the Contracting Parties 
of multilateral or bilateral agreements with the 
Agency for the application of the latter's safeguards 
to their nuclear activities. The General Conference 
of OPANAL had recommended its Member States 
to initiate the negotiations referred to in Article 13 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty as soon as possible and had 
invited the Director General of the Agency to study 
the possibility of preparing a model draft agreement 
to serve as a basis for those negotiations and, at 
the same time, had invited him in due course to 
communicate to the Acting Secretary-General of 
OPANAL the results of the study and to transmit to 
the Contracting parties to the Tlatelolco Treaty the 
text of any draft that might be prepared in accordance 
with the request that had been made2). 
8. The General Conference of OPANAL, in view 
of the fact that the Tlatelolco Treaty expressly provided 
for the participation of the Agency in the 
control system established thereunder, had also decided 
to invite the Director General of the Agency to 
participate in or be represented at all its meetings 5). 
9. The General Conference of OPANAL deplored 
the fact that as yet not all the nuclear-weapon States 
had signed Additional Protocol II to the Tlatelolco 
Treaty and had urged those States to heed fully 
the appeals that had been addressed to them by 
the General Assembly of the United Nations and 
by die Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States 
to sign and ratify that Protocol as soon as possible. 
10. Another matter of interest to Mexico was the 
use of nuclear explosives for peaceful purposes. 
The Mexican Government considered that the es2) 
Resolution 11(1) of OPANAL's General Conference. 
3) Resolution 16(1). 

-2



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

tablishment, within the framework of the Agency, 
of an international service for nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes, under appropriate international 
control, would initially require the drawing up and 
approval of a special international agreement to 
define the identity, structure, powers and duties of 
the service, a task which should be undertaken as 
soon as possible with the widest possible participation 
of the non-nuclear-weapon States. 

11. According to Articles IV and V of NPT, members 
of that service would, in the first place, be 
nuclear-weapon States. As regards the non-nuclearweapon 
States, Mexico considered that those States 
which had renounced nuclear weapons must benefit 
from the service. The service would function within 
the framework of the Agency, but would not be 
confused with the latter in discharging the specific 
tasks that would be assigned to it. Moreover, difficult 
problems might arise by virtue of the fact that 
the Member States of the Agency were not the same 
as those on which NPT or, naturally and with more 
reason, the Tlatelolco Treaty were binding. 
12. The Mexican Government had submitted two 
memoranda on the subject to the Conference4) 
13. The foregoing were the points to which the 
Mexican Government considered it pertinent to draw 
the attention of the General Conference as a further 
step towards ensuring that nuclear energy was used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes. 
14. Mr. MALU (DemocraticRepublic ofthe Congo) 
said that as his authorities had already submitted 
to die Secretariat a document covering nuclear activities 
in the Democratic Republic during the period 
1968-695), his statement would be limited to a few 
remarks on the Agency's activities since September 
1968. 
15. The first matter that deserved attention was 
the inconclusive reports which the Board was submitting 
to the General Conference on the review of 
Article VI of the Statute6). The Congo had participated 
in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee of 
the Whole set up by die Board. It had been able 
to observe how little enthusiasm there was in die 
Board to recommend a specific formula to the Conference 
at its thirteenth session for amending Article 
VI despite the consensus in favour of swift amendment 
that had been apparent at the twelfth session. 
16. His delegation had already set forth on several 
occasions the reasons why Article VI should be 
amended. The validity of its objections to the present 
composition of the Board had been recognized by 
4) GC(XIII)/4ll. 
5) GC(XIII)/INF/113/Rev.l. 
6) GC(XIII)/408and415. 

all the delegations. Those objections were the following: 
the Congo, along with all of independent 
Africa, refused to recognize South Africa as the 
representative of the area of Africa and the Middle 
East, and it challenged die assertion, repeated every 
year, that Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Poland and Portugal 
should constitute the representatives of the 
producers of source materials. On the other hand 
it had stated that the increase in the number of 
Members of the Agency warranted better representation 
of die African area on the Board, in implementation 
of Article VI.A.3. 

17. The wide range of opinion in the Ad Hoc 
Committee, mentioned in die Board's report7), related 
to questions of detail rather dian to the broad 
lines of the changes which Members would like to 
have incorporated in the new text of Article VI. 
No country, for example, had opposed deleting the 
names of the four countries mentioned in Article 
VI.A.2. It was that aspect of the discussions in the 
Ad Hoc Committee which the Congolese delegation 
would have wanted to be included in the Board's 
reports. 
18. The Board's interpretation of Resolution 
GC(XII)/RES/24l was radier disappointing. That 
resolution, of which the Congo had been a cosponsor, 
explicidy requested that the Board should 
submit to the General Conference at its thirteenth 
regular session a report containing a study of ways 
and means by which the membership of the Board 
would adequately reflect: 
(a) 
The progress and developments in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy achieved 
by many Members of the Agency, including 
the developing countries; and 
(b) 
An equitable geographical distribution. 
Those were two essential points. 

19. Apparently the only ways and means adopted 
by the Board had been to set up an Ad Hoc Committee 
of the Whole, simply to take note of the 
proposals of Member States — without summarizing 
them or trying to determine, for the benefit of the 
General Conference, areas in which diey converged— 
and, finally, to decide on the need for further studies 
and consultation. 
20. That conclusion was virtually the same as die 
one reached by the Board when the Congo had 
presented its draft amendment to Article VI.A.2 in 
19658). 
21. The Congo was opposed to such delaying 
tactics, which consisted in referring problems to 
7) GC(XIII)/408,para.5. 
8) See document G C( IX) / 3 09." 

-3



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

committees and engaging in endless consultations and 
studies which never led to concrete proposals that 
would have the advantage of getting discussions 
started and moving the debate forward. 

22. Meanwhile, the perpetual nominations of South 
Africa and Portugal were submitted year in and year 
out for the approval of the General Conference. In 
that connection, it would be desirable that the example 
of Belgium should be followed to the extent 
that it was realistic. 
23. For those reasons and with a view to advancing 
the discussions, the Congolese delegation 
was submitting for the approval of the General 
Conference a draft resolution supplementing Resolution 
GC(XIII)/RES/241 and empowering the Board 
to propose to the fourteenth regular session concrete 
proposals for amending Article VI, taking into 
account the draft amendments which had been or 
would be submitted to the Board through the 
Secretariat9} 
24. On the subject of technical assistance, it must 
be recognized that the action of the Agency, given 
the resources at its disposal, had been praiseworthy. 
The Congo welcomed the very valuable assistance 
which it had received from the Agency in organizing 
the Symposium on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy in Africa held by the Organization of African 
Unity (OAU) in Kinshasa. 
25. The Agency's technical assistance had, however, 
not been without its short-comings. For example, 
the 30% proportion of resources reserved for the 
agricultural and medical uses of isotopes and radiation 
appeared to be insufficient, considering the 
nature and the extent of the needs of the developing 
countries, the number of such countries and the 
importance of agronomy and medicine to the wellbeing 
of their inhabitants. 
26. The Symposium mentioned earlier had clearly 
demonstrated the high priority that should be assigned 
to that type of research. It had also placed great 
emphasis on the pressing need in Africa for adequate 
training at all levels of education as far as the applications 
of radioisotopes were concerned. It had 
made an urgent appeal to the Agency for increased 
assistance in that regard, especially in the form of 
studies on and development of inexpensive demonstration 
materials. The problem of equipment arose 
not only in connection with training but also, in 
particular, with research proper. 
27. Very often radioisotope laboratories in developing 
countries had staff with sufficient training to 
carry out worth-while nuclear research; however, 
9) GC(XIII)/COM.2/44. 

they lacked the required equipment or spare parts. 
The Agency could make a decisive contribution to 
promoting worth-while and profitable research merely 
by seeing to it that its assistance in kind was more 
abundant and more diversified. The Congo had 
already urged that such assistance in kind be substantially 
increased, even if it meant eliminating 
certain expert posts. The policy of combining the 
supply of material with a visit by an Agency expert 
was one which should be amended so as to permit 
adaptations in accordance with the merits of individual 
cases which might be brought to the attention 
of the Secretariat. 

28. The Agency's fellowship programme appeared 
to be carefully thought out and satisfactorily implemented. 
The Congo could express only satisfaction 
with that aspect of the Agency's work. 
29. The proportion of technical assistance provided 
for Africa under the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) was definitely insufficient. The 
situation appeared to be all the more alarming in 
that the Governing Council of UNDP had just decided 
that, as from 1970, funds would be allocated 
on the basis of preliminary projects approved by 
the Administrator of UNDP. Such a procedure was 
a considerable drawback to Africa which, generally 
speaking, did not have administrative personnel sufficiently 
well-trained to prepare the elaborate documentation 
required by certain international organizations 
responsible for distributing assistance. It 
should be a concern of the Agency to help Africa 
in such matters and to insist that the distribution 
of funds between various geographical regions should 
be based on the urgency of need and on the countries' 
actual capabilities. 
30. The Congolese delegation noted with satisfaction 
the development of ties between the Agency 
and OAU. The latter was embarking, with makeshift 
means, on the genuine promotion of science 
and technology in Africa. For example, it was considering 
the establishment of centres throughout 
Africa which would be responsible for training technicians 
and competent research workers and for 
encouraging useful research work. 
31. Such a policy deserved to be encouraged; 
moreover, it was in keeping with the excellent idea 
of regional centres, but it had not obtained all the 
support which the Agency might have been expected 
to give it. That attitude should be changed and 
an attempt should be made to understand that the 
regional association concept in the field of nuclear 
research was a very valuable one. 
32. In that connection, Africa was not starting 
from the zero point. The TRICO Nuclear Centre 
in Kinshasa had been accepted in principle as a 
regional centre of the Agency. OAU had, in addition, 

GC(XIII)/OR.129 

decided to take up, on its own account, the idea of 
a regional nuclear centre in Kinshasa. The financial 
implications of that project, although within reasonable 
bounds, were nevertheless quite extensive, 
considering the scant material resources of the 
Congo. 

33. For that reason the Congo needed additional 
aid from the Agency. There was certainly a need 
in Africa for such a centre. The participants in the 
OAU Symposium had repeatedly expressed the wish 
that nuclear research should be organized on a wider 
basis, which would group several African nations 
around a reactor, a well-stocked library and radioisotope 
facilities. The TRICO Nuclear Centre had 
such facilities at its disposal. However, they needed 
to be diversified and expanded so as to be adapted 
to the needs of the large number of research workers 
which could be brought together through regional 
association. 
34. On the subject of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), the Congo was prepared 
to contribute to the success of that enterprise to 
the best of its ability. It wished to issue an invitation 
for the organization in Kinshasa of an information 
and working meeting covering the African 
region. 
35. Mr. MOUSTAFA (United Arab Republic), 
referring to the fact that the Agency was entering 
the fourteenth year of its existence, said that noteworthy 
advances had been made in nuclear technology 
and its peaceful applications by many countries 
in Asia, Africa and Latin America during that period. 
The membership of the Agency had increased from 
54 in 1957 to 102 in 1969. 
36. Fields in which progress had been made were 
the generation of electric power, the desalting of sea 
water and the potential uses of nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes. Those developments could 
be expected to have an impact on economic, industrial, 
scientific and social progress. 
37. As a result of those advances, and also of the 
conditions created by such international developments 
as the conclusion of NPT and the adoption 
of resolutions by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations in response to the resolutions of 
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, the 
Agency's activities were likely to be considerably 
expanded and intensified. 
38. In connection with Article V of NPT, the 
General Assembly had adopted a resolution at its 
twenty-third session requesting the Secretary-General 
to prepare a report on the establishment, within the 
framework of the Agency, of an international service 
for nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, under 
appropriate international control10). 
10) General Assembly Resolution 2456 C (XXIII). 

39. The technology involved in such use of nuclear 
explosions was still at an early stage of development 
and much work would have to be done before it 
could be applied in major projects in civil engineering, 
in mining or in the petroleum and natural gas 
industries. The data presented to the Board of 
Governors at its June meetings had shown that a 
wide range of technical problems in many areas 
(e.g. seismic effects, radiation hazards to the environment) 
would have to be solved before such 
applications became feasible. In any event, it was 
evident that the Agency had a major role to play 
in that field. 
40. His delegation considered that, given its statutory 
functions and technical competence and experience, 
the Agency was the most appropriate 
international body for carrying out the tasks referred 
to in Article V of NPT. The obligations arising 
under Articles III and IV of NPT would require 
further expansion of the Agency's activities relating 
to safeguards and inspection, and to the peaceful 
applications of nuclear technology. 
41. To cope with those growing responsibilities, 
it would be necessary to make a number of structural 
changes in the composition of the Board and to 
reorganize the sections of the Secretariat concerned 
with problems of safeguards, inspection, and health, 
safety and waste disposal. 
42. The problem of the composition of the Board 
was not new and had already been the subject of 
extensive discussion. His delegation considered it 
to be one of the most important matters in which 
revision of the Statute was required. The United 
Arab Republic had always supported amendment of 
the Statute, not only of Article VI, but also of many 
other articles when developments in nuclear science 
so warranted. 
43. His country's views on the revision of Article 
VI had been clearly stated in the discussions of the 
Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole dealing with the 
question. The principles governing the composition 
of the Board should be such as to enable it to work 
most effectively within the framework of NPT. The 
United Arab Republic was concerned solely with 
rectifying the present unbalanced composition of the 
Board, having particular regard to the inadequate 
representation of African and Asian countries. It 
believed that whatever solution was arrived at should 
be based on a genuine balance, be really workable 
and be acceptable to both the advanced and the 
developing countries. 
44. The rapidly growing demand for nuclearpower 
plants meant that uranium consumption would increase 
sharply during the next decade. According 
to Agency estimates, it would rise from about 16 000 
tons of U3O8 in 1970 to about 90 000 tons per 

GC(XIII)/OR.129 

annum in 1980. Forecasts indicated future demands 
of the order of one million tons. Although prospection 
for uranium, thorium and other nuclear raw 
materials was under way in a number of countries, 
exploration on a large scale was still limited by a 
shortage of funds and lack of experience. Those 
were problems to which the attention of the Agency 
should be directed. 

45. It would be desirable for the Agency to find 
ways and means of financing the inclusion in its 
programme of projects for large-scale exploration 
work in developing countries. Work along those 
lines, involving expenditure on a scale of millions of 
dollars, was being done under projects sponsored 
by UNDP and other United Nations organizations. 
46. Nuclear power plants (for electricity production 
and desalting of sea water) could be expected to 
play an increasingly important role in meeting the 
future energy requirements of developing countries 
as well as of advanced countries. However, the 
introduction of nuclear plants in developing countries 
faced a number of problems. The threshold size 
for nuclear plants, to be competitive with conventional 
plants, was around 300MW(e)— a figure still 
much too high for most developing countries. Moreover, 
nuclear power plants required huge investment, 
a large proportion of it in foreign currency. Proper 
financing of such projects therefore met with serious 
difficulties. 
47. For those reasons, the introduction of nuclear 
power plants in developing countries was still proceeding 
-much too slowly. In fact, as the Director 
General had warned in presenting the Agency's annual 
report to the United Nations Economic and 
Social Council11) nuclear power was at present an 
illustration of the technological gap between the 
developing and advanced countries. His delegation 
endorsed those views and believed that the Agency 
should devote considerable attention to that problem 
in its future activities relating to nuclear power. 
48. Industrial companies should be urged and 
encouraged to increase their efforts and their research 
and development work in connection with 
improving the technology and economics of mediumsize 
nuclear plants. 
49. An important potential application of nuclear 
energy was in the production of fresh water by 
desalting of sea water. The availability of vast new 
supplies of water for use in agriculture opened up 
prospects for the development of large arid and 
semi-arid areas in various parts of the world. 
50. The results of recent studies on the feasibility 
of combining fresh-water and power production with 
U) INFCIRC/126. 

energy-intensive industries indicated that large agroindustrial 
complexes represented a promising solution 
for die distant future. 

51. Meanwhile, however, it was imperative, as a 
first step, to construct one or more pilot or demonstration 
plants to carry out research on the 
problems of desalting water for agriculture. The 
Agency could play a part in planning and implementing 
such pilot projects. 
5 2. It would also be useful if the Agency increased 
its assistance to the developing countries in the preparation 
of long-range nuclear power programmes 
and in carrying out feasibility studies on specific 
projects. The Agency and other international financing 
institutions could also help in the solution of 
the important problem of financing. It was relevant 
to refer in that connection to Resolution 2456 A 
(XXIII) of the United Nations General Assembly 
inviting the Agency, the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD) and UNDP 
to continue the study of the problems of financing 
nuclear activities for developing countries. Consideration 
could be given to an international, special 
fund arrangement for peaceful nuclear development 
projects, to be established in co-operation with 
IBRD, to make financing available solely on the 
basis of economic and technical feasibility of the 
projects, as decided by some appropriate international 
procedure. 
5 3. An important element in achieving progress 
in the developing countries was effective and fruitful 
co-operation at all levels. It was the policy of his 
Government to encourage international, regional and 
bilateral co-operation in all fields of scientific development. 
An outstanding achievement in that direction 
had been the establishment in Cairo of the 
Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for 
the Arab Countries in 1963. 
54. In the six years during which the Agency 
had participated in die work of the Centre, the latter 
had made valuable contributions to the application 
of radioisotopes in the solution of many problems 
of the region and to the training of visiting specialists 
from Member States. Although the Agency's participation 
had terminated during 1968, various forms 
of co-operation were still being maintained. 
55. The extent to which the Agency could carry 
on its technical assistance activities depended largely 
on an increase in voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund. The figures in the Board's annual 
report indicating that the percentage of requests from 
Member States which could be met by the Agency 
was steadily declining was a matter of great concern 
to the developing countries. His delegation, which 
emphasized die need for a substantial increase in 
the Fund, would be prepared to co-sponsor a draft 
_6



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

resolution on the subject. The United Arab Republic, 
in line with its policy of consistent support 
for the Agency, had decided to maintain its voluntary 
contribution to the General Fund for 1970 at the 
same level as its contribution for 1969- That amount 
corresponded to about three times its assessed contribution. 


56. His delegation wished to welcome the Republic 
of Ireland as a Member of the Agency. 
57. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam) wished to express 
his keen appreciation of the Agency's growing 
achievements in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and desired to see a still greater intensification of 
international co-operation for the common good. 
The success of the Agency's role in implementing 
NPT would certainly be governed by that intensification 
of co-operation. The same applied to the 
operation of INIS. 
58. As the Viet-Namese delegation had repeatedly 
stated at sessions of the General Conference, that 
co-operation was avidly desired by developing countries, 
whose nuclear programmes could certainly not 
be successfully carried out without the co-ordinated 
support of the Agency and of die advanced countries. 
In that connection he noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency had made every effort to meet die technical 
assistance requests of the have-not countries, 
naturally widiin the limits of its still slender resources. 
With the constant increase in technical 
assistance requests, the Agency would doubtless have 
difficulties to overcome unless all Member States 
without exception acknowledged dieir obligations 
regarding solidarity and mutual aid. 
59. For its part Viet-Nam was prepared to provide 
a financial buttress for that solidarity, in an 
amount equal to its assessed contribution to the 
Regular Budget for 1970. Although modest, that 
contribution represented a great sacrifice for his 
country. It had made the gesture as a mark of gratitude 
to the Agency, for it was thanks to the latter 
that Viet-Nam had been able to make quite rapid 
progress in the introduction of the use of radioisotopes 
in medicine and in agriculture. The Agency 
had also provided valuable assistance in the drafting 
of Viet-Namese nuclear energy legislation. It had 
made a substantial contribution to the training, 
including the advanced training of Viet-Namese nuclear 
scientists and technicians. Research had been 
undertaken with the Agency's assistance and in the 
year under review Viet-Nam had obtained from the 
Agency two research contracts, one in medicine and 
the other in agriculture. 
60. Apart from the difficulties peculiar to Viet-Nam, 
the implementation of its atomic energy programme 
was hindered by the lack of qualified staff. That 
situation came about pardy as a result of the "brain 
drain" and partly owing to the lack of the means 
to train staff in the country itself. It might in that 
connection be appropriate for the Agency to 
promote, along the lines of the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics, the establishment of centres 
dealing with other activities in the nuclear field. 
To offset the shortage of trained staff, the Agency 
might also draw up a list of teachers who would 
be prepared to give instruction in various disciplines 
in countries requesting such services. In addition 
the Agency could also supply experts and equipment 
in order to make a greater contribution to the local 
training of die technicians required by the developing 
countries. All those activities could be rationally 
got under way by the establishment of a regional 
nuclear training centre. For that purpose the Agency 
might seek the co-operation of regional organizations 
such as the Southeast Asian Ministers of Education 
Secretariat. 

61. Turning to research, he said that his delegation 
wished once again to express the desire, already 
formulated at the eleventh and twelfth sessions 
of the Conference, that the Agency should establish 
an appropriate procedure ensuring the rapid supply 
of scientific equipment to countries urgendy requiring 
it12). While equipment of diat kind was sometimes 
available to excess in the research establishments 
of the advanced countries, it was almost nonexistent 
on the local markets of the developing 
countries, where the lack even of a single spare 
part could often bring work to a standstill. 
62. Viet-Nam strongly supported the planned extension 
of the India/Philippines/Agency regional 
joint training and research programme using a neutron 
crystal spectrometer13) in the form of regional 
co-operation on a larger scale. However, the programme 
should be defined by common agreement, 
in the interests of the whole region, and its ultimate 
aim should be to enable each country concerned 
to specialize in a particular field, while being in a 
position to derive full advantage from the work 
carried out in other fields by the other participants. 
In that regard he would reaffirm his wish that the 
Regional Representative for Asia and the Far East 
should play an active part as co-ordinator. 
63. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) made the following statement*: 
(1) "Mr. President, distinguished delegates, 
ladies and gendemen, allow me, Mr. President, first 
of all to congratulate you on your election to this 
high office. The Soviet delegation is confident that 
12) GC(XI)/OR.113,para.6andGC(XII)/OR.122,para.21. 
13) See documents INFCIRC/56 and Add.1. 

* 
This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's 
request under Rule 92(b) of the Conference's Rules 
of Procedure. 

GC(XIII)/OR.129 

your election as President will contribute to the 
successful work of the thirteenth session of the 
General Conference of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency. 

(2) "The past year in the Agency's work 
can be characterized as a period qualitatively different 
from the preceding years of its operation. The 
past year has seen the conclusion of the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and the 
Agency's work has begun to be affected by a whole 
series of new functions resulting from that treaty. 
(3) "The Agency's successful discharge of 
these new responsibilities will depend on the efforts 
of all Member States, on the endeavours they make 
to contribute to the maximum extent to the accomplishment 
of the tasks devolving on the Agency as 
a result of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
(4) "The Treaty has now been signed by 
almost 90 States. As far as the Soviet Union is 
concerned, it will be known to those present that 
the foreign affairs commissions of the Supreme 
Soviet of the USSR have unanimously recommended 
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR 
to ratify the Treaty, and we hope that the time is 
not far distant when the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
will enter into force. 
(5) "Unfortunately not all States Members 
of the IAEA have yet acceded to the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. The position adopted by some States 
Members of the Agency is strange, to say the least, 
in that while stressing the great importance of the 
peaceful use of atomic energy and of international 
collaboration in that field, not least through the 
Agency, they nevertheless refuse to participate in the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty, with all the prospects it 
offers for the further development of international 
collaboration. 
(6) "At the present stage the Agency's entire 
work must be viewed in the light of the requirements 
stemming from the Non-Proliferation Treaty. This 
relates first and foremost to the Agency's vitally 
important task of applying safeguards to ensure that 
atomic energy is used for peaceful purposes. Even 
before conclusion of the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
the Agency had worked out and put into practice 
a trustworthy safeguards system, and the Non-
Proliferation Treaty provides that this system will 
be used in order to supervise implementation of its 
main provisions. The Agency has already begun 
preparing to carry out these new responsibilities. 
The Secretariat has done considerable work in drawing 
up a draft model safeguards agreement. What 
now remains is to bring this important work to 
completion in order that once the Treaty enters 
into force the Agency should be ready to discharge 
its control responsibilities in practice. This important 
work lays a heavy burden of responsibility on 
States Members of the Agency, on the Board of 
Governors and on the Agency's Secretariat. 

(7) "In addition to drawing up a draft model 
agreement the Agency is devoting close attention to 
working out the technical aspects of safeguards, and 
for this purpose is convening panels comprising 
expert consultants, etc. One group of consultants 
has completed its work and presented its reports 
to the Director General. The main conclusion that 
can be drawn from the results of its work is that, 
from the scientific and technical points of view, the 
Agency's existing safeguards system is the system 
on which the work of supervising implementation 
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty should be based. 
(8) "The Agency's responsibilities in connection 
with the Non-Proliferation Treaty go beyond 
making the necessary preparations to carry out its 
new functions in the field of safeguards. The Treaty 
gives the Agency definite responsibilities in regard 
to peaceful nuclear explosions. Most States are of 
the opinion that it is the Agency which should play 
the role of the organ through which the non-nuclear 
Powers parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty may 
benefit from the peaceful use of nuclear explosives. 
(9) "As we have indicated in the Soviet 
Union's reply to the Director General's query we 
believe that with its present structure the Agency 
is in a position to assume responsibilities in connection 
with such explosions. The Agency has 
played an active part in preparing the report which 
will be submitted to the General Assembly oi the 
United Nations for consideration at its present session, 
and it is collecting and disseminating information 
in regard to the possible practical applications 
of nuclear explosives for peaceful purposes. 
(10) "In accordance with the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty the USSR will take a direct part in 
carrying out peaceful nuclear explosions for nonnuclear 
States. In our desire to contribute to the 
Agency's work in this field we have already sent to 
the Agency a number of scientific and technical 
reports by Soviet scientists on the problem of using 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes. These 
reports discuss, on the basis of specific examples, 
possible applications of nuclear explosions in the 
USSR's national economy, in regard, for example, 
to the construction of canals and reservoirs, the 
underground development and opening up of mineral 
deposits and steps to increase petroleum and gas 
production. The reports also deal with such important 
questions as methods of forecasting radioactive 
contamination. We will continue sending the 
Agency similar information in future. 
(11) "We think this material will be of value 
to the Agency in assessing the propects of using 

GC(XIII)/OR.129 

nuclear explosives for peaceful purposes. Naturally 
these prospects must be considered realistically, taking 
into account the actual current level of technical 
development. 

(12) "There is no room for doubt that the 
General Conference was perfectly correct in the resolution 
it adopted at its twelfth session regarding the 
Agency's role in this question of peaceful explosions. 
There is a great deal of work for the Agency to do 
in making the necessary organizational and material 
preparations for discharging its responsibilities in 
this field. 
(13) "We fully approve the report of the 
Board of Governors on "The Agency's responsibility 
to provide services in connection with nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes", adopted by the 
Board last June. It is certain that this document 
will be one of the key elements in preparing the 
report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations 
on the question of nuclear explosions. 
(14) "In the view of the Soviet delegation, 
the Agency's new functions resulting from the Treaty 
should also be kept in mind when considering the 
question of the membership of the Board. This 
question was raised at the last session of the General 
Conference. In this connection I should like to recall 
that in the resolution then adopted one on the main 
reasons given for reviewing Article VI of the Statute 
and enlarging the composition of the Board was the 
necessity of enabling the Agency to carry out its 
new responsibilities under the Treaty. 
(15) "For this reason it is essential that 
the composition of the Board should be attuned to 
a factor of such great political importance as the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 
which has been signed by the overwhelming 
majority of States Members of the Agency. The 
Soviet delegation has stressed repeatedly, both in 
the Board and in the Ad Hoc Committee to Review 
Article VI, that this is a prerequisite for the effective 
functioning of the Board in the new conditions that 
have arisen. 
(16) "Naturally in deciding so important a 
question as the expansion of the Board it is necessary 
to proceed cautiously and with due regard to 
all the relevant factors. As the Soviet delegation 
pointed out at the last session of the General Conference, 
enlargement of the Board must not lead to 
undermining the political compromise on which its 
composition was based. That means that due attention 
must be paid to the legitimate interests of the 
socialist countries, which make a substantial and 
important contribution to the work of the Agency. 
It is also necessary to take into account those historic 
processes which have taken place since the Agency's 
Statute was drawn up, processes which have led to 
the liberation of African, Asian and American countries 
from the colonialist yoke and their emergence 
as new independent States. The Soviet Union fully 
understands the desire of the developing countries 
of these regions to increase their representation 
in the Board. 

(17) "Consolidation of the Agency's international 
authority is also manifest in closer links 
between it and other international organizations. 
Conclusion of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which 
entrusted the Agency with a whole series of important 
functions, has led to much closer relations 
between it and the United Nations. The Agency's 
relations with regional organizations are also being 
consolidated. During the past year the Soviet delegation 
has noted with satisfaction the conclusion of 
a Co-operation Agreement between the Agency and 
the Organization of African Unity. This year, only 
a few days ago, the Board of Governors, in response 
to a request from the League of Arab States, has 
instructed the Secretariat to engage in the necessary 
negotiations regarding conclusion of a similar agreement 
with that organization. In our view, that is 
the next useful step in establishing relations between 
the Agency and other international organizations. 
(18) "In this connection the Soviet delegation 
would like in particular to refer to the collaboration 
which has been established and which is 
developing between the Agency and the Council of 
Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON) in regard 
to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
(19) "Pursuant to a decision of its twentythird 
(special) session, held in Moscow in April 
1969 at the highest governmental level, COMECON 
is at present deeply engaged in drawing up a comprehensive 
long-term programme covering all branches 
of science, technology and industry, including 
the widespread use of atomic energy in die national 
economy of its Member States. In accordance with 
this programme new forms of co-operation will be 
developed and intensified. 
(20) "In view of the considerable experience 
of an organization such as the Agency and the farranging 
scientific, technical and economic activity 
of COMECON we consider that collaboration between 
the two organizations in regard to the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy will continue to be mutually beneficial 
in attaining the lofty objective of world-wide 
peace. 
(21) "When speaking of the new tasks widi 
which the Agency is faced as a result of the conclusion 
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons we should always bear in mind 
that an important prerequisite for the effective execution 
of these tasks is that the Agency should be 
converted into a genuinely universal organization, in 

GC(XIII)/OR.129 

other words that its membership should be broadened. 
We accordingly welcome the addition to the 
Agency's Members of a country such as Ireland, 
which was one of the first to sign and ratify the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty. It is at the same time 
all die more intolerable that owing to the resistance 
of a number of countries the German Democratic 
Republic has so far been denied the possibility to 
become a Member of the Agency. As is shown in 
particular by the message sent by the Government 
of the German Democratic Republic to the President 
of the Conference, this country has considerable 
achievements to its credit in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. It was one of the first to sign the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty and declare its readiness 
to place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards 
in accordance with the Treaty, and as delegates will 
have heard, the Parliament of the German Democratic 
Republic yesterday ratified the Treaty. It is 
indisputable that the admission to the Agency of a 
country such as the German Democratic Republic 
will enormously contribute to the Agency's successful 
work in all fields. 

(22) "Mr. President, a sound tradition has 
grown up during the General Conference to sum 
up what has been done towards developing the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy and international 
collaboration in this field during the period 
that has elapsed. The Soviet delegation would like 
to present certain comments on die main trends in 
regard to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, in the 
establishment of which the Agency plays an active 
part. 
(23) "First of all we deem it necessary to 
comment favourably on the Agency's work in the 
field of nuclear power and on the use it makes in 
its activities of the accumulated information and 
experience of the Soviet Union and other countries 
advanced in this field. 
(24) "At the twelfth regular session of the 
General Conference, the Soviet Union, wishing to 
promote still further the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy — and especially of nuclear 
power — in the non-nuclear countries, expressed 
its readiness to enrich natural uranium for interested 
countries up to 2.5-5% in uranium-235, i.e. to the 
level of enrichment required for nuclear power 
stations. 
(25) "The Soviet Union now reaffirms its 
readiness to do this and, in view of the interest 
expressed by a number of non-nuclear States, the 
appropriate organizations in the USSR have formulated 
terms for natural uranium enrichment in 
the USSR on behalf of non-nuclear States parties 
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. These terms are 
being communicated to the Secretariat. In this connection 
it is envisaged that such uranium-enrichment 
operations will be carried out by the Soviet Union 
either on a bilateral basis or through the Agency. 

(26) "International co-operation has also developed 
through collaboration between scientists involved 
in fundamental physics. 
(27) "Last year in the Soviet Union, in the 
field of fundamental research, new data were obtained 
on the Serpukhov-70 GeV accelerator. Interactions 
between high-energy protons were measured and 
the first experiments in the search for quarks etc. 
were carried out. This accelerator has formed a 
basis for the continued expansion of scientific cooperation 
between physicists in the Soviet Union 
and those in France and at CERN. 
(28) "Great success has been achieved by 
the scientists of socialist countries at the Joint Institute 
for Nuclear Research. They have proved by 
experiment that it is basically possible to build 
accelerators based on the collective method of accelerating 
charged particles, as propounded by 
Veksler and developed and put into practice by his 
pupil Sarantsev. 
(29) "Successful experiments have been 
carried out on the Institute's IBR reactor in the 
production of ultra-cold neutrons. Work has also 
successfully progressed there on the syndiesis of the 
transuranium elements, including the search for elements 
around the transition number 114. It should 
be pointed out that at the Joint Institute for Nuclear 
Research, scientists of the socialist countries are 
working on their own projects under their own 
initiative and are making their national contribution 
to the development of world science. 
(30) "In the field of thermonuclear research, 
investigations into the properties of hot plasma and 
mediods of containing and heating it have been 
continuing with the close co-operation of scientists 
from other countries. Special attention has been 
paid to the study of closed toroidal systems of the 
TOKAMAK type. Work has also continued on 
closed traps of the "Stellarator" type. The success 
achieved in this sphere has brought us closer yet 
to the point where we can embark on the design 
of a prototype thermonuclear reactor. 
(31) "Another important aspect of die 
Agency's activity is the treatment of radioactive 
waste. We are totally opposed to the disposal of 
industrial waste at any level of activity into the sea 
or fresh water. For this reason the Soviet Union 
has developed systems to remove the active elements 
from solution and place them in concentration. More 
than thirty centralized collection and burial points 
for radioactive waste have been constructed in our 
country. 
-10



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

(32) "We are freely sharing the experience acquired 
with the Agency. For this reason we were 
prompted to organize with the Agency a study tour 
for specialists from 14 developing countries which 
are Members of the Agency to study the problem 
of radioactive waste disposal; the aim of the tour 
was to acquaint the representatives of these countries 
with the work being done by Soviet scientists, to 
show them the scientific centres and burial points 
and to pass on the knowledge and experience we 
have gained in this field so that they might put 
it to use themselves. 
(33) "An important Agency activity is the 
solution of problems connected with the increase 
in agricultural productivity. A clear example of this 
is the work being done on the irradiation of seeds 
before sowing. 
(34) "As a result of these investigations it 
has been established beyond doubt that specific 
doses of ionizing radiation have a stimulating effect. 
There is now a theoretical basis to support the 
introduction of irradiation before sowing. It has 
been shown that irradiation before sowing can be 
applied in practice subject to a number of conditions 
which ensure reproducibility of the stimulating effect. 
(35) "We are prepared to co-operate more 
and more with the Agency in this field. 
(36) "A vital problem today is the preservation 
of food products and the Agency a playing a 
leading role in this field. 
(37) "Extensive research into the use of 
ionizing radiation to irradiate food products was 
begun in the USSR twenty years ago. 
(38) "One result of the investigations into 
the irradiation of food products carried out in our 
country is a list of irradiated products which the 
Ministry of Health of the USSR has passed as fit 
for consumption. This list, information about which 
was passed on by us to the Agency, entides the 
appropriate Ministries and Departments to introduce 
the new and efficient method of food processing 
into industry on a broad scale. 
(39) "Soviet scientists, working on the radiation 
processing of food products, are actively cooperating 
with the Agency and are assisting the 
developing countries in this matter by various means, 
including the Agency'stechnicalassistanceprogramme. 
(40) "In carrying out its extensive programme 
in the use of atomic energy, the Soviet Union 
consistendy supports broad economic, scientific and 
technological co-operation with all countries. 
(41) "Our country has a significant number 
of bilateral agreements on the peaceful use of atomic 
energy with States at various stages of development 
in this respect. However, whilst expanding cooperation 
on a bilateral basis, the Soviet Union is 
also each year intensifying its efforts to co-operate 
with international organizations, above all with the 
Agency. 
(42) "Eminent Soviet specialists are actively 
participating in scientific and technological conferences 
and symposia organized by the Agency. 
(43) "The Soviet Union is a regular location 
for Agency conferences and seminars, as well as 
study tours arranged for scientists from the developing 
countries under the technical assistance programme. 
In November of this year, in Moscow, a 
meeting of the four nuclear data centres is to be 
held. And at the beginning of 1970, also in Moscow, 
there will be a meeting of the international working 
group on diermionic energy conversion. 
(44) "The appropriate organizations in our 
country are constantly sending the Agency information 
about the results of scientific research carried 
out by Soviet scientists in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. This flow of information will increase 
considerably in 1970, since the Soviet Union has 
announced its willingness to participate in the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS) and 
will carry out all the duties that this entails. Soviet 
scientists are helping, partly on a cost-free basis, 
in scientific research being carried out at the Agency's 
request, and they are also helping to prepare coordinated 
scientific research programmes. The results 
of these activities will be of benefit to all the Agency's 
Member States. 
(45) "An important event for the further 
course of work on the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy will be the Fourth Geneva Conference. The 
Agency played an active role in organizing the Third 
Geneva Conference on the peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy. It is a matter for satisfaction to note 
that the Agency is now being entrusted with duties 
relating to die scientific and technical organization 
of the Fourth Geneva Conference and we are sure 
that the Agency will successfully carry out these 
duties. In order to do so, the Agency must already 
start to take account of the forthcoming conference 
in planning its activities. 
(46) "The Soviet Union is also actively participating 
in the' Agency's programme of technical 
assistance to developing countries. 
(47) "At the twelfth regular session of the 
General Conference we announced our intention of 
making our usual voluntary contribution of 15 0 000 
roubles. 
— 11 — 


GC(XIII)/OR.129 

(48) "We note with satisfaction that the 
Agency has now made use of practically this entire 
amount. In this connection, we should like to mention 
the useful work which the Agency's Secretariat 
has done in using these funds for the provision of 
equipment to developing countries. 
(49) "In order to help in implementing the 
Agency's technical assistance programme, the Soviet 
delegation is authorized to state that the USSR will 
make a voluntary contribution of 150 000 roubles 
in national currency to the Agency's technical 
assistance fund for 1970; this contribution is both 
for the provision of equipment, apparatus and supplies 
and also for the organization of meetings, study 
tours, seminars and courses in the USSR for specialists 
and scientists from developing countries. 
(50) "Soviet scientists sent to developing 
countries as Agency experts have made an important 
contribution in the provision of technical assistance. 
(51) "We feel sure, too, that scientists from 
the developing countries who have undergone training 
as Agency fellows on the basis of the 20 fellowships 
previously made available by the Soviet Union 
have derived considerable scientific advantage therefrom. 
(52) "In view of the satisfactory results of 
this work the Soviet Union, starting in 1970, will 
make available a further 10 fellowships a year — 
in addition to those offered through the IAEA — to 
train scientists from developing countries for work 
on installations built with Soviet aid or for carrying 
out joint scientific and technical work within the 
framework of bilateral agreements between the Soviet 
Union and the developing countries concerned. The 
USSR will acquaint the Agency's Secretariat with the 
use made of these fellowships in due course. 
(53) "The year 1970 will be a year marked, 
not only in our own country, but throughout the 
whole world, by the centenary of the birth of 
Vladimir Ilich Lenin, a brilliant thinker and man of 
learning and the founder of the Soviet State. 
(54) "Scientific meetings, conferences and 
symposia are being held both in the Soviet Union 
and within the framework of international organizations 
to commemorate this jubilee. We hope the 
senior staff of the International Atomic Energy Agency 
will be able to participate in the symposium 
entitled 'V.I. Lenin and Education, Science and 
Culture' to be organized by UNESCO in Tampere 
(Finland) and Leningrad. We feel sure that the 
celebration of this jubilee, which is so important to 
the Soviet people, will help to promote peaceful 
international collaboration. 
(55) "The Soviet delegation welcomes the 
decision of Dr. Eklund to remain in his post as 
Director General of the IAEA, which he has led so 
effectively for many years. 
(56) "In conclusion, I should like to point 
out that the Agency is assuming ever-increasing 
importance in the world of today. In addition to 
its important scientific, technical and economic duties 
in connection with the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy it is now also being called upon to perform 
important duties relating to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. This responsibility 
places our organization in the front rank of those 
concerned with ensuring international peace and 
security. On this very question of international peace 
and security the Government of the USSR has submitted 
important proposals for discussion at the 
twenty-fourth General Assembly of the tinted Nations. 
We are convinced that the Agency and its 
administration are fully aware of the Agency's new 
role and are properly equipping the organization 
to carry out its new duties. We can guarantee that 
the Soviet Union will give the Agency and its Secretariat 
full support in the performance of its important 
new duties." 
64. Mr. HIRSCH (France) said that over the past 
twelve years the Agency's role in connection with 
the provision of technical assistance to the developing 
countries, the drafting of international legislation 
governing the transport of radioactive materials, waste 
management and radiation protection had gradually 
become established. However, the Agency had not 
carried out on a large scale the functions of broker 
in nuclear materials, since countries continued to 
prefer bilateral exchanges in that field. The same 
applied to transactions concerning power reactors. 
The Agency's fund of special fissionable materials 
was in fact still quite fully stocked. When that was 
no longer the case the French Government would 
be prepared to give its close attention to the matter 
of placing the required amounts of fissionable materials 
at the disposal of the Agency's fund. 
6 5. The development of the political situation gave 
grounds for casting the Agency in an ever-wider role 
in the control of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
In that connection France approved the Agency's 
safeguards activities, the position of the French 
Government on the matter of financing those activities 
remaining unchanged. France was interested in 
all the studies undertaken by the Department of 
Safeguards and Inspection aimed at developing methods 
of control and expanding the practical field 
of their application. In particular, it had made a 
positive response to an Agency request to supply 
the material necessary for a study on control at an 
isotope separation plant. The French offer had received 
no reply and he would be interested to know 
how things stood in that respect. 
— 12

GC(XIII)/OR.129 

66. As regards the inspectorate, the persons chosen 
for that work should be drawn from a wide range 
of countries, while at the same time the recruitment 
of large numbers of insufficiendy qualified staff 
should be avoided; it might be possible to reduce 
the number of inspectors by making greater use of 
atomic energy experts who had had experience in 
the operation of nuclear installations. As to the 
financing of inspection work, the time had come to 
subject it to close scrutiny, since the cost involved 
could not continue to be charged to the Regular 
Budget in view of the relative increase in the funds 
allocated to safeguards. The cost of inspections 
would sooner or later have to be incorporated, in 
one way or another, in the price of services rendered 
or in the sales of nuclear materials subject to control. 
67. Conscious of the expansion which had taken 
place in the Agency's role and in the interest shown 
in it by its Members, whose numbers had registered 
a substantial increase, the French delegation considered 
it appropriate to make provision for the 
review of Article VI of the Statute. Numerous proposals 
for that purpose had been submitted to the 
Ad Hoc Committee set up to deal with the problem. 
Two trends had emerged in that committee: some 
Members were extremely cautious about upsetting 
the delicate balance achieved in 1956 when the 
Statute had been drafted, while others would like 
to have visible confirmation of the technical progress 
they had made or to buttress the importance of the 
geographical area to which they belonged by increasing 
the number of permanent seats. The proposal 
of the Italian Government represented, in 
the view of his delegation, a useful basis for discussion. 
France had therefore supported that proposal 
in principle, although the concomitant increase 
in the number of Governors from 25 to 33 seemed 
somewhat excessive, and it was to be hoped that 
the whole delicate question could be settled during 
the coming months. 
68. The French delegation regretted that it would 
be obliged to abstain on the vote for the budget 
for 1970, for reasons which it had set forth on 
various occasions, particularly in the Board's Administrative 
and Budgetary Committee. Stricter 
efforts should be made to arrive at a budget increase 
which remained reasonable in absolute terms, 
and at a proper distribution of funds between various 
activities. 
69- The concept of strict efficiency should also be 
applied to the Agency's staff, in terms of maintaining 
its quality, a feature by which France set ever-greater 
store. When an official was of undoubted value, 
there should be no hesitation in endeavouring to 
retain his services with the Agency, even sometimes 
at the expense of geographical distribution. Such 
action was necessary to ensure continuity in the 
implementation of the scientific programme. 

70. On the subject of geographical distribution, 
the French delegation wished to enter a protest 
at the fact that certain job descriptions implied the 
necessity for candidates to be of English mother 
tongue. That was an act of discrimination of which 
the French Government would be obliged to take 
official cognizance should it recur in either the letter 
or the spirit. 
71. He was pleased to see that the agreement 
with the International Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity 
at Monaco had been renewed, and stated that 
France would continue to supply the laboratory with 
the radioisotopes necessary for its research work. 
France was likewise prepared to continue its free 
deliveries of radioisotopes to the Laboratory at Seibersdorf 
for the fabrication of standards and for 
other activities. In that connection he wished to pay 
tribute to the work carried out by Mr. Seligman 
during the eleven years which he had spent at the 
head of the Department of Research and Isotopes; 
in particular, it was to Mr. Seligman that the Agency 
owed the existence of the laboratories at Seibersdorf 
and Monaco and the launching of the system of 
research contracts. 
72. Turning to the INIS project, he said France 
had followed the preparatory work with great interest 
and considered that something of universal value 
could thereby be achieved, particularly if account 
were taken of the experience obtained in operating 
already well-tried documentation systems. For that 
reason the French Government was prepared to 
participate in INIS as now defined, within the limits 
of the subject scope chosen by the experts. 
73. Conscious of the limitations of the French 
financial effort in connection with voluntary contributions, 
he was happy to announce that his 
Government had decided to make a gift to the 
Agency of electronic equipment for its laboratories 
and for use in research in the developing countries. 
The equipment in question was worth about 100 000 
francs. 
74. At the recent Symposium on the Handling 
of Radiation Accidents it had emerged that France 
possessed an infrastructure particularly well suited 
to rendering technical and medical assistance to 
irradiation and contamination victims. His Government 
was therefore signifying to the Agency its 
willingness to accept trainees for instruction in clinical 
radiopathology, and the training courses could 
begin as from January 1970. 
75. In addition the French Government was 
placing at the Agency's disposal, for the current 
year, ten fellowships for scientifically well-qualified 
candidates, the subjects for study being clinical radiopathology 
or any other nuclear discipline taught in 
France. 
-13



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

76-. During the past year the French Government 
had endeavoured to meet the Agency's requirements 
in the technical assistance field, and about a dozen 
French experts had taken part in missions, some 
of them of long duration. French research centres 
had furthermore received for training some 40 
Agency fellows. France would also be host country 
to a symposium on radiation safety problems and 
to a number of study groups during the coming 
months. 

77. Without giving a full analysis of French nuclear 
activities, he wished to point out, regarding nuclear 
power generation, that the main effort of the Commissariat 
a l'energie atomique (CEA) (French 
Atomic Energy Commission) was at present concentrated 
on the fast-neutron type of reactor, which 
was considered to be the reactor of the future. The 
"RAPSODIE" experimental reactor had been in very 
satisfactory operation for two years at Cadarache. 
It had irradiated fuel pins to burn-ups exceeding 
60 000 MWd/t without any problems arising, whereas 
the initial programme had made provision for a 
maximum burn-up of 30 000 MWd/t. Construction 
of the "PHENIX" prototype 250 MW(e) power station, 
representing one of the priority investment 
projects of CEA, had begun at Marcoule early in 
1969. That was a field in which France considered 
itself to be in a position to make a contribution to 
the international cause. The success obtained with 
"RAPSODIE" had indeed already induced several 
countries to turn to France with a view to future 
co-operation. 
78. The start of 1969 had also been marked by 
die commissioning of the Saint-Laurent power station, 
and six months after its connection with the Electricite 
de France grid the station had generated more 
than 500 million kWh; that was a quite remarkable 
performance by a plant which was one of the only 
three in the world with a capacity exceeding 
400MW(e). 
79. In the production and export of artificial 
radioisotopes, which was a responsibility of CEA, 
France was making an ever-increasing effort and 
according priority to the perfecting of all those applications 
which could be of service to the developing 
countries, especially in agriculture. 
80. Finally CEA was also playing a leading part 
in France in studies on the desalting of sea water, 
an activity which, perhaps sooner than had first been 
expected, could be associated with the generation of 
nuclear power. It was in that context that French 
industry, after having constructed a small desalting 
plant in Mauritania, was now going to erect a much 
larger one in Kuwait. 
81. He was gratified that the Agency would be 
responsible for organizing the Fourth United Nations 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses 
of Atomic Energy in Geneva in 1971. The Agency 
should make certain that no symposium was planned 
which might overlap with the topics to be dealt with 
in Geneva. The French delegation knew in advance 
that the Secretariat would display great efficiency, 
diligence and competence in the preparation of the 

Geneva conference, which should yield interesting 
conclusions. Among other things the conference 
would make it possible to assess the situation regarding 
the use of nuclear explosives for peaceful 
purposes, a topic which had recently acquired justified 
importance, although some countries had displayed 
a tendency to suggest that practical results 
could be achieved much sooner than was in fact 
the case, doubtless in order to calm the anxieties 
of countries which feared that they might be permanently 
excluded from activities in that field. The 
Agency should state the situation as it was and, in 
a general way, one of its functions should always 
be to place in proper perspective the sometimes 
exaggerated hopes originating in poorly industrialized 
countries regarding the possibilities of rapidly introducing 
the use of nuclear energy techniques. France 
had confidence in the Agency's capacity to succeed 
in that important assignment, as in all the other 
functions which were entrusted to it. 

82. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) thanked 
the Director General for all his work over the past 
eight years and expressed his delegation's confidence 
that he (Mr. Eklund) would continue rendering 
equally valuable service during his new term of office. 
He also welcomed the appointment of Mr. Rometsch 
as Inspector General, who was in charge of safeguards 
activities, a vital and growing part of the 
Agency's responsibilities. 
83. Though there had been no sudden change 
in the world's nuclear industry, there had, nevertheless, 
been a continued acceleration of the process 
by which it was becoming, in many ways, a normal, 
even if rapidly expanding, commercial industry an 
industry governed by the criteria of customer 
demand, price, reliability and contractual guarantees. 
The estimates made by economists of the costs of 
hypothetical nuclear power stations, or the arguments 
of the physicists to demonstrate that one reactor 
type was to be preferred to another, were things 
almost of the past. The present lay, to a much 
greater extent, with the engineers, the construction 
teams and the electricity utilities. What station would 
be built was determined by the hard facts of economic 
life, and that was how it should be. 
84. At the same time nuclear power was unique. 
Applied properly and responsibly, it could contribute 
enormously to man's welfare and progress and to 
a better life for all. But used irresponsibly or misused, 
it could be a hazard to everyone. That was 
true both of the possible manufacture and misuse 
-14



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

of nuclear weapons and of the possible release of 
excessive quantities of radioactive materials and radiation 
by carelessness or irresponsibility. Many industries 
were having to submit to an ever greater 
degree of control to ensure that their wastes and 
effluents did not harm the environment and that 
the people who worked in the industry were not 
exposed to harmful or toxic materials. That was 
particularly true of the nuclear industry. But the 
nuclear industry had additionally the problem of 
possible diversion of fissile material, a problem without 
parallel in any other large peaceful industry. 
In those circumstances it could not expect to have 
the degree of freedom enjoyed by most other industries. 
It was vital that nuclear power should 
not be used carelessly or incompetently or for narrow 
economic advantage in a way that could be detrimental 
to all. 

85. All countries recognized the need for control 
with regard to atomic energy and nuclear power. 
Standards had to be set up for permissible radiation 
levels, for maximum internal doses, for the movement 
and disposal of radioactive substances, etc. 
To do that sensibly needed international agreement 
on the basic data and principles to be applied, and 
it was to the great credit of the Agency that its 
recommendations had been so universally accepted. 
Not only had that ensured that proper standards 
were maintained, but it had also greatly facilitated 
movement of nuclear materials from one country 
to another and hence expansion of the nuclear industry. 
86. In connection with the Agency's statutory 
responsibility to encourage and foster the great new 
nuclear industry and, at the same time, ensure that 
its power was not misused, the United Kingdom 
believed that the Board of Governors could properly 
audiorize the Director General to act as intermediary 
in the supply of reactor fuel and nuclear material 
for use in reactor fuel on a long-term basis and in 
greater quantities than the Agency had previously 
dealt with. If it were to offer to supply fuel in 
such cases, the United Kingdom would do so on 
commercial terms no different from those which 
would apply to a direct sale to another country. 
87. The promulgation of scientific and technological 
data relating to atomic energy was similarly 
of great value, and the United Kingdom endorsed 
fully what the Agency was doing in that area. At 
the present stage in the evolution of nuclear power, 
however, the practical engineering and operating 
problems were coming to the front as many of the 
basic problems became better understood. There 
was in fact a tendency today to contract and reduce 
the amount of work in fundamental research, and 
he did not think there was any need for the Agency 
to increase its activities in that field, as ample resources 
already existed. 
88. The Agency's technical assistance activities were 
of the greatest interest to many Members, and he 
was glad to be able to say that the United Kingdom 
was prepared to increase its contribution to the 
General Fund for 1970 to £50420 in convertible 
sterling, subject of course to the usual budgetary 
procedures. Moreover, as in previous years, it was 
ready to support the Agency's operational activities 
by providing, on short-term assistance missions, experts 
and so on free of charge. It could also make 
available to the Agency free of charge up to seven 
training places at the Central Electricity Generating 
Board, nuclear power stations and laboratories. 
89. Though the Agency's Statute had served well 
for the past ten years, there was now general agreement 
that the membership of the Board might widi 
benefit be modestly increased, to take account of 
changed circumstances and conditions. His delegation 
agreed with that general view. But to achieve 
that in a manner satisfactory to all Members of the 
Agency was not easy, for many claims and interests 
had to be reconciled. Nevertheless, progress had 
been made, and he believed it should be possible 
to achieve agreement in time for the next session 
of the General Conference, on the basis of the proposal 
put forward by the delegation of Italy. 
90. Finally, with regard to safeguards and the 
Agency's responsibilities under NPT, he warmly 
welcomed the Director General's suggestion for the 
establishment of a safeguards committee in which 
the complex and important issues could be freely 
and openly discussed. 
91. Turning to the atomic energy programme in 
the United Kingdom, he said that although the 
country was continuing to develop the same reactor 
systems as in the past, the structure of the industry, 
including the Atomic Energy Authority, was being 
progressively changed to meet the changing circumstances 
and requirements. 
92. The main reactor programme in the United 
Kingdom had always been based on gas cooling, 
and the impressive thing about such reactors was 
the enormous development potential they seemed 
to have. As part of a steady process of development, 
their safety and economics had been greatly 
improved, the former to the point where the United 
Kingdom now felt completely justified in siting such 
reactors close to populous areas. Futher improvements 
were in view, and the United Kingdom expected 
to go oh building gas-cooled reactors of ever 
improving design for as far ahead as could at present 
be foreseen. 
93. The steam generating heavy water reactor — 
a light-water-cooled, boiling-water reactor moderated 
with heavy water — had been developed to meet 
the requirements for somewhat smaller reactors where 
-15



GC(XIII)/OR.129 

flexibility of operation was of more importance than 
high thermal efficiency. That design should be of 
particular value in areas where the requirements of 
the electricity network limited the size of reactor 
that could be employed. The 120-MW(e) prototype 
reactor at Winfrith Heath had performed well and 
had demonstrated the satisfactory performance of 
that reactor type. 

94. The United Kingdom's other main line of 
reactor development was the sodium-cooled fast reactor. 
Though construction of the prototype reactor 
had been delayed somewhat by late delivery of certain 
engineering components, the real problems of future 
fast reactor development related to the fuel, the 
metallurgy, the instrumentation and the performance 
of structural materials under irradiation. In all those 
areas his country's development programme was 
continuing well, greatly assisted by the irradiation 
experience obtained from the Dounreay experimental 
fast reactor. The United Kingdom also welcomed 
the growing use of that irradiation facility in the 
fast reactor development programmes of other 
countries. 
95- Plutonium was only now becoming available 
in the quantities required for fast reactor use, but 
in a few years' time the production of plutonium 
from the civil nuclear power plants of the world 
would be very substantial and he believed the fast 
reactor would provide the most economical way of 
using that plutonium. 

96. As far as the nuclear power programme and 
nuclear fuel services were concerned, the stations 
The meeting 

now in operation in the United Kingdom were producing 
4000 MW and stations with a capacity for 
a further 6000 MW were under construction, while, 
as indicated in documentGC(XIII)/INF/113/Rev.i, 
the Authority's factories at Springfields, Windscale 
and Capenhurst had been adapted and modified to 
meet the expanding requirements for a complete 
nuclear fuel service. The operations of those factories 
were being carried out on a commercial basis and 
it was the intention to complete that process by 
making them into a separate company, initially at 
any rate as a subsidiary of the Atomic Energy 
Authority. 

97. In the industrial sector the reorganization 
carried out in 1968 was working well. The four 
separate design and construction teams — one designing 
gas-cooled reactors for the electricity authorities 
— had been merged into two design and 
construction companies, with the Atomic Energy 
Authority taking a 20% shareholding in each. That 
had resulted in a considerable strengthening of the 
two companies while at the same time maintaining 
a measure of choice and competition in the industry. 
98. To conclude, one could see, looking back a 
few years, that the atomic energy organizations in 
the world had then been suffering from growing 
pains. What they were suffering from now was the 
pains of adapting themselves to a very rapidly 
changing environment. That was the price of rapid 
technological progress, but adjustment would be 
much more rapid if policies were based on the 
realities of the present and sensible anticipation of 
the changes in the future. 
rose at 1 p.m. 

-16



GC(XIII)/OR.130 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

22 January 1970 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(23-29 SEPTEMBER 1969) 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 25 September 1969, at 3.25 p.m. 
President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 
CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda* 
9 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1968-69 (continued)
Statements by the delegates of: 
RomaniaNetherlandsHungaryIndiaBulgariaAlbaniaGabon 
Paragraphs 
1—97 
1—26 
27—41 
42—54 
55—71 
72—85 
86—87 
88—97 
GC(XIII)/418. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/114/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.130 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1968-69 
(GC(XIII)/404, 416) (continued) 

1. Mr. HULUBEI (Romania) said that because 
of the substantial progress achieved in all domains 
of economic and social life, Romania had been able 
to draw up a development programme for 1971-75, 
with forecasts up to 1980, which provided for steady 
improvements in the building of the technical and 
material infrastructure of a multilaterally developed 
socialist society. The growth rate of the economy 
would be 8.5-9.5% for 1971-75, industrial production 
would increase by 2-2.3 times and electric power 
production would reach 55-57 million MWh by 1975. 
2. The programme also laid special emphasis on 
the development of science and technology. In the 
latter domain, the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy were given high priority and a national 
nuclear programme for 1969-80 had been adopted. 
3. At the heart of Romanian foreign policy was 
the strengthening of alliances, friendships and multilateral 
collaboration with all the socialist countries. 
At the same time Romania would pursue an active 
policy of increasing co-operation with all peoples in 
a spirit of peaceful co-existence. 
4. His Government was extending and intensifying 
its links with the more recently independent 
States whose efforts were directed towards the defence 
and consolidation of their national sovereignty 
and whose role and contribution were becoming 
increasingly evident in the international community. 
5. Its foreign policy was based on the principles 
of national sovereignty and independence, equality 
of rights, non-interference in internal affairs, mutual 
advantage and the right of peoples to decide their 
own future, in the belief that the strict observance 
of such principles would create a climate favourable 
to the cause of peace and security. 
6. The problem of general disarmament and, in 
particular, of nuclear disarmament was accorded high 
priority in Romanian foreign policy. There was a 
need to step up action leading to disarmament and 
to make definite progress towards a nuclear weapons 
ban and the liquidation of existing stockpiles of such 
weapons. 
7. Romania was constantly striving to promote 
security in Europe with a view to transforming the 
continent into an area where peaceful co-operation — 
a stable factor for peace and security — flourished. 
8. At the same time, the Romanian people expressed 
grave concern about the armed conflicts 
and the sources of tension which persisted in 
different parts of the globe. The war in Viet-Nam 
and the Middle East situation were a threat to world 
security and peace. Romanians supported the wellknown 
policy of their Government with regard to 
the settlement of those conflicts. 

9. Romania had striven persistently and steadfasdy 
to secure observance of the principle of 
universality in international organizations. It was 
therefore happy to see Ireland admitted to membership 
of the Agency. 
10. On the other hand, it deplored the situation 
in which the People's Republic of China was deprived 
of its lawful right to take its seat in the 
Agency and the fact that the German Democratic 
Republic, which was a country highly developed in 
the nuclear sciences, the Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea and the Democratic Republic of 
Viet-Nam were also deprived of the opportunity to 
participate in the Agency's activities. 
11. Estimates showed that Romanian resources of 
liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons would not be adequate 
to meet the increased needs for power during 
the following 15-20 years, and it had therefore been 
decided to prepare forthwith for the introduction 
and progressive expansion of the commercial-scale 
generation of nuclear power, using domestic uranium 
sources. 
12. Nuclear power plants with a combined output 
of 1800-2400 MW(e) would be built during the 
next 11 years. 
13. The implementation of the nuclear programme 
would be made possible by a programme of action 
co-ordinated by the Nuclear Energy Committee and 
carried out by the mechanical engineering, electrical 
engineering, mining and nuclear materials industries, 
together with the specialized education institutes, 
health services and scientific research establishments 
in the country. 
14. That programme would provide the industrial 
base which was essential for the domestic manufacture, 
to an increasing extent, of the necessary 
machinery, and would ensure supplies of raw materials, 
the training of specialized personnel and 
the introduction of protective measures against radiation 
and nuclear hazards in general. 
15- The programme would also pave the way up 
to 1980 for a better utilization of nuclear fuel, using 
advanced-type reactors. 

16. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency had paid greater attention to nuclear 
power problems in response to requests made in 
previous years by Romania and other States. 
— 2

GC(XIII)/OR.130 

17. He hoped that the Agency would conduct 
further studies on the economic viability of certain 
low- and medium-power reactor types for desalting, 
and on the establishment of agro-industrial complexes. 
18. After technical assistance, the organization of 
scientific meetings and the provision of scientific 
and technical documentation services, he considered 
that the establishment of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), with a very wide subject 
scope, was particularly useful. Romania would participate 
in INIS and hoped to assist in its growth 
and development. 
19. As regards research contracts, the Secretariat 
had made commendable efforts to tackle practical 
problems whose solution was of immediate benefit 
both to the Agency and in the development of research 
in Member States. Co-operation between 
Romania and the Agency was evolving satisfactorily 
in that domain. The carrying out of co-ordinated 
research programmes had played a substantial part 
in solving many problems, and it seemed that the 
research contracts programme would benefit greatly 
if that practice were extended. 
20. The Secretariat was also to be congratulated 
on the analysis of its activities in the context of the 
recommendations of the Conference of Non-Nuclear 
Weapon States (CNNWS). The results of that analysis 
were reflected in the report to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations1). 
21. Mention should also be made of the assistance 
extended by the Agency to the group of experts 
appointed by the Secretary-General — of which a 
Romanian specialist was a member — to prepare a 
report on the contributions of nuclear technology 
to the economic and scientific advancement of the 
developing countries2). 
22. The work of the Secretariat in collaborating 
with Member States in the preparation of regulations 
governing radiological protection was also worthy 
of note. In that context it was satisfactory to note 
that the Agency had intensified its co-operation with 
other international organizations having similar or, 
closely related aims. 
23. The programme of the Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division of Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture 
for the use of radiations to obtain varieties of high 
protein-content plants was a good example of international 
co-operation. Another was the agreement 
with UNESCO under which the latter would from 
1970 onwards collaborate with the Agency in financing 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics*) 
in whose work Romania was participating. 
1) GC(XIII)/INF/110. 
2 ) United Nations document A/ 7568. 
i) INFCIRC/132. 


24. Several international scientific events had taken 
place in Romania in 1969. They had been organized 
by or under the auspices of die Nuclear Energy 
Committee, and had included a summer school on 
relaxation and magnetic resonance phenomena held 
at Mangalia in co-operation with the Ampere Association, 
and a summer school on theoretical nuclear 
physics held at Predeal. Romania was willing to 
act as host for similar events organized by the 
Agency. 
25. During the past year the Agency's attention 
had been taken up by an important problem: the 
review of Article VI of the Statute. The Romanian 
delegation favoured the amendment of Article VI 
and hoped that a reasonable solution acceptable to 
the majority of Member States could be found. 
26. The Secretariat was to be commended for 
the care it had devoted to the fellowship programme. 
It should find the means which would enable it to 
make full use of Type II fellowships with a view 
to training the highly qualified staff which Member 
States needed. The Agency should also intensify 
co-operation with UNESCO and ILO in the training 
of specialists at all levels. For that purpose it should 
also pay closer attention to the organization of 
courses, seminars and study tours. For 1970 Romania 
would contribute $8250 to the General Fund, 
of which 90% would be in national currency. It 
would place 120 fellowship months for Type II 
fellowships at the disposal of the Agency. 
27. Baron van BOETZELAER (Netherlands) said 
that since the twelfth General Conference it had 
become abundantly clear that some of the problems 
facing the Agency were world problems which 
affected several organizations in the United Nations 
family. Under its Resolution 2456 A/(XXIII) relating 
to the work of CNNWS the General Assembly 
of the United Nations had invited the specialized 
agencies, the Agency and other international bodies 
concerned to report to the Secretary-General on the 
action taken by them in connection with the recommendations 
contained in the respective resolutions 
of CNNWS; it had further requested the Secretary-
General to place the question of implementation 
on the provisional agenda of the twenty-fourth 
session of the General Assembly. 
28. That Resolution had, without any doubt, constituted 
an important signpost for the activities of 
the Agency and of the Board of Governors over 
the past twelve months, but the fact remained that 
the Agency had the primary responsibility for initiating 
action to spread the benefits of nuclear energy 
among all countries. That primary responsibility and 
the autonomy which the Agency had under its 
Statute did not mean that the Agency could go 
about its own affairs without taking into account 
the interests of the other members of the United 
-3



GC(XIII)/OR.130 

Nations family. Under Article III.B.4 of its Statute, 
the Agency reported on its activities to the General 
Assembly. That statutory provision enabled the 
General Assembly to make specific requests and 
recommendations to the Agency. The action taken 
by the Board and by the Director General showed 
that they were fully conscious of their responsibilities 
and obligations in that respect. That having been 
said, the fact remained that where its primary responsibility 
was concerned, the Agency must solve 
its problems according to its own lights, in its own 
time and on the basis of its own Statute. 

29. In response to Resolution 2456 A/(XXIII), 
the General Assembly would have before it both 
the Agency's report to the Secretary-General relating 
to recommendations made by CNNWS and the report 
of the group of experts on the contributions 
of nuclear technology to the economic and scientific 
advancement of the developing countries transmitted 
to members of the General Assembly by the Secretary-
General. Those two important documents were 
closely interrelated and complemented each other. 
In that connection, he drew attention to paragraph 4 
of the Board's annual report in document 
GC(XIII)/404 which underlined the assistance extended 
by the Agency to the United Nations Secretariat 
and to the group of experts appointed by 
the Secretary-General. 
30. His delegation suggested that, in addition to 
the Board's report on the Agency's responsibility 
to provide services in connection with nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes4), its memorandum 
on a fund of special fissionable materials?) should 
also be brought to the attention of the General 
Assembly. Those documents constituted, for all 
practical purposes, addenda to the Board's report 
to the General Conference, which dealt with the 
same topics in a more concise manner. 
31. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
steps had been taken to strengthen the co-operation 
and co-ordination between the Secretariat of the 
Agency and that of the United Nations in matters 
of common concern. 
32. To conclude his general remarks, he said he 
hoped that the deliberations of the General Conference 
and the resolutions it adopted would contribute 
to the clarification of the major issues in the 
field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which 
would shordy be discussed by the General Assembly 
in the context of Resolution 2456 A/(XXIII). 
33. CNNWS had recommended in one of its 
resolutions that a review of Article VI of the Agency's 
4) GC(XIII)/410. 
5) GC(XIII)/409. 

Statute should be carried out6). It could not be 
denied that the Board and the many Members who 
had participated in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee 
of die Whole set up by it, had given very 
serious attention and had devoted a great deal of 
work to finding a solution to the problems posed 
by the composition of the Board; that was conclusively 
proved by the number of proposals 
presented. Nowhere were delicate political difficulties 
better known than in the Agency; a lasting solution 
must and could therefore be found by the Agency 
itself. His delegation would continue in die coming 
year to contribute constructively whenever a solution 
which might command general support was in sight. 
Without general acceptance no solution could be 
lasting. 

34. His delegation had noted that in further developing 
and increasing the efficiency of its safeguards 
system, die Agency was taking into consideration 
the relevant provisions of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and 
the recommendations embodied in CNNWS Resolution 
F. As stated in the report to the Secretary-
General relating to CNNWS recommendations, the 
Agency pursued the threefold objective of making 
the application of safeguards as effective as possible, 
limiting to the minimum the need for the presence 
of inspectors and reducing the cost of safeguards7). 
Those aims were not new, but were in fact the basic 
premises of the safeguard system, which had an 
evolutionary character and was designed to take 
into account new developments and technological 
progress. His delegation strongly supported the 
view of the Director General that it was desirable 
for the Board to set up a committee, open to all 
Members of the Agency, which could examine proposals 
relating to safeguards by the Director General 
or Member States8) 
35. With regard to INIS, his delegation noted 
with satisfaction that a form of co-operation had 
been established between the Agency and the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), 
especially with regard to the keyword-system 
(thesaurus) developed by the latter organization. 
36. As was clear from the report to the Secretary-
General relating to CNNWS recommendations, the 
Agency's activities in the compilation and dissemination 
of information concerning the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy were considerable, but so were 
the costs involved. It was stated in that report that 
the objective of INIS was "to ensure that any nuclear 
scientist or engineer will be made aware as quickly 
6) See United Nations document A/7277, Resolution K. 
7) GC(XIII)/INF/110,para.26. 
8) GC(XIII)/OR.127, para. 39. 

-4



as possible of items of literature that might help 
him in his work"9). 

37. At the last session of the General Conference 
the delegate of Indonesia had expressed some doubt 
as to the benefit INIS would bring to developing 
countries and had urged the Agency to adapt INIS 
in such a way that every Member State could benefit 
equally from it10} His delegation had given serious 
consideration to those observations and wondered 
whether providing the complete relevant literature 
was indeed sufficient to foster research and development 
in all Member States in the most efficient 
manner. An inquiry into the needs of the user might 
well reveal that he was more interested in receiving 
condensed information, again as quickly as possible. 
38. Selection at the sources of the information was 
important, but could not be undertaken by the 
Agency itself. It was worth investigating whether 
the output of INIS could be presented in a variety 
of ways. The possibility of being able to obtain 
all relevant literature must, of course, be maintained. 
In addition, INIS might provide periodically and 
at frequent intervals concise review reports on selected 
topics. In such reports reference should be made 
to the original literature which could be obtained 
on request. Although his delegation realized that 
the preparation of those reports would put a sizable 
additional burden on the Agency's staff, it considered 
that the dissemination of literature would become 
much more efficient if the information were presented 
in a channelled, concise and hence directly readable 
form as well as in the form of a non-selected complete 
compilation of abstracts. 
39. In his opening statement the Director General 
had put the need for technical assistance to developing 
countries first on the list of topics he had 
reviewed11^. There was a general awareness of the 
disturbing imbalance between the increasing number 
of requests for technical assistance and the inadequate 
and static financial means available. Consequently, 
the call of the group of experts appointed 
by the Secretary-General for a "steady increase in the 
resources available for multilateral technical assistance 
in the nuclear field, especially through the 
Agency12), had a note of particular urgency. A better 
understanding of the fundamental deficiencies which 
were inhibiting the expansion of the technical assistance 
programme might in itself be an incentive to 
seek ways and means to improve a situation which 
was becoming steadily less satisfactory as the years 
went by. 
9) GC(XIII)/INF/110, para. 58. 
10) GC(XII)/COM.1/OR.80, para. 71. 
11) GC(XIII)/OR.127, para. 29. 

12) United Nations document A/7568, para. 259. 

GC(XIII)/OR.130 

40. If it was true that there was a re-awakening 
of interest in the Agency's activities, as the Director 
General had mentioned, it should prove possible 
to channel more funds from the relevant international 
organizations or bodies and also from national 
Governments through the Agency to better satisfy 
the needs of the developing countries. 
41. His delegation fully realized that several of the 
suggestions which he had just made would unavoidably 
increase the heavy burden which the Director 
General and his dedicated staff were already carrying. 
It would not have made those suggestions if it had 
not deemed the aims to be achieved of such enormous 
importance. Neither would it have made them 
if experience had not taught it to place unrestricted 
confidence in the Director General. His delegation 
fully endorsed the decision of the Board of Governors 
to appoint him for a third term. 
42. Mr. STRAUB (Hungary) said that he had 
long been looking forward to the thirteenth session 
of the General Conference, believing as he did that 
the importance of the Agency was rapidly increasing. 
The Director General's statement outlining the 
Agency's responsibilities in relation to NPT1})had 
greatly impressed him. Some months previously 
the Presidential Council of the Hungarian People's 
Republic had in fact ratified NPT, in keeping with 
the policies which the Hungarian Government had 
been pursuing for a considerable time. NPT assigned 
to the Agency new and highly significant duties, 
and it behoved all to assist the Agency in carrying 
them out. 
43. The Hungarian delegation was looking forward 
with keen interest to the elaboration of a model 
agreement for the application of safeguards under 
NPT and hoped that it would be submitted to 
Member States in the near future. The development 
of the safeguards system itself, including safeguards 
technology, was also acquiring fresh importance. 
It was vital that the methods evolved in national 
laboratories should be utilized to the fullest possible 
extent, for otherwise die immense technological and 
organizational tasks inherent in the control functions 
provided for in NPT could scarcely be discharged 
efficiendy. 
44. The performance of supervisory duties in connection 
with peaceful nuclear explosions - together 
with related technological, health protection and 
legal problems — were other aspects of NPT. The 
Hungarian delegation regarded the Agency as the 
organization most competent to deal with those 
problems. Another task which must not be neglected 
was that of giving adequate information to the public 
at large. The offer of the delegate of the Soviet 
Union to provide information on the peaceful appli13) 
GC(XIII)/OR.127, paras 38 and 39 and 47 and 48. 


GC(XIII)/OR.130 

cations of nuclear explosions in his country was 
most timely and welcome. 

45. Information services, by which the achievements 
of one country could be communicated to 
others, constituted an extremely important area of 
the Agency's work. The International Nuclear Information 
Service (INIS) was a significant step 
forward in that sphere and the results so far achieved 
were gratifying. The Hungarian delegation hoped 
in fact that INIS would develop at a rather quicker 
pace than heretofore. 
46. By and large the Agency's activities in the 
field of information, including the publication of 
books and journals, the organization of symposia, 
conferences and expert meetings and so on, deserved 
commendation. Nevertheless, it was important to 
be critical in selecting materials to be published. 
47. The Agency's assistance to die developing 
countries should of course continue and should be 
so conceived as to bring the greatest possible 
benefits. In that connection, it was worth mentioning 
that the Hungarian Government had again 
increased its voluntary contribution, which in 1970 
would amount to three times the figure for 1968. 
48. The Agency's work in relation to the applications 
of isotopes was likewise of great importance. 
Greater attention should be given to the economic 
efficiency of those applications, however, and to the 
elaboration of methods by which their efficiency 
could be properly assessed. 
49. The wide range of its activities made it necessary 
for the Agency to maintain good relations with 
intergovernmental organizations and the various 
agencies of the United Nations family. At present, 
the situation was not altogether reassuring. Greater 
attention should be given, in the first place, to cooperation 
between the Agency and the World Health 
Organization (WHO). On the other hand, the 
Agency's collaboration with certain intergovernmental 
organizations, for example with the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (COMECON) and international 
institutes such as the Joint Institute for 
Nuclear Research at Dubna, was developing well 
and had been noted with satisfaction by the Hungarian 
Government. 
50. The expansion of the Agency's activities naturally 
warranted a certain increase in the budget but, 
in the opinion of the Hungarian delegation, there 
was room for improvement in the budget's structure. 
51. The Agency's increased activity in recent years, 
and the new prestige it had acquired, were a natural 
concomitant to the progress that had been made in 
international affairs generally - progress marked by 
such milestones as the conclusion of the Partial 
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the agreement on the 
peaceful use of outer space and NPT. Unfortunately, 
the world had also witnessed events of a different 
nature. The extension of the war in Viet-Nam was 
continuing to poison the international atmosphere 
and to maintain a situation fraught with dangerous 
consequences for the whole of mankind. 

52. The Hungarian delegation congratulated Ireland 
on its election to membership of the Agency 
and wished it every success in participating in the 
Agency's work. 
53. The number of Members had now reached 
103, a fact which one could not but note with pleasure. 
Nevertheless, given the fact that the Agency 
was a universal international organization, the 
Hungarian delegation could not willingly accept the 
fact that several important States were still being 
denied membership. It was unjust, for example, 
that the German Democratic Republic should not 
be admitted to the Agency, the more so as that 
country could claim substantial achievements in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and had ratified NPT. 
54. In conclusion he reaffirmed the intention of 
the Hungarian Government to contribute, within the 
limits of its means, to the success of the Agency's 
work. 
55. Mr. SARABHAI (India) said that his delegation 
wished first to extend a most cordial welcome to 
the Agency's newest Member, Ireland. Everyone 
was aware of the valuable contribution Ireland had 
made to the cause of disarmament and international 
peace in the United Nations, and would look 
forward to an equally fine contribution by it to the 
work of the Agency. 
56. In speaking of India's progress in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy during the past year, 
he proposed to confine himself to a few areas of 
special significance to developing countries. At the 
twelfth session of the General Conference he had 
given a fairly detailed description of a study initiated 
two years previously, on the development of nuclearpowered 
agro-industrial complexes in India. To 
derive the fullest possible advantage from nuclear 
power, developing countries had not only to produce 
low-cost power in large stations but also, at the 
same time, to establish power-consuming units which 
would enable them to achieve good load factors. 
It was disappointing in fact that the importance of 
simultaneous planning for power generation and consumption, 
as a means of raising the developing 
nations from a position of poverty, had not been 
adequately emphasized in the report of the group 
of experts appointed by the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations to examine all possible contributions 
of nuclear technology to the economic and scientific 
advancement of developing countries. The relation_
6



ship between per capita power consumption and 
gross national product was well established, and 
modern agriculture needed energy just as much as 
industry. While advanced technologies required trained 
personnel, they also offered a surer road to development 
than mere reliance on obsolete methods. 

57. India's study of the proposed energy production 
and consumption centre in Western Uttar Pradesh 
had made significant progress during the past year: 
detailed analysis and planning were now being 
undertaken, allowance being made for facilities already 
existing in the region so that an inventory 
of the new initiatives that would be required in 
each location could be drawn up. An interesting 
outcome of the study was the realization that it 
might be advantageous to use two technologies and 
two scales of operation. To get agriculture started 
in a particular area, energy could be provided initially 
by efficient gas turbines having a low capital cost, 
which could be transferred from one location to 
another after a few years of operation with only 
15-20% additional investment. Thus, once a largescale 
nuclear power project had been completed and 
a grid established the gas turbines could be moved 
to new areas to help start the process of development 
there. The studies seemed to indicate that, 
even though the electricity produced by gas turbines 
would be much more expensive than that produced 
by large nuclear power plants, the initial agricultural 
operations could nevertheless be profitable. In any 
event the prospect of increasing food production in 
Western Uttar Pradesh by five to six million tons, 
and the per capita income of 22 million people by 
as much as 25% in five years, was extremely exciting. 
58. During the past year India had taken the 
first steps towards designing a fast breeder test 
reactor (to be located in a new research centre near 
Madras) in collaboration with the French Atomic 
Energy Commission. For reactors of the CANDU 
design, using natural uranium fuel, India was enlarging 
its facilities for the production of heavy water; 
to that end an agreement had recendy been concluded 
with a consortium of industries in France 
for a plant to be established at Baroda. 
59. India was happy to acknowledge the close 
collaboration that existed widi many countries, particularly 
Canada, France, the United States of America 
and the Soviet Union, in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
60. There were many other promising applications 
of atomic energy apart from power, among them 
radiation sterilization of medical products and the 
development of fibre polymer combinations. India 
was currently interested in such work and believed 
that it would have an important impact on two 
aspects of life, namely health and housing. The 
Government of India was looking forward to 
GC(XIII)/OR.130 

establishing a centre for development and training 

in that field, in association with the Agency and 

UNDP. 

61. With regard to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
explosives, the delegation of India believed that 
the conclusions reached by the Board, reflected in 
a report now before the Conference, represented a 
realistic and positive appraisal of the problem. 
However, as the relevant technology was in its infancy, 
attention should be focused initially, as the 
Board had recommended, on the exchange and dissemination 
of information. 
62. The Agency's experience in promoting the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy throughout 
the world, and in safeguarding against any diversion 
of nuclear materials to military ends, clearly made 
it the competent organization to provide international 
services in connection with the peaceful uses of 
nuclear explosives. His delegation trusted that that 
subject would be considered in proper perspective, 
within the framework of the Statute, and that it 
would not be clouded by extraneous issues. 
63. Much had been said about the problem of 
safeguards and the Agency's responsibility therefor. 
His delegation, like many others, had stated repeatedly 
that the safeguards system needed reform. 
Briefly, it should be simplified. The system should 
above all be designed flexibly, so that inspections 
could be either thorough or perfunctory and routine, 
as circumstances dictated. Without wishing to go 
into the details of the subject, he felt it had been 
amply demonstrated that the system could be simplified 
without losing any of its effectiveness. The 
acceptability of safeguards would be gready enhanced 
if the whole operation were streamlined and placed 
on a sound scientific footing. 
64. Turning to the financial aspects of the 
Agency's operations, he said that his delegation and 
many others had stressed the need to ensure that 
the technical assistance programme, already minimal 
owing to inadequate funds, should not be further 
reduced by the growdi of other activities, particularly 
safeguards. At the twelfth session of the General 
Conference India had mentioned die need for a 
long-term review of the Agency's resources in the 
light of its increasing responsibilities14). It had referred 
in particular to the need for a close examination 
of large-scale activities, especially safeguards. 
The delegation of India therefore welcomed die 
Director General's willingness to convene a panel 
for a systematic study of past and future expenditure 
in the light of available resources. The findings of 
that panel should help the Board to evaluate the 
justification for proposed expenditures — particularly 
in relation to safeguards — and to examine the problems 
of financing them. 
14) GC(XII)/OR.122, para. 41. 

-7



GC(XIII)/OR.130 

65. India held the view that a satisfactory solution 
to the problem of finance would be to create a 
second category of assessed contributions related to 
the net output of nuclear energy of each contributing 
State and payable, in the case of the developing 
countries, in local currency. Without such a system 
there was bound to be a sharp increase in the regular 
assessed contributions of Member States; the smaller 
developing countries would be hit particularly hard 
and would find that their contribution to the Agency 
was out of all proportion to their own expenditure 
on atomic energy activities. 
66. With reference to the review of Article VI of 
the Statute, he wished to repeat the observations 
he had made at the twelfth session of the Conference15^. 
There was much to be gained by retaining 
some of the older principles and yet providing for 
enlarged representation in the composition of the 
Board. Several delegations had submitted ideas and 
proposals in an honest effort to find a generally 
acceptable solution to the problem. In the opinion 
of the Indian delegation the Italian proposal conformed 
most closely to the principles which it espoused 
itself, and therefore offered the best basis 
for serious consideration. 
67. The Indian Government felt that the Agency 
would be well advised to take action in three other 
matters. Firstly, it should draw the appropriate 
conclusions from the review of the operations of its 
Laboratory at Seibersdorf which had been carried 
out by a panel of experts in 1968. Secondly, it 
should take the initiative in matters related to the 
certification of irradiated foods. Thirdly, it should 
take early action in considering the problem of safeguards 
for enrichment facilities. 
68. The Conference has already heard a reference 
to the agreement with UNESCO concerning the 
sharing of responsibility for the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics at Trieste16} The Agency 
should take care, however, not to accept permanent 
responsibility for the operation of the Centre, either 
alone or in conjunction with another organization, 
and should ensure that its present commitment was 
subject to an overall financial ceiling. 
69- The programme for regional collaboration in 
South East Asia was something to which the Government 
of India attached particular importance. During 
the past five years India had done much to share 
with its neighbours its own experience in the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy. With the 
Agency's help it had co-operated in the establishment 
of a reactor utilization programme for the region of 
South East Asia, to which the Government of the 

15) Ibid., para. 39. 
16) Para. 23 above. 

Philippines had graciously offered to act as host. 
Under that project — generally known as the IndiaPhilippines-
Agency project17)— five years' work had 
already been completed. That the venture had been 
a success could be seen in the fact that the participants, 
apart from receiving training themselves in 
neutron diffraction and other related problems, had 
initiated similar work in their own countries and 
had begun to make substantial contributions of 
their own in various branches of solid-state physics. 
One could only express satisfaction at the Agency's 
willingness to continue such co-operative efforts. 

70. He took pleasure in announcing a voluntary 
contribution of $35 000, in rupees, to the Agency. 
71. In closing, he congratulated the Director General 
and his staff on their untiring and dedicated services 
to the Agency and pledged India's wholehearted 
support to the Agency in all its activities. 
72. Mr. VASSILEV (Bulgaria) congratulated the 
representative of Ireland on his country's admission 
to membership of the Agency. He pointed out that 
nuclear science and technology were characterized 
not only by the rapid growth in their development, 
but also by the prospects which they offered. At 
the present time, nuclear technology was finding 
a wider application in the scientific and economic 
sphere not only in developed countries, but also in 
a number of developing countries. In that respect 
the Agency was making a positive contribution, 
guided by the noble aims set out in the Statute 
with regard to the widespread application of nuclear 
anergy for the maintenance of peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world. 
73. The international prestige of the Agency, as 
the only organization which was competent in matters 
relating to the peaceful application of atomic 
energy, was growing constantly. The role and activities 
of the Agency in the peaceful uses of the atom 
would increase in importance with the coming into 
force of NPT, which had been signed by most States 
Members of the United Nations and the Agency and 
ratified by a number of countries, including Bulgaria. 
NPT provided concrete guarantees of security for 
non-nuclear-weapon States and enabled them to apply 
atomic energy succesfully for the development of 
their national economies. 
74. One of the most important functions which 
the Agency would assume would be that of applying 
safeguards under NPT. Its competence and the 
availability of qualified staff and a safeguards system 
which enjoyed the confidence of the majority of 
Member States were a guarantee that the Agency 
could fulfil that responsible task. 
17) See documents INFCIRC/ 5 6 and Add. 1. 

-8



75. His delegation wished to stress once again 
that Bulgaria accepted the Agency's safeguards system 
and associated itself with those delegates who 
had spoken in favour of drawing up a draft model 
agreement between the Agency and the non-nuclearweapon 
States parties to NPT. His delegation 
wished to repeat that it was against acceptance of 
the principles of regional safeguards systems, which 
in practice would lead to countries applying safeguards 
to themselves. 
76. The Bulgarian delegation considered that in 
addition to safeguards and work in connection with 
INIS, one of the main activities of the Agency should 
be to provide technical assistance to developing 
countries. 
77. With regard to enlarging the composition of 
the Board, the Bulgarian delegation considered the 
existing structure of the Board to be useful and 
effective, although it sympathized with the approach 
of the developing countries in that matter and would 
have no objection to a small, constructive expansion 
in the size of the Board. Nevertheless, it should 
be stated that the socialist countries that were Members 
of the Agency could not agree to any weakening 
of their position in the Board. The Bulgarian delegation 
also wished to call attention to its views on the 
self-evident requirements which countries becoming 
Members of an expanded Board should be expected 
to fulfil. The main criterion in that respect should 
be acceptance of NPT. 
78. With regard to the principle of universality 
of the Agency, the Bulgarian delegation had more 
than once stated that it was its Government's firm 
conviction that it was essential to preserve the universal 
character of the Agency and to take the necessary 
steps to admit the German Democratic Republic, 
which was a highly developed industrial country 
with great achievements in die peaceful application 
of atomic energy. The German Democratic Republic 
was one of the Countries which had not only signed 
NPT but were wholehearted and active supporters 
of the principles underlying it. Moreover, as delegates 
were aware, the Parliament of the German 
Democratic Republic had ratified NPT the previous 
day. 
79. Another important activity of the Agency was 
the provision of services in connection with nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes. The Bulgarian delegation 
wished to express its approval of the Board's 
report on that subject. 
80. With reference to the report to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations on the action taken 
by the Agency in connection with recommendations 
by CNNWS, the Bulgarian delegation agreed with 
the observation made in the document that the 
Agency was not in a position to grant financial 
GC(XIII)/OR.130 

assistance to countries for the implementation of 
major nuclear technology projectsI8). As far as contributions 
to the General Fund were concerned, the 
Bulgarian delegation considered that diey should be 
at the same percentage level as contributions to the 
Regular Budget. 

81. His delegation noted with satisfaction the readiness 
with which the Agency had considered some 
of its requests for technical assistance necessary for 
the implementation of various projects in the Bulgarian 
national programme. The objectivity with which 
the Director General and the Secretariat had considered 
matters relating to technical assistance had 
been highly appreciated by Bulgaria. 
82. As far as die Bulgarian power programme 
was concerned, Bulgaria had laid particular emphasis 
on nuclear power stations. First and foremost in 
that connection it had carried out preparatory work 
for the construction, with die assistance of the Soviet 
Union, of a nuclear power station with a capacity 
of more than 800 MW. 
83. The Bulgarian delegation had noted with satisfaction 
the useful co-operation which had been built 
up between States Members of COMECON, not only 
with regard to reactor science and technology and 
nuclear power engineering, but also nuclear instruments, 
the production of isotopes and labelled compounds, 
radiation safety, protection equipment, etc. 
84. Referring to the Agency's budget, he said that 
Bulgaria had noted that the Secretariat and the 
Board's Administrative and Budgetary Committee had 
largely succeeded in making the budget for 1970 
reflect the activities for that year laid down in the 
six-year programme. Of course any expansion in 
the activities of the Agency, in particular where such 
matters as safeguards and INIS were concerned, 
would depend on the funds being found. At the 
same time, however, Bulgaria felt that a more flexible 
policy with regard to the use of available personnel 
and resources would enable the Secretariat to discover 
new reserves for carrying out some of its 
work at lower cost. 
85. In conclusion, the Bulgarian delegation wished 
to state that it would do everything possible to 
facilitate the successful completion of the work of 
the current session of the General Conference and 
also to ensure that the resolutions adopted would 
further enhance the authority of the Agency. 
86. Mr. TONA (Albania) said he was happy to 
be able to announce that for 1970 his country would 
make a voluntary contribution of $800 to the General 
Fund for carrying out the operational programme. 
18) See document GC(XIII)/INF/110, para. 103. 


GC(XIII)/OR.130 

87. A firm upholder of the principle of universality 
in international organizations, his Government deplored 
the absence of a delegation from the Peoples' 
Republic of China, which alone had the right to 
represent the Chinese people, and strongly objected 
to the presence at the General Conference of envoys 
from the Chiang Kai-shek clique, who claimed to 
represent China. 
The meeting was suspended at 4.45p.m. and resumed 
at 5 p.m. 

88. Mr. N'GUEMA N'DONG (Gabon) said he 
welcomed the admission of Ireland to the Agency 
and hoped that the work of the new Member State 
would constitute fresh support for countries in their 
efforts to cement peace and reduce the risk of world 
war. 
89- Describing the past year as the "Year of the 
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States" in his opening statement, 
the Director General had drawn attention to 
the extensive work that was to be done in those 
countries in the production and utilization of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. 

90. At the present time, if a nuclear power station 
was to be economic, it had to be of large size and 
connected to a large electrical power distribution 
network. The developed countries, forced by the 
need to overcome certain problems posed by the 
environment, would have recourse to such nuclear 
power stations to meet their increasing electric power 
requirements, while the developing countries, using 
more costly sources of power and remaining wholly 
dependent on conventional types of fuel, would fall 
further behind. It was to be hoped that the efforts 
of the Agency would enable that situation to be 
changed through the introduction of smaller-size 
and economically viable power stations into industry. 
Such action would help to narrow the very wide 
gap between the developed and the developing 
countries. 
91. He was glad to note the fruitful results 
obtained by the Agency in the application of atomic 
energy for purposes other than the generation of 
electricity in certain developing countries, in particular 
the "green revolution" in Asia and a 90% 
reduction in the Mediterranean fruit fly population. 
The meeting 

92. His country was keeping the Agency informed 
on the subject of its hydroelectric potential, which 
was enormous, but the exploitation of which required 
expenditure beyond the means of a developing 
country. Gabon was giving prominence to the 
construction of dams, such as the Kinguele dam 
now being built. Concurrendy with that work it 
was conducting hydroelectric studies on the Imperatrice 
Falls, capable of producing 3000 million kW, 
the Poubara Falls, which could likewise produce 
3000 million kW, and the Portes de l'Okanda Falls, 
capable of producing 8000 million kW. The construction 
of those dams would require enormous 
resources and Gabon was therefore not neglecting 
prospection for uranium, of which it was already 
one of die major African producers. 
9 3. Ever since his country had gained independence, 
the Gabon Government had continued its study of 
mineral resources. In the case of uranium one could 
already speak of a metal-bearing region. The distribution 
of the chief indications over a particular area 
was now beginning to come clear and studies were 
being continued. It was likely that new deposits 
would be found, as, incidentally, had been the case 
during the past year. 
94. Uranium mining in Gabon had already been 
described in several publications. It could be taken 
for granted that exploitation had not interrupted 
further prospecting; die future of the mining operations 
was already assured by the reserves that had 
been discovered. 
95. Agency experts had foreseen increased demands 
for uranium and the need for new reserves of a 
million tons of cheap uranium by 1980. The modest 
efforts made by Gabon should result in discoveries 
of economic importance. His country would thereby 
help to meet part of the market requirement in 
uranium envisaged for 1980. 
96. It was to be hoped that the Agency's assistance 
to developing countries would reach a higher 
level than the year before so that a number of 
countries could benefit thereby. That was an important 
matter which should be tackled without 
delay. 
97. In conclusion, he hoped that the representation 
of the Africa and the Middle East area in the Board 
would be enlarged in view of the number of Member 
States from that area. 
at 5.10 p.m. 

-10



GC(XIII)/OR.131 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

23 January 1970 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(23-29 SEPTEMBER 1969) 

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 26 September 1969, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the Paragraphs 

agenda* 
1— i 

10 Closing date of the session 

4—122 


9 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1968-69 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

4— 21 


Australia 22— 37 
Turkey 38— 56 
Japan 57— 63 
Israel 64— 68 
China 69-80 
Czechoslovakia 81— 97 
Austria 98—112 
Poland 113— 122 
Switzerland 

GC(XIII)/418. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/114/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.131 

CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

1. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure the General Conference 
had to fix a closing date for the session, on the 
recommendation of the General Committee. 
2. The General Committee had considered the 
question and had authorized him to recommend on 
its behalf that Tuesday, 30 September, be fixed as 
the closing date, subject to all business having been 
disposed of by then. 
3. The General Committee's recommendation was accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1968-69 
(GC(XIII)/404, 416) (continued) 

4. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) said his delegation 
had appreciated the support and helpful cooperation 
Australia had received from the Director 
General and his staff throughout the past year and 
looked forward to the confirmation of the former's 
reappointment, as recommended by the Board. It 
also gratefully acknowledged its cordial and helpful 
relationships in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
with the United States of America, Canada, the 
United Kingdom and France, countries with which 
it had formal collaboration agreements, which provided 
for exchanges of information, materials and 
personnel and which were an essential part of its 
nuclear programme. There was also a number of 
other countries with which it had fruitfully collaborated. 
All that collaboration had been, and continued 
to be, of great benefit to Australia. 
5. Australia's co-operation with New Zealand 
continued to follow its established and useful pattern 
and would no doubt be extended as the two countries' 
nuclear programmes progressed. Immediately 
before he had left for Vienna, the annual conference 
of the two countries had been held in Australia, 
when such matters as regulatory procedures for nuclear 
power, radiation chemistry and radioisotopes 
had been discussed. 
6. Australia's association with Japan in the nuclear 
field had been developing in a very satisfactory way. 
Discussions with the Japanese Atomic Energy Commission 
had been valuable and promising. Visits 
had been made by Commissioners and senior officers 
from his country for discussions with the Japanese 
Atomic Energy Commission in Tokyo, at Tokai 
Mura and Takasaki, and with Japaness universities, 
on such subjects as radiation chemistry, metallurgy 
and isotopes. Those activities had all been worthwhile, 
and there were opportunities for that cooperation 
to grow. The Australian Atomic Energy 
Commission had warmly welcomed representatives of 
the Japanese Atomic Energy Commission to Australia. 
7. The Australian Atomic Energy Commission had 
signed an agreement the previous June with the 
Commissariat a PEnergie Atomique (CEA) (French 
Atomic Energy Commission) for co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. This formalized 
the long-standing scientific and technical co-operation 
between the two bodies in many fields of nuclear 
energy. Some of Australia's Commissioners and 
senior officers had made fruitful visits to CEA and 
to nuclear installations in France, and training facilities 
had been made available at CEA's Research 
Centre at Cadarache. Those developments were very 
encouraging and it was hoped to extend them as 
opportunity offered. 
8. There had long been fruitful collaboration 
with India in various areas of atomic energy research, 
with exchanges of personnel and information between 
Trombay and Lucas Heights, and in the 
carrying out of joint projects. Areas of common 
interest had been in reactor operations, fission physics, 
radioisotope production and disposal of radioactive 
waste. His delegation greatly valued those 
exchanges, which were of mutual benefit. 
9. The Australian Atomic Energy Commission's 
Executive Member had returned recendy from a 
journey which had taken him to France, Italy, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United 
States and the Federal Republic of Germany. His 
purpose had been to draw on the experience of 
those countries in specific matters connected with 
Australia's nuclear power plans, and the Commission 
greatly appreciated the way in which the sought-for 
information and wise counsel had been provided. 
10. A useful exchange of publications and scientific 
literature took place with Czechoslovakia, Hungary 
and Poland, and, to a somewhat lesser extent, with 
Bulgaria, Romania and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics. His delegation believed that exchanges 
of that type were of mutual benefit. It did not 
overlook the catalytic role of the Agency, nor the 
role that the contacts which were made at its 
meetings played in futhering international cooperation 
of that kind. 
11. The Australian School of Nuclear Technology, 
located at the Research Establishment near Sydney 
had, amongst its many other activities, conducted a 
course the previous July on the siting and safety 
assessment of nuclear facilities. It had been very well 
attended not only by the Commission's staff and 
the staff of Australian electricity generating authorities, 
but by students from overseas, mostly from 
South East Asian countries, who were always welcome. 
The Australian authorities were grateful to 
the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom 
for their generosity in making available such distinguished 
guest lecturers as Dr. Richard L. Doan, 
Mr. Guest Hake and Mr. F.R. Farmer, who were 
the leading world experts in that field. 

12. It would be recalled that in March that year, 
the Director General had asked Member States to 
give him their views on the procedures the Agency 
might employ in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear 
explosions and had also set out a very well-reasoned 
analysis of the role the Agency might play in that 
field. The Director General's concept was in close 
accord with his delegation's views. The Agency 
should not be entided to intervene, adjudicate or 
arbitrate in matters of peaceful nuclear explosions 
unless it was asked to do so by both the countries 
concerned. The system proposed by the Director 
General should lead to efficiency and economy. His 
view that the Agency should let its role in that new 
field evolve rather than try to determine it in 
advance, was sound and was one with which his 
delegation fully agreed. It was worth noting, perhaps, 
that because of the early state of development of 
that particular technology, the Agency had time to 
make a full and practical appraisal of its potentialities. 
13. The Australian delegation believed the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS) to be 
of much significance in die future development of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. There had 
been dispute over the formulation of the system, 
but a position seemed to have been reached where 
INIS could go forward in a form which was acceptable 
to most Member States. There were bound to 
be some initial difficulties in an undertaking of that 
magnitude, and it might well be found that major 
changes would be required as operational experience 
was built up. Neverdieless his delegation was delighted 
to note a general recognition of the essential 
merit of the system, which would bring to developing 
countries the distilled substance of the combined 
research of more developed countries. 
14. The sum of knowledge in atomic energy went 
on increasing at a formidable rate, and the potential 
benefits for mankind inherent in all that knowledge 
would seem limidess. The difficult problem was 
becoming not only that of increasing technical knowledge, 
but of finding a way to use that knowledge 
to the best effect. It would be vital to have a comprehensive 
information storage and retrieval system 
that would enable diat large and invaluable fund of 
knowledge to be readily available to all Member 
States. His delegation looked forward, therefore, 
to the development of the INIS programme as an 
essential function of the Agency. 
15. With regard to the question of revising Article 
VI of the Statute, his delegation, recognizing 
the pressures for change that had become so evident 
at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States 
(CNNWS) held in Geneva the previous year, and 
subsequently, considered that it would be undesirable 
to attempt a major reorganization of the Board's 
structure. The present structure had been finally 
determined only after protracted and tortuous disGC(
XIII)/OR.131 

cussions; it had worked quite well and smoodily 
and it would be very difficult to arrive at a consensus 
for a drastic change. Some change, however, might 
well prove to be inevitable and desirable. Perhaps 
that might best be brought about by increasing 
representation on the Board through adding some 
elective seats. To depart from the existing basic 
principles of designated nations and geographical 
representation might be inequitable and unwise. 
Because of the special nature of nuclear science and 
technology, his delegation considered that the geographical 
areas wisely determined by the framers 
of the Statute should stand as they were. The Agency 
was neither one of the specialized agencies of the 
United Nations, nor was it called upon to conform 
with the political groupings used in that organization. 
His delegation approved die Board's decision to 
continue the study of Article VI as an urgent matter 
and to request the Chairman of the Board to reconvene 
the Ad Hoc Committee for that purpose 
as early as convenient. 

16. Turning then to a point of some importance 
he had raised at the Board's June series of meetings, 
namely the question of the relationship of the Agency 
to the United Nations, he said that the Agency was 
constituted as a responsible authority in its own 
right under the terms of its Statute. It was not 
accountable to the United Nations in die same 
was as were the specialized agencies; there was a 
tendency to misunderstand that position, and several 
times during the current session the Agency had 
been referred to as if it was a specialized agency. The 
trend seemed to have become more marked since 
the increase in activity on nuclear matters in the 
General Assembly of die United Nations which had 
given rise to CNNWS. 
17. Under Article XVI.A of the Statute, the Board 
was autiiorized, with die approval of the General 
Conference, to enter into an agreement or agreements 
establishing an appropriate relationship between 
the Agency and the United Nations and any 
other organizations the work of which was related 
to that of the Agency. However, neither the Board 
nor the staff of die Agency should seek or receive 
instructions from any source external to the Agency. 
18. Article 11 LB of the Statute provided that the 
Agency should conduct its activities in accordance 
with die purposes and principles of the United Nations 
and that it should send an annual report to 
that body. That was right and proper as a matter 
of communication. 
19. The Agency had wide membership and support 
and had all the equipment, staff and experience to 
carry out its objectives as laid down in the Statute. 
His delegation would like to feel assured that the 
considerations which gave rise to die development 
of the Agency, and its responsibilities and functions, 
were clearly recognized. 
-3



GC(XIII)/OR.131 

20. Since he had outlined Australia's progress in 
the technical fields of nuclear power, nuclear fuels 
and radioactive isotopes at some length the previous 
year1), all that need be said was that all those activities 
had continued at an increasing tempo and were 
making very satisfactory progress. 
21. The Australian delegation approved the annual 
report to the General Conference by the Board of 
Governors. 
22. Mr. ISTINYELI (Turkey) said that his delegation 
was happy to see Ireland become a Member 
of the Agency. 
23. In the view of his Government, 1969 heralded 
a new era in the Agency's history. The reorganization 
required to enable the Agency to discharge the 
new functions arising from recent developments — 
which his country had followed with great interest — 
had been started. 
24. During the past year his Government had 
endeavoured to make an effective and positive contribution 
to the work of the Agency, while at the 
same time paying heed to the interests and needs 
of the developing countries. 
25. It had signed the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in token 
of its sincere desire to see nuclear energy used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes and as a contribution 
to bringing about a general lessening of tension. 
26. However, at the time of signing, his Government 
had issued a statement expressing concern 
about the points the Treaty had failed to cover. 
27. The implications of NPT would be so farreaching 
that they should be closely studied by 
Member States and by the Agency. There could be 
no doubt that the Treaty was creating a delicate 
balance which the Agency would have to bear carefully 
in mind in its future work. 
28. He considered that as well as taking die necessary 
action to help Member States fulfil their 
obligations under NPT, the Agency should also 
endeavour to assist them in the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. 
29. As his delegation had repeatedly stated during 
previous sessions and in the Board, it was imperative 
that the balance between the Agency's different activities 
should be maintained since its resources were 
limited and die new responsibilities and functions 
being entrusted to it tended to change the balance 
to the detriment of those activities which were of 
most direct interest to the developing countries. 
1) GC(XII)/OR.120, paras 92 to 98. 

30. For instance, the 1970 budget would allocate 
considerably more funds to Agency safeguards. Modest 
preliminary estimates showed that expenditure 
by the Agency on safeguards under NPT would 
be $15-20 million in 1975 and would probably rise 
to $30 million in 1980 and between $40 million 
and $69 million in 1990. The question therefore 
was, what means the Agency should employ to find 
a new criterion for financing expenditure arising 
from the application of safeguards? 
31. Furthermore, the Secretariat should draw up 
the model agreement referred to in Article III, paragraph 
4 of NPT, as the legislative bodies of some 
Member States, including his own, would like, before 
ratifying the Treaty, to consider the scope of the 
provisions of the agreement provided for in that 
Article. 
3 2. As the Director General had said in his statement, 
1969 was the year of the non-nuclear-weapon 
States. The resolutions adopted by CNNWS and 
approved by an overwhelming majority of representatives 
in the General Assembly of the United 
Nations referred to several articles of NPT and 
indicated guidelines for their implementation. The 
subjects of some of those resolutions had been 
studied by the Board and were on the agenda of 
the present session. 
33. His delegation supported the conclusions contained 
in the reports on the Agency's responsibility 
to provide services in connection with nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes2), the review of Article VI 
of the Statute*) and the fund of special fissionable 
materials4). 
34. The financing of nuclear projects had been 
debated in the Board and had been studied in depth 
by the group of experts appointed by the Secretary-
General of the United Nations to prepare a full 
report on all possible contributions of nuclear technology 
to the economic and scientific advancement 
of the developing countries5). In its report, the 
group of experts had said that the complex problem 
of the financing of nuclear projects should be carefully 
considered by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations and by other competent organizations with 
a view to finding appropriate solutions6) 
35. His delegation therefore considered that the 
General Conference should adopt a resolution on 
that topic. 
- 2) GC(XIII)/410. 
3) GC(XIII)/408and415. 
4) GC(XIII)/409. 
5) Pursuant to General Assembly Resolution 2456 
A (XXIII). 
6) See United Nations document A/7568, para. 262. 



36. In several countries the inadequacy of nuclear 
legislation was seriously hampering the development 
of nuclear activities. That was an important domain 
in which the Agency could make a substantial contribution. 
In that connection, he commended the 
efforts it had already made to codify nuclear 
legislation. 
37. As the Fourth International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy would be attended 
by administrators and economists as well as 
scientists, he would like to suggest to the Director 
General that he should propose a special meeting 
at which the Conference would deal with the question 
of nuclear legislation. 
38. Mr. HIRAIZUMI (Japan) said that his delegation 
sincerely hoped that the General Conference 
would approve the appointment of Dr. Eklund as 
Director General so that the Agency could have the 
benefit of his continued service in starting a new 
and important phase of its development. 
39- A particularly significant development in Japan 
was the changing image of atomic energy in the 
minds of the Japanese people in general. As a 
natural consequence of the events which had taken 
place in the closing months of the Second World 
War, the Japanese people had long entertained a 
strong resentment towards atomic weapons and, 
more generally, had developed a keen sensitivity to 
possible dangerous effects of atomic energy. 

40. Strong opposition by the residents around the 
sites proposed for the installation of new nuclear 
facilities' had- not been a rare occurrence. Being 
aware that atomic energy, if not properly controlled, 
could be a danger to human lives, the Government 
had made, and was continuously making, every effort 
to ensure safe operation of nuclear installations, 
paying particular attention to environmental problems. 
At the same time, it had always considered 
it important to gain the general understanding and 
collaboration of the public in that matter by providing 
it with as much information as possible concerning 
the technical measures taken to ensure the safety 
of nuclear facilities. He was pleased to say that 
safety measures and the degree of public understanding 
had now reached a fairly advanced stage. 
To give one recent example: the residents in the 
vicinity of a nuclear power plant and the company 
operating the plant had entered into an agreement 
that monitoring stations would be installed around 
the site and that the radioactivity in the environment 
would be jointly ascertained so that the residents 
would have no cause for suspicion and doubts as 
to the safety of the plant. 
41. There was evidence that the Japanese people 
were, to an increasing extent, building up a more 
balanced picture of atomic energy. During a recent 
GC(XIII)/OR.131 

survey of public opinion on nuclear energy, one of 
the question asked had related to the individual's 
reaction on hearing the words "nuclear energy". 
According to the results, 35% of the people, twice 
the figure obtained in a similar survey carried out 
a year earlier, appeared to take a favourable view 
of peaceful uses such as nuclear power generation, 
the nuclear-powered propulsion of ships and the 
irradiation of food or plants. On the other hand, 
the percentage of those who had rather a gloomy 
picture of atomic energy, associating it with atomic 
bombs or nuclear weapons, had been definitely lower 
than a year previously. Furthermore, when the 
Science and Technology Agency of the Japanese 
Government had sponsored an essay contest for 
high-school students in 1968 on the topic, "What 
do you expect from the peaceful use of atomic 
energy?", a great number of students had participated; 
they had been quite eager to express their keen 
interest in and high hopes for the future of the 
constructive uses of atomic energy. 

42. In Japan all were convinced that a keen 
interest in the problems of safety was and would 
remain one of the indispensable prerequisites for a 
succesful development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
43. Turning to some of the highlights in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in Japan during the 
past 12 months, he recalled that in April 1968 the 
Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation 
had formulated its first basic programme 
for the development of new types of power reactors. 
The preliminary designing of a prototype fast breeder 
reactor had already started, while the development 
of an advanced thermal reactor had progressed to 
the stage of second design, and construction sites 
for both reactors had been tentatively selected. 
44. Projects for building nuclear power stations had 
moved steadily forward. A total of five power reactors 
with an aggregate electrical output of 2.4 million 
kW was under construction. If other construction 
plans were taken into consideration, Japan's nuclear 
power generation capacity world reach around 
8 million kW(e) by the end of the fiscal year 1975 
and 30 million to 40 million kW(e) in the fiscal 
year 1985. It could thus be said that the foundation 
was being laid for nuclear power to emerge as a 
primary source of energy in Japan in the near future. 
45. The demand for nuclear fuels was expected to 
rise sharply with further development in nuclear 
power generation. It had therefore been decided 
in August 1968 to authorize private bodies to possess 
special nuclear materials, such as enriched uranium 
and plutonium. Meanwhile, the Power Reactor 
and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation and the 
private enterprises concerned were exploring overseas 

GC(XIII)/OR.131 

uranium markets in an effort to secure a more stable 
supply of nuclear fuel. 

46. Work on the hull of Japan's first nuclearpropelled 
ship had begun in November 1968, and 
the vessel had been launched in June 1969. After 
it had been fitted out with an atomic power reactor, 
the ship was expected to make its maiden voyage 
in January 1972. 
47. There was no doubt that atomic energy had 
a noble role to play in the promotion of the welfare 
and happiness of all mankind, today and in the 
future. It could be expected to continue and intensify 
that role on a world-wide basis with harmonious 
co-operation between all the countries concerned and 
under effective guidance from the Agency. 
48. It was for that reason that the Japanese delegation 
wished to emphasize that no handicaps should 
be imposed upon any State in respect of research 
into and development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. It was against any idea or proposal which 
would allow distinctions or discrimination between 
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States to 
creep into the realm of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. It was obviously equally important that 
there should be no discrimination between developed 
and developing countries in respect of the inherent 
right to enjoy the benefits of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 
49. Japan had been the first country to accept 
the Agency's safeguards, and all of its 22 reactors 
were now subject to them. His delegation fully 
supported the Agency's safeguards system and hoped 
that all States would agree to make their nuclear 
facilities subject to it. 
50. In that context, Japan welcomed the official 
commitment undertaken by the Governments of 
the United States and the United Kingdom, both 
nuclear-weapon States, to place voluntarily their nuclear 
facilities for peaceful purposes under the 
Agency's safeguards once NPT entered into force 
and hoped that other nuclear-weapon States would 
follow their example as soon as possible. 
51. According to the estimate given in the Board's 
annual report, the world's nuclear power capacity 
would reach 110000 MW(e) by 1975 and 300350 
000 MW(e) by 1980 (GC(XIII)/404, para. 64). 
An increase in power generation would naturally 
mean an increased number of nuclear power facilities 
in many parts of the world which would require 
the application of safeguards by the Agency. If the 
Agency was to perform its safeguards functions effectively 
under such circumstances, it would be 
imperative to work out rational and efficient safeguards 
and apply them with maximum costeffectiveness, 
since the whole system of the Agency's 
safeguards would otherwise in all probability be 
seriously encumbered, if not totally crippled, by the 
rapidly mounting technical burdens in the not very 
distant future. 

52. In that connection, he wished to pay a high 
tribute to the pioneering efforts of the Agency. 
Specifically, his delegation attached great significance 
to the attempt to design a system that was to serve 
as a universally applicable criterion for the objective 
international application of safeguards to the flow of 
nuclear materials for peaceful purposes. It felt that 
the type of system which would enable the maximum 
efficiency to be achieved with minimum cost might 
include the concept of verification or audit of national 
or multi-national systems by the Agency. Another 
important requirement of the safeguards system, 
besides it effectiveness, was equality between nuclearand 
non-nuclear-weapon States. Such equality should 
also prevail among non-nuclear-weapon States themselves. 
5 3. Another matter which the Japanese delegation 
considered particularly important in the face of the 
new and more advanced stage o£ development of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy was the transfer 
of nuclear information. It was firmly convinced 
that the smooth international transfer of scientific 
and technical nuclear information, including information 
of commercial value, was one of the prerequisites 
for further progress in the peaceful use of 
atomic energy. In that connection, his delegation 
wished to draw attention to the resolution of 
CNNWS which invited the nuclear-weapon States 
to advise the Agency as to the possibility of their 
declassifying scientific and technical information as 
soon as there was no longer any reason for its 
classification7). 
54. Special consideration should be given to the 
role to be played by the Agency in connection with 
the international transfer of nuclear information. In 
that respect, the Japanese delegation subscribed to 
the views expressed in the Agency's report to the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations relating to 
recommendations made by CNNWS8) Obviously, 
it was important to promote the exchange of scientific 
and technical information derived from the 
peaceful application of nuclear explosions, the 
potential benefits of which were expected to be 
made available, by appropriate international arrangements, 
to non-nuclear-weapon States. He would not, 
however, dwell on that important subject as the 
detailed views of the Japanese Government had already 
been presented to the Agency and were set 
out in various documents. 
7) United Nations document A/7277, Resolution H.I.3. 
8) GC(XIII)/INF/no,paras42to65. 

-6



GC(XIII)/OR.131 

55. His delegation attached great importance to 
to the problem of altering the composition of the 
Board of Governors. It considered that the expansion 
in the size of the Board should be as 
modest as practicable in order to maintain the efficiency 
with which the Board had been successfully 
discharging its responsibilities. At the same time it 
wished to emphasize the need for a fair distribution 
of die Board's membership among geographical areas, 
including Asia. 
56. In concluding, he wished to express once 
again the sincere hope of the Japanese Government 
that the Agency, in conformity with Article VIII of 
the Statute, would take truly positive steps to encourage 
the exchange of information relating to 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and would serve 
as a good and effective intermediary among its Members 
for that purpose. In that way the Agency would 
discharge its noble duty to contribute to world peace 
and the happiness of all mankind. 
57. Mr. DOSTROVSKY (Israel), after expressing 
his delegation's approval of the Board's decision to 
appoint Dr. Eklund as Director General for a further 
term, said that a disquieting aspect of the report 
of the Board of Governors for 1968-69 was the 
clear indication that the gap between die resources 
available for technical assistance and the need for 
such assistance was steadily increasing. More than 
that, it appeared that in terms of real value even 
the absolute amount of those resources was 
decreasing. It was clear that if that trend was allowed 
to continue, the Agency would, in effect, be phasing 
out its technical assistance programmes. Undoubtedly 
a day would come when those programmes could 
be terminated but surely that day was far in die 
future. 
58. Moreover, the decreasing ability of the Agency 
to tackle technical assistance effectively came at a 
time when the Agency's resources were strained by 
the ever increasing number of fields in which it was 
active. The increased burden of the safeguards programme 
was but one such example. His Government 
hoped that the various efforts which were being made 
to redress the situation would bear fruit and that 
the Agency would be able to continue as an important 
factor in advancing the science and technology 
of nuclear energy, and would not be relegated 
merely to the role of a world policeman. His 
Government, for its part, continued to pledge its 
support of the General Fund and again offered 
fellowships to the value of 45 man-months. 
59. One of the new activities was INIS. Israel 
welcomed die progress made in that regard and 
intended to participate very actively in the work 
of INIS. 
60. The Israeli delegation welcomed the attention 
given by the Board and its Ad Hoc Committee to 
the review of Article VI of the Statute. It was essential 
for any dynamic organization to examine its 
own machinery from time to time to determine its 
suitability to changing circumstances. There had 
been a growing feeling among most delegations in 
the past few years that the original Statute was 
failing to meet die pressures of time. That feeling 
had found its expression in General Conference 
Resolution GC(XII)/RES/24l. That did not mean 
that the basic tenets of the founding fathers had 
been found wanting. On the contrary, they were 
just as valid today as 13 years ago, but the way 
they were implemented was certainly inadequate. 
61. His delegation understood that the Board and 
its Ad Hoc Committee required further time to study 
the question of the composition of the Board, and 
it certainly did not wish them to carry out anything 
but the most thorough examination. After all, revision 
of a statute was a complicated process which 
was not undertaken at frequent intervals or lightheartedly. 
For that very reason it was essential for 
the Board to approach die problem with open minds 
and not be satisfied with minor palliatives which 
would have only short-term effects. 
62. The suggestion that there should be a modest 
increase in the number of Members was in itself 
not necessarily an adequate solution, and could 
easily become just such a temporary palliative. After 
all, on the assumption diat what one was trying to 
achieve was an equitable system where all Members 
of die Agency had an equal chance of participating 
in its work, each according to his ability, a mere 
increase in membership was not the only, or even 
the most effective, way of achieving that. Certainly 
nobody claimed that efficiency was increased by increasing 
the size of an organization. So the aim 
should be to find the system which would achieve 
die basic purpose widi a minimum increase in membership, 
and he hoped that in the studies to be 
carried out in the coming year all possibilities would 
be examined. 
63. Before concluding, he wished to welcome Ireland 
as a new Member of the Agency. 
64. Mr. YEN (China) said that his country had 
been following with keen interest die swift and 
steady increase in the applications of atomic energy. 
An important development had been the conclusion 
of NPT, and his delegation noted with satisfaction 
the Agency's willingness to assume the responsibilities 
which would desolve upon it under that treaty. 
When China's first research reactor had gone into 
operation eight years earlier, the President of the 
country had emphasized that its purpose was to 
advance research and development in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, to promote public welfare 

GC(XIII)/OR.131 

and to raise the standard of living. Those aims 
had also been clearly specified in China's bilateral 
agreement with the United States. Later, the responsibility 
for safeguarding operations with the 
reactor had been transferred to the Agency. 

65. As he had reported at the preceding session, 
owing to a shortage of natural energy resources in 
the area, his Government was already planning the 
erection of the first of a series of nuclear power 
plants9? Further progress had been made on that 
project and commercial negotiations relating to the 
selection of the supplier of a 500-MW(e) nuclear 
plant of the light water type were under way. A 
decision would be made in the very near future. 
It was hoped to have the plant in commercial operation 
by 1975. A project for constructing a materials 
testing reactor of the heavy water type had been 
started during the present month. In accordance 
with the policy to which he had referred and in 
compliance with the Statute, the Agency would be 
requested to apply its safeguards to those reactors 
and facilities as well. 
66. He wished to express his Government's deep 
appreciation of and wholehearted support for, the 
Agency's activity in promoting regional and interregional 
co-operation in research and development 
in the field of nuclear science. The Republic of 
China had been privileged to participate in a number 
of regional programmes, including projects concerned 
with the gamma irradiation of wood-plastics, food 
preservation by means of radiation, applications of 
hot-atom chemistry to isotope production, in-pile 
dosimetry and solid-state physics. 
67. The Chinese delegation also wished to express 
its appreciation of such Agency activities as the 
establishment of INIS, the sponsorship and organization 
of important and timely symposia and 
meetings on various subjects, and the provision to 
Member States of the services of technical experts, 
equipment, fellowships and research contracts. The 
Republic of China was happy to be associated with 
those activities, which contributed to peace and to 
the development of a better world and a better life 
for all mankind. 
68. On the subject of voluntary contributions, 
his Government, in response to the Agency's requests, 
was prepared to make a contribution of 
$10 000 in cash and also to place $10 000 worth 
of domestically manufactured nuclear electronic training 
equipment at the Agency's disposal for 1970. 
That contribution was double the one for the 
previous year, which in its turn had been twice the 
contribution for 1966. Those increases were a concrete, 
even though slight, token of his country's 
interest in the work of the Agency and of its 
9) GC(XII)/OR.122, para. 88. 

appreciation of the services which the Agency had 
rendered not only to China but to all mankind. 

69. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) said that 
progress in the Agency's work and the results 
achieved would depend on the general political atmosphere 
in the world, on the level of mutual confidence 
between States and on their readiness to 
respect present-day political realities. From that point 
of view it would be useful for the Agency's work 
if a part could be played in its activities by States 
like the German Democratic Republic, which wished 
to become full-fledged Members and which, through 
their activities, gave continuous evidence that they 
were ready and able to make their due contribution 
to the world community - and in the present case, 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
70. A very important factor in the future work 
of the Agency would be NPT and for that reason 
he wished to make a few comments on the activities 
of the Agency in connection with the tasks which 
it would have to assume when that Treaty came 
into force. The Treaty had already been signed by 
some 90 States but thus far it had been ratified by 
only 20 out of the necessary 43. The President of 
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic with the approval 
of the Federal Assembly, had ratified the Treaty 
in June 1969. The Czechoslovak delegation therefore 
recommended that an appeal should be made 
to other Governments to accede to the Treaty and 
to accelerate their ratification procedures, so that 
the Treaty could come into force as soon as possible 
and that its objectives could thus be implemented. 
In that connection the Czechoslovak Government 
could not fail to call attention to the fact that the 
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany 
had thus far not signed the Treaty. It was evident 
that its accession would contribute to an improvement 
in the present political situation, especially in 
Europe, and also to the preparation for negotiations 
on European security. 
71. NPT would confront the Agency with important 
tasks, arising from the fact that it would 
be the organ for supervising implementation of the 
Treaty. The Czechoslovak delegation proceeded on 
the basic assumption that the application of the 
Agency's safeguards system was the main prerequisite 
for the development of broad co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was therefore 
essential that the Agency should submit for the 
consideration of its Member States at an early date 
a model agreement on the implementation of controls, 
as provided in NPT. In the same connection, 
it would be necessary to work out a methodology 
and a unified system of technical and administrative 
procedures for carrying out inspections. 
72. An effort should also be made to ensure that 
different approaches to those problems by Member 

States did not have the effect of interfering with the 
development of standard methods of control. The 
Secretariat should not attach excessive importance to 
research and development work relating to safeguards 
procedures for large automatedprocessesordevoteless 
attention to die elaboration of suitable procedures 
for small- and medium-scale processes, which were 
what a majority of the Member States were concerned 
with. 

73. The thirteenth session of the General Conference 
should ask the Board and the Director General 
to give priority consideration in 1970 to the 
swift elaboration of a model agreement. 
74. Since certain delegations had expressed their 
views concerning the need for reviewing the composition 
of the Board, he wished to state that the 
Czechoslovak delegation appreciated the work of 
the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole to Review 
Article VI of the Statute. His country had not been 
one of the initiators of that review but it had 
recognized that a considerable number of Members, 
especially from the developing countries, were requesting 
certain changes. The task of the Ad Hoc Committee 
in the period ahead would be to reconcile 
the highly conflicting opinions concerning ways of 
broadening the present composition of the Board. 
In considering the review of Article VI, it should 
always be borne in mind that the purpose of the 
review was to ensure that the Agency would become 
an even stronger organization. It was essential that 
the Agency should be a viable organization, especially 
now when it would have to assume new duties in 
connection with safeguards. Any change in the composition 
of the Board should therefore take due 
account of those new functions. The Czechoslovak 
delegation fully agreed with the preceding speakers 
who, while favouring the idea of a review of 
Article VI, called for a responsible and reasonable 
approach to the problem. 
75. On the subject of the draft budget, his delegation 
drew attention to the importance, as in the 
preceding year, of paying attention to balancing the 
budget. Although it supported an increase in expenditure 
in connection with implementation of the 
safeguards system and INIS, it believed that the 
rise in the budget for the current year was disproportionate. 
76. The Czechoslovak delegation approved the 
start of work, as provided for in Resolution 
GC(XII)/RES/245, on studies relating to the 
Agency's functions in connection with nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes. An exchange of 
information and its circulation to Member States 
was the first stage in the preparations which the 
Agency would have to carry out in the implementation 
of those important functions under NPT. His 
delegation welcomed the general support for the 
GC(XIII)/OR.131 

principle that those activities should be undertaken 
by the Agency, the present organizational structure 
of which was fully capable of performing the tasks 
assigned to it. 

77. He wished to stress that his delegation was 
in favour of expanding die INIS project. However, 
it recommended that the Secretariat should accelerate 
the preparatory work and that the Member States 
should receive, not later than at the end of the 
present year, the full authorization and guidance 
required for preparing input. Only in that way could 
INIS begin its work by 1 May 1970 with the processing 
of data published as from 1 January 1970. 
His country had already stated officially that it would 
participate and it was prepared, as in the past, to 
take part in joint work on the expansion of INIS. 
78. Under the existing technical assistance 
programme his Government was making available 
in 1970 equipment worth 150 000 crowns for the 
developing countries, and it renewed its offer of five 
long-term fellowships for study at higher educational 
institutes in Czechoslovakia and for four one-year 
fellowships for study and work in research institutes 
and facilities of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. 
It was again offering to organize one of the 
Agency's scientific conferences, symposia or series 
of courses on practical work. 
79. In principle, his delegation approved the overall 
activity of the Agency during the past year and 
also its programme for 1969-1974. 
80. In conclusion, he wished to say that his country, 
in keeping with its policy of peaceful international 
co-operation, would continue its co-operation 
with the Agency in the future and contribute, to the 
best of its ability, to the fulfilment of its mission. 
81. Mr. REITBAUER (Austria) referred to the 
fact that several speakers had said that NPT would 
serve as a stimulus to the Agency. That view was 
shared by the Austrian delegation because of the 
explicit or implicit role the Agency would be called 
upon to play in the implementation of the Treaty. 
The Agency, whose mandate as laid down in the 
Statute was "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world" and to ensure that the assistance 
provided by and through the Agency was not 
diverted to military purposes, had been the principal 
international forum for discussion relating to the 
peaceful uses of the atom. It was his delegation's 
wish that the Agency should retain that function. 
82. The Austrian Government continued to take 
great interest in the Agency's safeguards activities, 
and his delegation welcomed the creation of the 
Division of Development within the Department of 
Safeguards and Inspection. In the Austrian view, 

GC(XIII)/OR.131 

that demonstrated the Agency's willingness to contribute, 
in collaboration with Member States, to the 
development of effective safeguards methods and 
technology. His Government had noted with satisfaction 
the formal training course for new safeguards 
inspectors that had been held in June 1969, 
which it considered an important step in the right 
direction. Like other delegations, the Austrian delegation 
recognized the need to establish a corps of 
safeguards inspectors, who should be offered longterm 
careers in order to be able to fulfil their tasks 
effectively. 

83. On 20 August 1969 the United States, the 
Agency and Austria had signed a new safeguards 
transfer agreement. The new agreement implicitly 
expressed the full support of the Austrian Government 
for the Agency's safeguards system, the importance 
of which was certain to increase further 
with the expected entry into force of NPT. 
84. While it was making progress with regard to 
safeguards, the Agency was facing increasing 
difficulties in meeting the requests for the provision 
of technical assistance to developing countries. The 
Board's report showed that the value of requests 
had risen from $1.5 million in 1962 to $3.7 million 
in 1969, while the percentage of requests approved 
had fallen from about 50% to little more than 25% 
(GC(XIII)/404), para. 17 and Table 2). The Austrian 
delegation deplored that development and 
shared the view expressed by other delegations that 
the chronic shortage of funds was one of the most 
serious problems facing die Agency. Austria believed 
that more countries should be prepared to contribute 
to the General Fund in order to narrow the continuing 
gap between the funds pledged and the actual 
needs. Only then would the Agency be able to 
fulfil one of its foremost tasks. Austria was therefore 
willing to contribute, as in past years, on the basis 
of the assessed budget ratio to the General Fund, 
subject to parliamentary approval. The Austrian 
Government did not exclude the possibility of a 
further increase in its voluntary contribution, if other 
countries were prepared to adopt the same attitude. 
85. The Director General had mentioned that the 
Agency was carrying out an investigation into the 
technical and cost aspects of small and mediumsized 
power reactors10). The Austrian delegation 
attached great importance to that investigation, not 
only because the possible development of small and 
medium-sized power reactors would, in view of the 
reduced costs of construction, allow a more rapid 
narrowing of the gap between the developed and 
developing countries, but also because small industrial 
countries with limited financial resources 
would benefit. 
10) GC(XIII)/OR.127, para. 37. 

86. As regards the budget of the Agency, it was 
proposed to increase the Regular Budget by about 
$1 million or 8.8%; the Austrian delegation had 
taken note, with some concern, of that increase, 
which was due largely to adjustments of salaries 
and wages. It recognized, however, that the Agency's 
responsibilities were increasing rapidly, in particular 
with regard to safeguards and INIS, a project which 
it fully supported, and that the extra staff required 
would necessitate higher appropriations. The Austrian 
delegation welcomed the introduction in the 
Agency's budget for 1970 of a separate section 
grouping all expenditure relating to safeguards under 
a single heading; that would certainly permit a better 
understanding of the expenditure involved in applying 
safeguards, and would allow a fuller appreciation 
of the Agency's policy in that respect. 
87. In the light of the increased membership of 
the Agency and of the remarkable progress in 
various countries in die technological, scientific and 
economic fields, but above all in the light of the 
future obligations of die Agency under NPT and 
of the extensive responsibility vested in the Board 
with regard to the problems of safeguards it was 
understandable that there should be considerable 
concern about the nature and composition of the 
Board and consequendy about the representation 
in the Agency as a whole. The wishes of the 
developing countries for better representation oftiieir 
respective areas on the Board were justified, but 
it was not possible either to ignore die remarkable 
progress and impressive achievements of some Member 
States in nuclear technology and their considerable 
contribution to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. 
88. Agreement had been reached on the need for 
a modest expansion of the Board. Austria felt that 
for the time being the Italian proposal best reflected 
the criteria formulated by the twelfth General Conference, 
and could well serve as a basis for further 
discussions, particularly as the Italian delegation had 
said that it was ready to consider improvements 
and amendments. Austria sincerely hoped that it 
would be possible to find a generally acceptable 
solution in the coming months. 
89. Turning to the Agency's role in connection 
with nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, he 
said that the relevant technology was still at an 
early stage. That use of nuclear energy did, however, 
constitute a major hope for development and prosperity. 
The Board's report on the subject was an 
excellent survey of what the Agency could undertake 
in the future in that connection. 
90. Austria was firmly convinced that the activities 
of the Agency in that respect fell within its statutory 
objectives and that they were within its technical 
competence. At the present stage of technological 
-10



GC(XIII)/OR.131 

development in that field the Agency should devote 
its attention initially to the exchange and dissemination 
of information, for which the present organizational 
structure seemed to be appropriate and 
adequate. 

91. He then turned to the atomic energy programme 
in Austria. He pointed out that research 
and development work had been carried on for 
many years. That the construction of a nuclear 
power plant was only now being considered was 
partly due to the fact that hydrolectric power stations 
had hitherto played a primary role in Austria's 
economy. Austria hoped to be able to have the 
first nuclear power station of about 350 or 
600 MW(e) operating by 1975. Studies had been 
concentrated on the question of the site and on the 
ways and means of ensuring effective and extensive 
participation by Austrian industry in the construction 
of the plant. , 
92. In view of the federal structure of Austria 
some problems regarding the organization of the 
future power station had had to be solved, since 
it would be run jointly by several utility companies. 
93. In conclusion, he wished to inform the Conference 
on the progress made in the Donaupark 
project. In the international competition for architects 
from all over the world, which had been jointly 
run by the Federal Government of Austria and the 
city of Vienna with the object of finding an urbanplanning 
solution to the question of the Headquarters 
of the Agency and UNIDO and an Austrian 
conference centre in the Donaupark, a decision had 
been taken on 23 September 1969. 
94. The international jury had had to make its 
choice, in several sessions, from more than 250 
projects; the final decision had been made public 
at a press conference on 24 September 1969 in the 
presence of representatives of the Agency and 
UNIDO. 
95. The first prize had been awarded to the 
project submitted by Cesar Pelli and Partners, 
Victor Gruen Associates, United States of America. 
The second prize had gone to the project presented 
by the Building Design Partnership, United Kingdom. 
The third prize had been awarded to the 
project of Messrs. Novotny and Mahner, Federal 
Republic of Germany. An Austrian architect, 
Mr. Staber, had qualified for the fourth prize. 
96. Five supplementary awards of S150 000 each 
had been granted to three architects from the United 
States, one from Switzerland and one from France. 
97. The models and plans of the successful 
projects as well as the plans of all projects submitted 
would be displayed in a public exhibition from 
1-20 October 1969 in the Donaupark. 

98. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) considered 
that the conclusion of NPT had been a very important 
recent development. His country attached 
importance to the implementation of that Treaty, 
which would be a powerful factor in the interest 
of world peace, international collaboration in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and, hence, the improvement 
of man's living conditions. On 12 June 
1969 the Polish Council of State had ratified NPT, 
thus expressing its strong desire to see it come into 
force - which development was a prerequisite for the 
Agency's activities and for increased participation by 
the nuclear Powers in the service of peace and humanity. 
Unfortunately, there were countries which 
had not ratified the Treaty and which were even 
taking action against it. Those countries included 
Members of the Agency which were advanced in 
nuclear science. 
99. It was to be hoped that the process of ratifying 
NPT would proceed more rapidly. No Member 
of the Agency or other country making extensive 
use of the results of nuclear science should fail to 
play its part in the implementation of that historic 
Treaty. It was paradoxical that the German Democratic 
Republic, with its highly developed technology, 
was not a Member of the Agency, which it was 
generally recognized should be universal and nonpolitical 
in character. That state of affairs should 
be changed as quickly as possible and the German 
Democratic Republic, which had recently ratified 
NPT and whose achievements in the atomic field 
had been dealt with at length in the document presented 
to the General Conference by his delegation11} 
should be admitted to the Agency. 
100. There was an essential link between implementation 
of NPT and the Agency's activities in 
respect both of control of fissionable materials and 
the installations where they were stored and of the 
peaceful use of nuclear explosives. His Government 
supported the work the Agency had done so far in 
those areas. It should be noted that the sum of 
$1 272 000 was to be allocated separately for control 
functions under the budget for 197012). 
101. His delegation considered that the Agency was 
the only international body entitled to control nuclear 
explosions and that all signatories of NPT 
should submit to its control. The experience and 
outstanding scientific qualifications of the experts 
in the Secretariat fully justified their being entrusted 
with the functions provided for in Article V of the 
Treaty. He approved without reservation the con11) 
GC(XIII)/INF/116. 
12) GC(XIII)/405, Section 12. 

-11 — 


GC(XIII)/OR.131 

elusions of the Board set out in document 
GC(XIII)/410. 

102. The entry into force of NPT in the near future 
would make it imperative for the Agency to step 
up preparations in connection with the control functions 
mentioned in NPT. 
103. The Agency's safeguards system might well 
serve as a basis for the drafting of control agreements 
under NPT between the Agency and signatory 
States. 
104. For all those reasons his delegation approved 
the appropriation for safeguards in the draft budget 
for 1970. 
105. His country had continued to make an active 
contribution to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
From 5 to 20 June 1969 an inter-regional training 
course in the production of radioisotopes had been 
held at the Institute of Nuclear Research in Warsaw. 
The course had been attended by 13 participants, 
most of them from developing countries. 
106. The project for co-operative research in reactor 
physics between the Agency, Norway, Poland and 
Yugoslavia (NPY project)13) had been expanded, 
and a symposium on a technical subject relating 
to that project had been organized in Poland during 
March 1969. In the programme for the NPY project 
more attention should be paid to the practical problems 
of nuclear power in order to make the results 
of the research more useful for those countries about 
to embark on that new type of power production. 
Specialists from his country were members of the 
ENEA/IAEA Liaison Group on the generation of 
electricity and one Polish expert had taken an active 
part in the work of the international group of experts 
set up by the Secretary-General of the United Nation 
pursuant to Resolution 2456 A (XXIII) of the 
General Assembly 14\ Scientists from his country 
were also working under research contracts relating 
to a number of subjects. 
107. Support should be given to those activities 
through which technical assistance was supplied to 
the developing countries. Poland had made experts 
available for various courses, including the Warsaw 
course and a course in Cairo on the industrial applications 
of isotopes. It approved the Agency's efforts 
in that field and was ready to make a larger number 
of experts available to the Agency. 
108. The Regular Budget estimates had risen by 
8.88% over the figure for 1969, the largest 
increase — 38.2% — being for safeguards. The latter 
increase was justified in view of the increasing control 
13) See document INFCIRC/55. 
14) See para. 34 above. 

functions of the Agency. There had also been a 
considerable increase in expenditure on INIS, a 
project supported by several Members of the Agency, 
including Poland. However, the budget should not 
increase at a rate greater than that of the national 
income of the Member States. 

109. Poland attached great importance to the 
Agency's activities in connection with the provision 
of technical assistance and the training of specialists. 
If, as was expected, the Laboratory at Seibersdorf 
and the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste became more and more independent 
economically, the amounts allocated for those facilities 
could be used for technical assistance. 
110. Although it supported the efforts by Member 
States to increase funds for direct technical assistance, 
his delegation wished to warn against over-simplifications, 
which generally took the form of underestimating 
the importance of certain Agency activities 
which really constituted technical assistance to countries 
not having die means to develop independently 
all applications of science and nuclear technology. 
It was only by a balanced development of the 
Secretariat's work, in accordance with the current 
tasks in the most important sectors, that efficiency 
would be achieved in the provision of direct and 
indirect assistance to the developing countries. 
111. The Polish delegation wished to express its 
satisfaction with the progress made in the INIS 
project, which was to come into operation in 1970. 
As regards the purchase of the IBM-360/30 computer, 
provision must be made for training programmers 
from Member States so as to facilitate an 
expansion of the Agency's services to Members. 
112. As his delegation had pointed out the year 
before, the development of new activities would 
soon make it imperative for the Agency to curtail 
certain programmes, especially in fields like theoretical 
physics, nuclear medicine and radiobiology 15l 
Some of those activities could be continued by other 
international organizations, from which Member 
States could also derive benefits. 
113. Mr. HOCHSTRASSER (Switzerland) said that 
his country had made considerable progress in nuclear 
energy since the twelfth session of the Conference. 
Of three commercial power plants under 
construction, one had been finished and was already 
producing power; work on the other two was progressing 
according to plan and no serious difficulties 
were being encountered. 
114. On a less cheerful note, Switzerland had to 
report an incident in its experimental nuclear power 
plant at Lucens. So far the investigation, which was 
15) GC(XII)/124, para. 53. 


GC(XIII)/OR.131 

still under way, indicated that the reactor had 
suffered extensive damage, due probably to the melting 
of one fuel element. Fortunately the safety 
equipment had protected the personnel of the plant 
and the population at large from the radioactivity 
released during the incident. Copies of the full 
reports on the incident would be given to the 
Agency as soon as they were available. Although 
the operation of the Lucens plant had thus come to 
a somewhat disappointing end, it had yielded a great 
deal of valuable information. 

115. In Switzerland, as in other countries, the 
future of nuclear power plants seemed likely to be 
affected to a considerable extent by growing public 
concern about the environment. An intensive and 
objective information campaign, showing the elaborate 
precautions taken to protect the public against 
any damage which might result from the construction 
or operation of a nuclear plant, would be essential; 
the information would have to be presented, moreover, 
in a form understandable to the layman. The 
Agency could play an important role by collecting 
and distributing all the relevant documentation. 
116. Switzerland was happy that a Fourth Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy was to be 
convened at Geneva. It would, of course, give the 
organizers of the conference all necessary support 
in the hope that the conference would be as successful 
as its three predecessors. 
117. The Government of Switzerland had noted 
with satisfaction die Agency's continued effort to 
develop services which could most effectively be 
organized in an international framework. He had 
in mind particularly INIS, which, in view of the 
flood of scientific publications, would answer a real 
need. Switzerland, he hoped, would be able to 
make a useful contribution to INIS. 
118. In the same general category was the assistance 
which the Agency could give in connection with 
underground nuclear explosions. Although widespread 
use of that application was impossible at 
the present stage, Switzerland felt that the Agency 
was the proper organization to assume international 
responsibilities in connection with the peaceful uses 
The meeting rose 

of nuclear explosives. It should gird itself for its 
new task. 

119. The application of safeguards constituted 
another important service to all Member States. 
Accordingly, the cost of safeguards activities should 
be borne by all Members. The idea of adding a 
supplement to the price of nuclear materials sold 
to non-nuclear Powers subject to safeguards, with 
a view to retrieving thereby the expenses incurred 
in applying safeguards to them, would only add to 
existing forms of discrimination between nuclear 
and non-nuclear Powers. To Switzerland it was a 
completely unacceptable proposal. 
120. One could not but realize that the Agency's 
increasing expenditure on safeguards inspections 
might have a deleterious effect on programmes 
designed more specifically for the developing 
countries. However, if the Agency could show that 
it had made the best use of the means at its 
disposal, by eliminating all activities which could 
not claim first priority and by streamlining its administration, 
the additional funds needed to finance 
essential tasks such as the provision of technical 
assistance would somehow be found. For its part, 
Switzerland had again resolved to make a voluntary 
contribution on the recommended basis. 
121. Switzerland agreed that the composition of the 
Board was no longer completely in keeping with 
the organization's requirements and believed that 
fairer systems of representation should be sought. 
Nevertheless, in the interests of efficiency any enlargement 
of the Board should be kept within 
bounds. Furthermore, permanent seats should not 
constitute a large proportion of the total. States not 
enjoying the privilege of continuous representation 
should, from time to time, be enabled to participate 
in the work of the Board and to share its responsibilities. 
Switzerland felt that the Italian proposal provided 
an acceptable basis for further discussion. 
122. In conclusion, he noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency had played a valuable part in advancing 
the peaceful applications of nuclear energy for the 
benefit of mankind. One could only hope that it 
would continue to do so in the future. Switzerland 
pledged its full support to the Agency in all its 
activities. 
12.50 p.m. 

GC(XIII)/OR.132 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

28 January 1970 
GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(23-29 SEPTEMBER 1969) 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 26 September 1969, at 3.30 p.m. 
President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 
CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda* 
Paragraphs 
9 General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1968-69 (continued) 1—142 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist RepublicSpainArgentinaYugoslaviaUkrainian Soviet Socialist RepublicSwedenPhilippinesRepublic of KoreaBrazil 
1— 14 
15— 37 
38— 62 
63— 72 
73— 88 
89— 98 
99—115 
116—126 
127—141 
GC(XIII)/418. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/114/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.132 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1968-69 
(GC(XIII)/404, 416) (continued) 

1. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said the Agency was performing a variety 
of useful activities designed to improve co-operation 
between countries in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, thereby helping to accelerate the progress 
of science for the benefit of the world community 
as a whole. 
2. In the year under review the Agency had taken 
a number of steps to improve methods of research 
into problems of power engineering, isotope applications, 
medicine, etc. By regularly holding seminars, 
symposia and panels the Agency was helping to 
speed up the exchange of scientific and technical 
information, to improve the qualifications of creative 
institutions and to determine the most up-to-date 
trends in the development of science and technology. 
3. The Byelorussian delegation considered that, 
from the technical and organizational point of view, 
the Agency was meeting the demands made upon it. 
It therefore seemed perfectly natural that it should 
be the Agency that was entrusted with the safeguards 
functions under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). He was convinced that 
the Agency would be equal to that task. 
4. The availability of up-to-date and complete 
information on the latest achievements was extremely 
important for the selection of the lines along which 
science and technology should be developed. The 
Agency was carrying out extremely useful activities 
in that respect. Recendy, there had been a satisfactory 
development in the form of panels with the 
participation of experts as observers. Such meetings 
of experts could result in the more general 
dissemination of the most useful information, the 
assessment of particular scientific achievements and 
the making of recommendations as to their 
application. 
5. His delegation wished to express its approval 
of and interest in the announcement that a Fourth 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy was to be held. 
6. When speaking of the Agency's activities it 
was impossible not to mention the sterling services 
of the Director General. 
7. In the past year the Byelorussian SSR had 
taken a new step forward in the peaceful application 
of atomic energy. During that period the Institute 
of Nuclear Power Engineering of the Academy of 
Sciences of the Byelorussian SSR had constructed 
a multipurpose gamma unit with a 200 000-curie 
cobalt emitter. At the same Institute work had 
been carried out on radiation chemistry and studies 
had been made of the properties of new coolants, 
which were regarded as promising for use in nuclear 
power stations. 

8. Papers by Byelorussian scientists had been 
published in journals of the Byelorussian Academy 
of Sciences and in the main journals of the Soviet 
Union. 
9. In the last few years scientists of the Byelorussian 
SSR had engaged in a wide range of research 
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy and, with 
their published work, had made a definite contribution 
to the overall achievements of science. 
10. The rapid progress of science in his country 
doubtless owed much to the fruitful co-operation of 
Byelorussian scientists with those of the other 
Republics of the Soviet Union and also with 
scientists in other countries. 
11. The Byelorussian delegation had noted with 
satisfaction the growing role of the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON) in consolidating 
the efforts of a number of countries in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and also the closer 
working relations between COMECON and the 
Agency. 
12. International co-operation in many matters 
had become an integral part of progress. All Member 
States were aware of the fruitful role of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
The number of Member States of the Agency was 
showing a regular increase, which was only to be 
expected. In that connection his delegation welcomed 
the admission of Ireland as a Member State and 
wished it every success in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
13. At the same time the Byelorussian delegation 
wished once again to draw the attention of the 
General Conference to the question of the admission 
to the Agency of the German Democratic Republic, 
a country which was making extensive use of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes. The Government of 
the German Democratic Republic had stated its 
readiness to place its nuclear plants under Agency 
safeguards. A number of its research institutes were 
carrying out work on nuclear physics and the 
development of nuclear physics equipment. Preparations 
had been made for the production of radioisotopes. 
Those facts were convincing evidence that 
the German Democratic Republic had all the prerequisites 
for participation in the work of the Agency, 
and that its membership would bring undoubted 
benefits to other countries. 
14. The people of the Byelorussian SSR were 
preparing to celebrate 1970 as the centenary of the 
— 2

birth of Vladimir Ilich Lenin, a thinker of genius 
and founder of the Soviet State. The workers of 
the country were preparing to celebrate that 
anniversary with a great creative upsurge. His 
delegation was glad to learn that many international 
organizations intended to commemorate the centenary 
and it expressed the hope that the event, which 
was of great significance to the Byelorussian SSR, 
would also be marked by the Agency in its activities. 

15. Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) said that 
his country's Nuclear Energy Board (JEN) had gone 
ahead with the programmes described in the report 
covering the previous period (1967-68) and had 
completed the work it had planned. 
16. He would confine himself to the work which 
had actually been completed, and wanted in the 
first place to mention the various phases of the 
nuclear fuel cycle. On the basis of the experience 
gained during the previous year, the first aerial 
prospecting campaign had been completed, covering 
an area of about 24 000 km2 At the same time 
a great deal of prospecting had been done on foot 
and using motor vehicles. About one third of the 
national territory had been explored, and an area 
including the northern and southern edges of the 
central Cordillera had been discovered which offered 
excellent prospects. Atpresent a sampling and mining 
project was being carried out in granite areas in 
different provinces of his country. 
17. During the period under review about 
80 000 tons of uranium ores had been extraced. 
On the basis of the European Nuclear Energy Agency 
classification, his country's reserves amounted to 
more than 260 000 tons. 
18. An experimental static leaching installation 
with a capacity of 15 000 tons per year had been 
built and put into operation for treating marginal 
ores. The Andujar uranium plant had continued 
producing uranium concentrates at a rate of 60 tons 
of U3O8 per year. It had also been decided to 
construct a uranium plant in the town of Rodrigo 
(Salamanca) as a joint enterprise of the National 
Institute of Industry and JEN, and the Government 
had appointed a joint control commission to study 
the means of financing the installation. The site 
had already been chosen and the construction work 
was due to begin shortly. Work was being continued 
on the technological development programme and 
recently a pilot plant for treating low-content ores 
by leaching had been put into operation. The plant 
had a capacity of 1000 tons of ore per day. 
19. A production line had been started up for 
the manufacture of fuel elements on a semi-industrial 
level for light-water reactors. Advanced fuel element 
prototypes had been developed for the JEN-1 reactor. 
The design of those elements was such as to permit 
GC(XIII)/OR.132 

better utilization of the reactor core for carrying out 
irradiation experiments. Production of 200-kg 
metallic uranium billets had been started on a semiindustrial 
scale, on the basis of the magnesiothermy 
method. Uranium tubes were also being manufactured 
on a semi-industrial scale for the Vandellos reactor. 

20. The Ibero Nuclear Company had been formed 
for the purpose of studying the possibilities of 
manufacturing fuel elements in Spain. The partners 
in that company were the National Institute 
of Industry and various electric companies. JEN 
was acting as the company's technical organ. A 
research contract had been signed between JEN, 
the Madrid Electricity Company and the Westinghouse 
Electric International Company for the evaluation 
of fuel elements of advanced design. Those 
elements were being irradiated in the Jose Cabrera 
reactor. 
21. The M-l installation introduced during the 
previous period was continuing its normal operation 
of reprocessing fuel from the JEN-1 reactor. A 
study was also being carried out on the construction 
of a new installation of higher capacity to satisfy 
the country's requirements. 
22. The OIES radioactive-waste treatment plant, 
which was put into service during the previous year, 
was operating as planned. A new plant was also 
under construction for the recovery of fission products 
of commercial value; it was hoped to put that plant 
into operation during the coming year. The JEN-1 
and JEN-2 research reactors had continued in operation, 
and with their use it had been possible to gain 
experience in reactor physics. At present the JEN-1 
reactor was being modified to increase its power 
to 5 MW, and studies were being carried out to 
increase its power to 10MW so as to make available 
a greater capacity for the supply of isotopes and to 
provide a basis for carrying out experiments on 
material testing and neutron flux. Experiments on 
the measurement of fast neutrons had been continued 
on the Coral I fast experimental reactor. 
23. In connection with the desalination of water, 
work was being continued on the methods of fast 
distillation, electrodialysis, reverse osmosis and solar 
distillation, and various pilot plants were in operation. 
Work had just been started on a fast distillation 
plant with a capacity of 2000 m^ per day and on 
another which would produce 50 m5 per day by 
electrodialysis. One of the engineering projects, 
carried out with the collaboration of different undertakings, 
was the Aquarius project concerned with 
the feasibility of constructing an agro-industrial 
complex in the Almeria region, with a dual-purpose 
nuclear power station. A study had also been made 
of the possibility of building a dual-purpose nuclear 
power station for increasing the electric power in 
the Catalan region and increasing the supply of 
water for Barcelona and its suburbs. 

GC(XIII)/OR.132 

24. The number of radioisotope users in Spain 
continued to increase and at the end of 1968 had 
reached a total of 511, the number of curies used 
being 10 500; most of the users were concerned with 
medicine and animal biology, followed by industrial 
applications, physical chemistry research, agriculture 
and plant biology, in that order. The number of 
authorized installations using radioactive materials 
had been 300 at the end of 1967. 
25. Some of the more important studies on industrial 
applications related to the detection of leaks 
in reservoirs, the determination of river flow rates, 
the irradiation of wood and foodstuffs (fish, strawberries, 
oranges, garlic and onions), safety in respect 
of the consumption of irradiated foodstuffs, the determination 
of wear in internal combustion engines, 
the production of labelled compounds, and research 
on new radiopharmaceuticals. 
26. The Institute of Nuclear Studies had carried 
on with its work of co-ordinating and promoting 
basic research and with the organization of highly 
specialized courses in the nuclear field. In particular, 
he wanted to mention the courses on nunclear 
engineering for graduates, and others on the use of 
radioisotopes in engineering and industry, on nuclear 
medicine and instrumental analysis; those courses 
were attended by a total of about 100 students. The 
laboratories of JEN were assisting a number of 
fellowship holders who were just starting on nuclear 
research or carrying out special tasks. The Institute 
of Nuclear Studies had continued to support studies 
on theoretical physics, radiochemical research, 
biological research, instrumentation and other basic 
studies. Recently, two departments dealing with 
molecular biology and solid-state physics had been 
established in the Institute of Nuclear Studies. 
27. In December 1968 the 15 3-MW(e) Jose Cabrera 
nuclear power station at Zorita had been officially 
inaugurated. By 1 July 1969 the station had produced 
333.7 million kWh. Authorization had been given 
for the building of a 500-MW(e) power station in 
Lemoniz, which would go into operation in 1975. 
Authorization had been requested for three units 
of more than 500 MW(e). The operation of the 
Santa Maria de Garona and Vandellos power stations 
(440 MW(e) and 480 Mf(e) respectively) had 
continued normally. 
28. The recently approved National Electric Plan for 
the period 1972-1981 provided, among other things, 
for the construction of nuclear installations to produce 
a total of 8000 MW(e). 
29. The Board's annual report for 1968-69 
(GC(XIII)/404) showed how far the Agency's work 
had advanced in recent years and the extent to 
which it had benefited a number of countries. 
30. Spanish scientists and engineers had been 
selected by the Agency for foreign missions, especially 
in America. JEN had also been awarded a number 
of research contracts and had attached maximum 
importance to that work. 
31. However, as had been pointed out the previous 
year, the Government of Spain was concerned at 
the lack of Spanish nuclear energy experts on the 
Agency's staff. Spain was still inadequately represented 
in the Secretariat although the appointment 
of Spanish technical experts to P-3 and P-4 posts 
had slightly corrected the situation in which there 
had been no Spanish national among the senior 
scientific staff. 
32. His delegation was concerned at such a situation, 
which could be regarded as discriminatory. 
For seven years there had been not a single Spanish 
national at Director level to which, with the logical 
rotation of those posts for the filling of which not 
only experience in nuclear energy matters but also 
the principle of geographical distribution were important 
considerations — it would have been 
reasonable or natural for Spanish scientists and 
technicians to have been appointed. 
33. NPT provided that the Agency would be called 
upon to perform the inspection duties required under 
that Treaty. His delegation was concerned at the 
fact that those inspection duties, which would of 
course be performed for the parties to the Treaty, 
might result in the Agency having two, if not three 
categories of Member States: the nuclear-weapon 
States, parties to the Treaty, which would never 
be inspected; the non-nuclear-weapon States, parties 
to the Treaty, which would be inspected and, finally, 
those which were not parties to the Treaty and 
had large nuclear installations, some of which had 
been placed voluntary under Agency safeguards and 
some of which were covered by bilateral agreements 
— which States would evidently lose none 
of their rights within the Agency or be discriminated 
against. 
34. His Government was also concerned at the 
considerable cost to which inspections would give 
rise, owing to the vast increase in the number of 
nuclear installations throughout the world. It seemed 
logical that those costs should be met by countries 
making use of the Agency's services, whether in the 
form of currently applied safeguards or safeguards 
resulting from NPT. It did not seem fair that many 
developing countries, for which the production of 
nuclear electricity was not yet economic or feasible, 
and which would not draw on the inspection services, 
should have to assume obligations arising out of 
such inspections. 
35- As it had stated frequently, the Spanish 
Government considered that the application of safe



guards, their development (with maintenance of 
maximum industrial secrecy) and their gradual simplification 
should be administered by a body subordinate 
to the Board of Governors whose members would 
be scientists and technicians from the countries subject 
to inspection. 

36. Just as countries which did not possess large 
nuclear installations should not have their contribution 
increased by having to pay costs under that heading, 
so also was it illogical that those countries should 
participate in devising inspection and safeguards 
techniques, whilst other countries with large nuclear 
installations were exempt from that requirement. 
37. The Agency was now at a cross roads which 
could lead either to the provision of better services 
to its Member States, which had to work together 
harmoniously, or else to the making of distinctions 
which could turn into discrimination, something 
which should be avoided at all costs. It was to be 
hoped that the Board and the Secretariat would 
take great care that such a situation could not arise. 
38. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said his delegation 
was happy to welcome Ireland as a new Member 
State. 
39- He wished to express his Government's satisfaction 
at the Board's decision to reappoint 
Dr. Eklund as Director General for a new period of 
office, a decision that he felt certain would be 
approved by the General Conference. Dr. Eklund's 
experience, competence and dedication would ensure 
the performance of outstanding work by the Agency. 

40. Argentina was fulfilling a debt of gratitude 
in making particular mention of the assistance that 
it continued to receive from the Agency and which 
had made possible, among other achievements during 
the year under review, the signing of a new trilateral 
safeguards agreement between the Agency, the United 
States of America and the Argentine Republic1); the 
conclusion of an agreement with the World Health 
Organization, in collaboration with the Agency, by 
which the Argentine Atomic Energy Commission 
was designated as a regional reference centre for 
secondary dosimetric standards; and the conclusion 
of an agreement for the transfer to Argentina of a 
Siemens SUR-100 training reactor, donated by the 
Federal Republic of Germany, and an agreement 
for the transfer of a low-temperature, liquid-nitrogen 
irradiation loop, offered by France2). 
41. Added to that was the support received under 
the technical assistance programme, which in the 
present year consisted of a larger number of fellowships 
for advanced professional training and the 
1) INFCIRC/130, 130/corr.l and 130/corr.l/Rev.l. 
2) INFCIRC/128. 

GC(XIII)/OR.132 

services of experts in a variety of projects being 
carried out under the supervision of the Argentine 
Atomic Energy Commission. 

42. As a result of Argentina's positive efforts in 
nuclear energy matters and of the benefits stemming 
from international co-operation, steady progress was 
being made in the efforts to narrow the gap between 
that country and those which were technologically 
more advanced. 
43. An example of the achievements during the 
year under review was the work connected with 
the nuclear power production programme, first and 
foremost the Atucha reactor. The original idea 
of a nuclear power station to be set up in the coastal 
area of greater Buenos Aires found expression in 
the construction of the 319-MW(e) Atucha power 
station, using a natural-uranium heavy-water 
moderated reactor. The work, which was scheduled 
for completion in the middle of 1972, was proceeding 
in accordance with the time-table and plan 
drawn up. 
44. With regard to the Cordoba pre-investment 
project, a study had already been made of the feasibility 
of establishing a nuclear power station alongside 
the Los Molinos dam, 5 5 kilometres south-west of 
the city of Cordoba. 
45. The result of that study had shown that the 
erection of a nuclear power station servicing the 
Province of Cordoba was feasible from the technical 
point of view, desirable from the economic standpoint 
and practicable from a financial viewpoint. 
46. As regards the fuel cycle, the discovery of 
a large deposit near the uranium-bearing region 
in the south of Mendoza Province would clearly 
improve the economic conditions for exploitation 
in that region and increase the level of economically 
exploitable resources. 
47. On the subject of uranium prospection, it 
was worth while mentioning that there was a regional 
training course in progress at present in Argentina, 
sponsored by the Agency and attended by professional 
people from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, 
Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela. 
48. Studies and arrangements for the installation 
of a fuel fabrication plant providing fuel elements 
for power reactors had made progress, and it was 
hoped that the plant would be able to start 
industrial-scale production in 1973. 
49. Progress had also been made in the application 
of nuclear irradiation techniques, particularly 
in food and agriculture, with the setting up at the 
Ezeiza Atomic Centre of new laboratories for agronomic 
and veterinary applications and the completion 
of a semi-industrial irradiation unit at the same 

GC(XIII)/OR.132 

Centre as part of the installations of the intense 
radiation sources division. 

50. The studies on possible industrial applications 
had shown a need for equipment with which 
research could be carried out on a pilot scale and 
crucial information obtained in advance on such 
matters as the economic aspects of a process, prior 
to its introduction into manufacturing practice. 
51. That requirement, and also the need for equipment 
for use in applications that had now reached 
the industrial scale, had been the factors which had 
led to the decision to built the semi-industrial 
irradiation plant. 
52. The regional centre for secondary dosimetric 
standards, to which he had referred, was to 
commence activity in the present year and would 
enable radiotherapy service centres of the Latin 
American region to calibrate instruments used for 
radiation measurements in connection with clinical 
dosimetry and with radiological protection. 
53. As regards the Board's annual report, he said 
that although his delegation accepted the document, 
a critical examination of the period in question 
indicated that the gains in areas of particular importance 
to developing countries had been very slight. 
54. The funds available to the Agency for its 
technical assistance programme remained at the same 
level as, or lower dian, that of previous years. 
Technical assistance showed a decline in relation 
to the Agency's overall activity and, should that 
trend continue, within a few years it would lose 
all meaning as compared to other activities. 
55. As far as proposed solutions were concerned, 
voluntary contributions did not even reach the $2 
million target, and the Director General's appeal 
in his address to the previous General Conference3^ 
did not seem to have met with success. His 
delegation wished to state that the Argentine contribution 
was equal to the percentage recommended. 
56. Not very much had come of the recommendations 
in Resolution H.II and Resolution I of the 
Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States for a study 
of ways and means of increasing the funds available 
for technical assistance*), except for the proposed 
agreement between the Government of Sweden and 
the Agency relating to co-operation in the provision 
of assistance to developing countries. The latter 
could be a trial experiment which, if effective, should 
be further developed. His delegation congratulated 
the Government of Sweden and the Agency on 
taking that action. 
3) GC(XII)/OR.119,para.41. 
4) United Nations document A/7277. 

57. In the matter of technical assistance, even 
within its present limitations, certain concepts with 
regard to the proportion of aid offered in terms 
of equipment and experts should be reconsidered. 
Although Argentina, for special reasons, at present 
considered aid received in the form of expertise to 
be more valuable than equipment, the situation 
could not be generalized and was subject to time 
factors and local circumstances, which should be 
analysed in each individual case. 
58. With reference to the review of Article VI 
of the Statute, his Government had followed the 
matter very actively and had carefully studied all 
the proposals put forward. It was of the opinion 
that Article VI should be amended by adapting 
it to existing conditions and to the criteria laid 
down in Resolution GC(XII)/RES/24l. Everything 
indicated that, given the machinery available and 
the present rate of progress, even though a detailed 
study of the matter could be carried out, it would 
be some time before the hoped-for modification 
of Article VI could be arrived at. 
5 9 • Referring to the provision of services in connection 
witli nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, 
he said his country considered that all international 
activities for the peaceful uses of atomic energy 

should be centralized in the Agency, including nuclear 
explosions or any other activity or development 
by which nuclear energy could contribute to the 
general well-being. The Agency's Statute, organization 
and procedures had been devised for the 
provision of services of that kind, and the only 
way in which the situation could be affected by 
the emergence of new types of activities would be 
a change in the volume of the Agency's work, as 
a result of an increase in requests for technical 
assistance by Member States. 

60. For those reasons his delegation considered 
that services in connection with nuclear explosions 
were among the functions envisaged in Article III 
of the Statute and that the Agency should therefore 
act in full conformity with what was stated in that 
Article, and without departing from the provisions 
of paragraph III.C thereof, which stated: "In carrying 
out its functions, the Agency shall not make 
assistance to members subject to any political, 
economic, military or other conditions incompatible 
with the provisions of this Statute." 
61. It was therefore quite feasible for the Agency 
to undertake immediate work to promote a maximum 
exchange of information and expertise on nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes, since the subject 
was one in which many Member States were 
interested and on which very little information was 
available. 

62. With reference to the fund of special fissionable 
materials, he recalled that his Government had always 
sought to have the Agency implement one of the 
basic conditions envisaged by the Preparatory 
Commission and laid down in the Statute, namely, 
that it should act as an international supplier of 
fissionable materials for power reactors. The request 
made in that regard by the Conference of NonNuclear-
Weapon States5) had again demonstrated how 
important it was for the development of nuclear 
power production in many countries that a supply 
of fissionable material should be available on an 
international scale. An analysis of the Board's memorandum 
on the subject6)showedhowlittleprogress 
had been made along those lines over the past 13 
years and how urgent it was to adopt a more 
positive attitude which would enable die Agency 
to make provision on a regular and long-term basis 
for the supply of fissionable materials for power 
reactors to Member States requesting them. 
63. Mr. GUZINA (Yugoslavia) welcomed Ireland 
as a new Member of the Agency. 
64. Recalling that the Director General, in his 
opening statement, had described the past year as 
the "Year of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States"7\ he said 
that Member States which did not possess nuclear 
weapons were closely studying how NPT would 
affect them when it came into force. It was essential 
that the nuclear-weapon States should discharge their 
obligations under NPT, particularly Articles IV, V 
and VI, if the Treaty was to fulfil the hopes placed 
in it. 
65- Developing countries would be unable to enjoy 
the benefits to be derived from the use of nuclear 
energy if they lacked the financial resources required 
to carry out their nuclear energy programmes, and 
in that connection he deplored the steady decline 
in the funds available for the provision of technical 
assistance by the Agency. A number of States had 
failed to respond to the Director General's appeal 
to make voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund at the same percentage rate as their assessed 
contributions to the Regular Budget, and he hoped 
they would do so in future. 

66. His delegation was prepared to approve die 
proposed budget but regretted that die increase of 
approximately 996 in the Regular Budget was mainly 
attributable to an increase in administrative expenses 
and laboratory costs. Care should be taken to ensure 
that the large increase in expenditure on safeguards 
activities did not militate against the interests of the 
developing countries. The Agency's main task was 
to help the developing countries to close die ever5) 
Ibid., Resolution J. II and HI. 
6) GC(XIII)/409. 

7) GC(XIII)/OR.127, para.29. 

GC(XIII)/OR.132 

widening technological gap between them and the 
more advanced countries, and accordingly he hoped 
a reasonable balance would be maintaned between 
all its activities, bearing in mind the limited resources 
available and the growing needs of Member States, 
particularly the developing countries. 

67. The Agency could not perform its function 
successfully if Member States were not adequately 
represented in the Board, and Article VI of die 
Statute should therefore be amended as soon as 
possible so as to bring it into line with the current 
situation. While an increase in the membership 
of die Board was necessary, it was even more important 
that seats should be allocated to States 
in a democratic and equitable manner. The General 
Conference should instruct the Board and the Ad 
Hoc Committee of the Whole to Review Article VI 
of the Statute to continue their study of the matter 
with a view to submitting a proposed amendment 
of die Article to the General Conference at its next 
session. 
68. Referring to the establishment of the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS), he 
paid a tribute to the useful preparatory work done 
by a number of Member States, technical working 
groups and experts and was confident that the dissemination 
of scientific information would be of 
benefit to all Member States, particularly the developing 
countries. 
69. It was unfortunate that less than 2% of nuclear 
power plants were located, or were to be built, 
in die less-developed countries since that would 
further widen the technological gap between them 
and the highly industrialized countries. He welcomed 
the steps taken by the Agency to study the feasibility 
of building small and medium-size nuclear power 
plants. The study of the possible use of nuclear 
energy for desalting sea water, irrigating arid land, 
etc. was also very useful, although at that stage 
the cost seemed to be very high. 
70. He realized diat technical and healtii and 
safety problems relating to the use of nuclear explosives 
for peaceful purposes required further study 
but considered, in that connection, that the Agency 
should make timely preparations to provide Member 
States with the necessary services under appropriate 
international control. 
71. He was convinced that the Agency would 
continue to promote international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and would dius 
contribute to the preservation of peace and the 
progress of all mankind. 
72. His delegation supported the reappointment 
of Dr. Eklund as Director General of the Agency. 

GC(XIII)/OR.132 

73. Mr. PASECHNIK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said his delegation noted with satisfaction 
that, although the Agency had not yet become a 
universal, international centre for the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy, it was nevertheless fulfilling a 
definitely useful function and playing an increasingly 
significant role. 
74. The past year had been marked by a widening 
of the applications of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. Important steps had been taken in the 
basic sciences. With every new discovery in those 
fields, the revolutionary nature of man's penetration 
into the secrets of the microcosm and sub-microscosm 
was becoming increasingly obvious. On the eve 
of the hundredth anniversary of the birth of the 
great scholar and thinker, V.I. Lenin, Soviet scientists 
were pleased to note that Lenin's struggle for the 
triumph of the dialectical and materialistic conception 
of the laws governing the development and knowledge 
of nature, society and human thought had been 
crowned with success, and his wise prophecy of the 
ways in which the crisis in physics at the beginning 
of the twentieth century could be avoided had been 
fully justified. 
75. Having, examined the Board's report on the 
Agency's activities in 1968-69, his delegation could, 
in principle, approve the main trends in those 
activities. An analysis of the activities carried out 
over the past year indicated that the Agency's efforts 
had been concentrated on the solution of three 
problems: 
(a) Preparations for implementing the Agency's 
safeguards system in connection widi NPT; 
(b) Organization of international co-operation 
in the interest of utilizing experience in the 
field of nuclear power and the applications 
of isotopes and nuclear radiation in industry, 
agriculture, health and scientific research; and 
(c) Assistance to developing countries in the 
use of atomic energy to improve their national 
economies and raise their living and cultural 
standards. 
76. The Board's report rightly noted that, although 
NPT had not yet come into force, the Agency was 
already paying close attention to the provisions of 
the Treaty relating to international safeguards and 
to the prospects which it opened up for a further 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
However, certain aspects of the Treaty which direcdy 
affected the Agency's activity in those directions 
called for further comment. Since the aim of the 
Treaty was to prevent a further proliferation of 
nuclear weapons in the world, it was inevitable that 
attention should be directed towards the countries 
among those whose Governments had not yet signed 
the Treaty which were trying to obtain nuclear 
weapons. 
77. Criticism of the idea of non-proliferation had 
continued in certain capitals from the very beginning 
of talks on that vital international problem right 
up to the present. Certain States had launched 
a whole multitude of arguments against NPT in 
an attempt to frustrate the signing of the Treaty. 
Despite the barriers which certain States had placed 
in the way of a solution of the problems of nonproliferation, 
it could be stated with confidence that 
the peace-loving nations were putting a stop to the 
proliferation of nuclear warheads in various countries 
and continents. It was therefore a source of satisfaction 
to note that the individual, and perhaps 
the most important, articles of NPT were being carefully 
studied by the Agency and the Board. 
78. One of the important facets in the Agency's 
activity was the international exchange of scientific 
and technological information on important applications 
of atomic energy. Assistance in the construction 
of desalination plants and agro-industrial complexes 
was another significant aspect of its work. 
79. His delegation was gratified to note the Board's 
decision to make a start with INIS in 1970. Scientists 
of his country were playing an active part in the 
establishment of that system. 
80. The Ukrainian SSR attached great importance 
to fundamental research on medium-and low-energy 
nuclear physics, where one of the most important 
tasks was the development of a microscopic theory 
of the nucleus. Experimental approaches to that 
problem had already produced valuable results. A 
2-GeV linear electron accelerator had been used 
to determine — by the pulsing method — the 
distribution of nucleons in the nucleus, to arrive 
at nuclear form-factors and to obtain additional 
evidence of periodicity in nuclear properties. 
81. Using a set of neutron sources covering the 
entire fission-energy spectrum (WR-M reactor, precision 
electrostatic generators), Ukrainian scientists 
were obtaining data on the neutron-physics characteristics 
of structural materials. 
82. The Marine Hydrophysics Institute of the 
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences was studying the 
level of radioactivity in sea water and developing 
a theory on the diffusion of radioactive contamination 
in the oceans. The same Institute had also studied 
various aspects of the problem of disposal of radioactive 
wastes into seas and oceans. Data obtained 
had shown that such waste should not be discharged 
into the Black Sea. Those findings had been discussed 
at the twenty-third session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations and had been reported 
in the relevant United Nations documents. 
83. Successful use was being made of radioisotope 
equipment in many of his country's industries. 

84. During the period under review the Agency 
had paid special attention to the review of Article VI 
of its Statute. Since the drafting of its Statute in 
1956, and the establishment of the Agency, considerable 
changes had taken place in its structure and in 
the nature of its activities. Those changes should 
be taken into account in trying to solve the problem 
of the composition of the Board. The primary 
problem that had to be borne in mind was the 
important political factor represented by NPT, which 
had already been signed by 90 States. 
85. Many countries would soon be making wide 
use of atomic energy. For example, the East 
European countries — the socialist countries — were 
carrying out large-scale atomic energy development 
programmes. The interests of the socialist countries 
should be taken into account in increasing die composition 
of the Board. 
86. The decay of the colonial system, and with 
it the founding of new independent States, was 
making further progress. The Ukrainian SSR 
sympathized with die demands of those countries 
for better representation on die Board. 
87. His delegation had already drawn attention 
to the fact that the Agency was not yet a universal 
organization. A number of States were, in breach 
of the Statute, being discriminated against. The 
German Democratic Republic, for instance, was an 
independent, sovereign German State, and with every 
year it was making greater use of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes; its Government had been 
one of the first to sign and ratify NPT. 
88. In conclusion, his delegation wanted to thank 
Mr. Eklund for his many years of successful work 
as Director General of die Agency and for his agreement 
to remain in that post for a further term. 
89. Mr. BRYNIELSSON ( Sweden) said his delegation 
had great pleasure in supporting die reappointment 
of Dr. Eklund as Director General of die 
Agency and wished to pay tribute to his constructive 
and dedicated leadership during die past eight years. 
90. In his opening statement the Director General 
had placed special emphasis on the possible contribution 
of nuclear technology to die economic and 
scientific advancement of developing countries. The 
Agency should do all it could to provide technical 
assistance, and Member States should ensure that 
it had adequate funds to do so. In addition to 
making their usual voluntary contribution to die 
General Fund, die Swedish audiorities had recendy 
prepared an agreement with the Agency relating 
to co-operation in the provision of assistance to 
developing countries. The agreement had been 
approved by die Board the previous week and would 
GC(XIII)/OR.132 

come into effect when it had been formally approved 
by the Swedish Government. 

91. In response to the Director General's invitation 
his delegation had, for die information of die Conference, 
provided a written statement on die developments 
in Sweden's nuclear energy programme during 
die past year8), and he wished to draw attention 
to some of die information contained dierein. 
92. Sweden was one of die countries which were 
introducing the use of nuclear power at the fastest 
rate. The net electrical output of nuclear power 
stations already built or under construction would 
be about 3300 MW, which constituted the highest 
per capita production of nuclear power in the world. 
93. Sweden produced uranium, using the lowgrade 
shale, with only 300 grams of uranium per 
metric ton, that was available in large quantities in 
die soudiern part of die country. The work had 
been a technical success so far and a $5 million 
development programme to reduce production costs 
had been initiated. 
94. The siting of large nuclear power stations 
for combined district heating and electricity production 
close to population centres was of considerable interest 
to many countries and was being closely studied 
in Sweden. 
95. The location of nuclear facilities raised the 
serious problem of die effects of die increased use 
of modern technology on the human environment. 
His Government welcomed die growth in international 
co-operation in efforts to solve tiiat problem. The 
Agency should play an active part in such efforts, 
not only by organizing meetings and symposia on 
the subject but also by taking part in die work 
carried out by other organizations; he had in mind, 
in particular, die United Nations Conference on 
the Human Environment which it was planned to 
hold in 1972. 
96. The Agency's most important responsibility 
under NPT would be the application of safeguards, 
and he noted with satisfaction that the Board had 
approved safeguards agreements widi 30 Member 
States. His Government, after consultation with 
the United States Government, would request that 
negotiations be undertaken widi a view to transferring 
responsibility to the Agency for applying'safeguards 
to material and facilities in Sweden in relation to 
its bilateral agreement with die United States. 
97. Sweden was in favour of the extension of 
the Agency's safeguards activities which the assumption 
of its new responsibilities under NPT would 
entail and was confident diat it would discharge 
8) GC(XIII)/INF/113/Rev.l. 


GC(XIII)/OR.132 

those responsibilities successfully under the direction 
of the Inspector General, Dr. Rometsch. 

98. Sweden would be a Member of the Board 
during the coming year and would do its utmost 
to contribute to the successful completion of one 
of the most important tasks facing the Board, namely 
the review of Article VI. There was an understandable 
desire on the part of many States to make 
the Board more representative of the present membership 
of the Agency and that could be achieved 
through a modest increase in its membership, bearing 
in mind the need to preserve its efficiency as the 
governing body of the Agency. 
99. Mr. BRILLANTES (Philippines) said that the 
Philippines had always attached great importance 
to regional and sub-regional co-operation, a notable 
example of which was the India/Philippines/ Agency 
regional joint training and research programme using 
a neutron crystal spectrometer, named the IPA project 
after its sponsors9}, It had been organized in 1964 
to train workers and conduct research in neutron 
spectrometry. India had helped to initiate it by 
the loan and subsequent donation of the principal 
equipment, the Agency had defrayed the travel and 
living expenses of the experts and awarded fellowship 
grants to interested Member States in the 
region, and for its part, the Philippines had provided 
the site and the use of the I-MW research reactor 
at the Philippines Atomic Research Centre in Quezon 
City. 
100. By the end of the project 11 scientists from 
the Republic of China, Indonesia, Korea, the 
Philippines and Thailand had undergone intensive 
training on the installation, operation and use in 
research of the neutron spectrometer. Most of those 
countries already had neutron spectrometry projects 
in their own centres, and India and the Philippines 
had built their own spectrometers. 
101. The successful conclusion of the project had 
indicated a practical approach in promoting regional 
co-operation in that part of the world which could 
be useful to other developing areas. With that end 
in view the Agency had convened in Manila, in 
March 1969, the Organizational Meeting for a New 
Regional Co-operative Project to Succeed the IPA 
Project, and also two other scientific meetings. 
102. The Manila meeting had drawn upon the lessons 
learned and experience gained from the IPA project 
and recommended a broader form of agreement, 
under the auspices of the Agency and administered 
by a regional committee, to promote training, research 
and development in nuclear science and technology, 
including the effective utilization of research reactors. 
9) See documents INFCIRC/56 and Add. 1. 

103. Participating Governments were called upon to 
offer the Agency Type II fellowships for specific 
projects under the agreement, support joint programmes, 
meet the cost of locally available 
consumable items and provide supporting personnel 
and facilities when available, while for its part the 
Agency was requested to bear the cost of the transfer 
of equipment, fellowships and committee meetings, 
and to make arrangements for the services and the 
assignment of experts. 
104. The proposal for broader regional co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy had been 
communicated by the Agency to the countries 
concerned. Eight countries in the region had already 
expressed support for the undertaking. India and 
the Philippines had formally accepted the proposal, 
and the Philippines had already offered two Type II 
fellowships. His delegation therefore noted with 
gratification the continuing efforts in that area. 
105. Turning to the Agency's Regular Budget for 
1970, he wished to reiterate that Agency programmes 
for technical assistance, research contracts, food and 
agriculture and life sciences, and other activities 
of direct and immediate benefit to developing 
countries, should not be held up for the purpose 
of making more funds available for INIS and safeguards 
activities, which were mainly of interest to 
the nuclear-weapon States and technologically advanced 
countries. 
106. There would shordy be 103 Member States 
in the Agency, the majority of which belonged to 
the developing regions of the world. It would therefore 
be fair and good management practice to 
increase those of the Agency's activities that were 
of direct and immediate benefit to the majority of 
its Members. 
107. Furthermore, although his country supported 
NPT, as evidenced by its early signing of the Treaty 
last year, he wished to call attention to the high 
costs of mandatory and universal safeguards required 
by the Treaty and to the need for establishing a 
more equitable system of assessing contributions 
by Member States to finance the Agency's safeguards 
activities under NPT. The present safeguards activities 
of the Agency were financed from the Regular 
Budget, which came mainly from the contributions 
of Member States, assessed in accordance with United 
Nations practice. But the intensity of the safeguards 
activities required of the Agency was directly related 
to each country's volume of nuclear installed capacity 
and activities related to nuclear fuel. Those factors 
should therefore serve as additional criteria in the 
assessment of contributions to meet safeguards costs. 
108. Since the inception of the Agency the question 
of financing the safeguards activities had always 
been the subject of much discussion among Member 
-10



States. It had been the subject of lengthy deliberations 
during the Conference on the Statute and 
again during the Board's meetings in February 1965 
and February 1966. However, no final decision 
on the matter had so far been reached. In view 
of the mandatory and universal nature of safeguards 
under NPT and the disproportionately high costs 
involved in the implementation of such a safeguards 
system, the Member States of the Agency should 
consider a new method of financing safeguards lest 
all the other resources of the Agency be diverted 
in the future into such operations. The Board 
should be urged to look for a new method 
of financing the safeguards activities of the Agency 
and report on the matter to the next General 
Conference. 

109. With regard to the review of Article VI of 
the Statute, his Government strongly believed in 
the need for an early solution of the problem posed 
by the composition of the Board that would provide 
for equitable representation of the various Member 
States, and adhered to the criteria enumerated in 
Resolution GC(XII)/RES./24l. Its views on that 
question had already been stated in detail during 
the meetings of the Board and the Ad Hoc 
Committee of the Whole. 
110. With regard to representation in the Board 
it should be borne in mind that, in addition to 
the vastness of its area and its huge population, 
Asia and the Pacific region had made impressive 
advances in nuclear technology since 1956. Agency 
reports indicated that in 1956 Asia had only had 
one research reactor and no nuclear installed capacity. 
Today there were in Asia 30 research reactors with 
871.75 MW(e) nuclear installed capacity. It was 
predicted that by 1980 the region would have about 
11 000MW(e) nuclear installed capacity. Those were 
clear indications that the region of Asia and the 
Pacific was making steady progress in the efforts 
devoted to the peaceful application of nuclear energy. 
111. As to the role which the Agency might assume 
in connection with nuclear explosions for peaceful 
purposes, there would have to be proper international 
observation to protect health and ensure safety in 
the surrounding areas. The technological progress 
attained by the more advanced countries should 
not have the effect of jeopardizing the health of 
the population around the area of explosion. In 
the matter of financial aid, Article XI.B of the Statute 
provided that upon request, the Agency could assist 
any Member or group of Members to make arrangements 
to secure necessary financing from outside 
sources to carry out projects, but that in extending 
such assistance the Agency would not be required 
to provide any guarantees or assume any financial 
responsibility for the project. 
GC(XIII)/OR.132 

112. Like many other development projects in the 
developing countries which remained unimplemented 
because of inadequate financing, projects involving 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes would 
definitely be shelved unless a more workable financing 
system was available to developing countries, as 
envisaged under Article V of NPT. 
113. Bearing in mind the resolutions adopted by 
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, he 
wished to emphasize the urgency of studying further 
the ways and means of increasing the funds available 
for technical assistance and for financing nuclear 
projects in the developing countries. It was necessary 
to undertake a comprehensive study of the capital 
and foreign exchange requirements for carrying out 
nuclear projects in developing countries during the 
next decade, to examine ways to secure financing for 
such projects from international and other sources 
on favourable terms, and to formulate suggestions 
concerning the constructive role that the Agency 
could play in that regard. Along with other 
countries, his delegation had accordingly sponsored 
a resolution along those lines. 
114. He strongly supported the Agency's role as 
a supplier of fissionable material under appropriate 
safeguards. With the growing awareness in the 
developing regions of the economic advantages of 
nuclear power and with the gradual establishment 
of nuclear power plants in some developing countries, 
that role was bound to grow. The availability of 
a continuous supply of fissionable material through 
the Agency would enable developing countries to 
select their nuclear power systems on purely economic 
and technical grounds rather than on the basis of 
other considerations that were not directly related 
to nuclear power planning. He expressed the hope 
that in the immediate future the super Powers would 
be able to make more generous offers of fissionable 
material to the Agency, thereby enabling it to achieve 
its central role as the world's supplier of fissionable 
material. 
115. In conclusion, he called for joint efforts and 
co-operative endeavours in the coming Second 
Development Decade to ensure that the further 
application and exploitation of nuclear energy would 
meet the needs of the human being in a manner 
befitting his dignity, and to that end pledged his 
country's voluntary contribution for 1970 to the 
General Fund in the full amount assessed so as 
to help the Agency to discharge its growing and 
expanding activities. 
116. Mr. YOO (Republic of Korea) wished first to 
express his country's deep gratitude to the Director 
General and his staff for their dedication to the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and their outstanding 
achievements during the past year. At the same time, 
-11



GC(XIII)/OR.132 

he was happy to extend a most cordial welcome 
to Ireland, the Agency's newest Member. 

117. The past year had marked the tenth anniversary 
of Korea's atomic energy programme. During those 
ten years a great deal had been accomplished in 
reactor engineering, in radiochemical production and 
in the application of nuclear energy to many other 
fields of science and technology. The anniversary year 
had been highlighted by the power upgrading of the 
TRIGA Mark II reactor from 100 to 250 kW — a 
task which had been undertaken entirely by Korean 
scientists and engineers without the help of foreign 
experts, apart from occasional consultation with the 
reactor supplier in connection with the technical 
specifications of the plant. Thus Korea's reactor 
engineers had demonstrated their own competence 
and proved the solid foundation of reactor technology 
in Korea. 
118. Another significant event during the tenth 
anniversary year had been die ground-breaking 
ceremony for a TRIGA Mark III reactor with pulsing 
capacity and a power rating of 2 MW. The reactor 
was intended to go critical in 1971 and at present 
the construction and civil engineering work was 
making rapid progress. As everyone knew, the higher 
neutron fluxes obtainable from the larger research 
reactors offered definite advantages in neutron physics 
and reactor physics experiments, as well as in radioisotope 
production. 
119- Korea's nuclear power generation programme 
was in the hands of the Korea Electric Company, 
which during the past year had completed its evaluation 
of power reactor tenders submitted by various 
manufacturers. The choice resulting from diat evaluation 
was a 600-MW(e) pressurized water reactor of 
the Westinghouse Corporation. A partial solution 
had been found to the problem of finance, and 
construction was expected to start some time in 
1970. The Korean Government's Office of Atomic 
Energy had received much valuable assistance from 
the Agency in connection with its power programme, 
and took the present opportunity of expressing its 
heartfelt gratitude. 

120. Other useful work had been done in the 
country's laboratories. Thermal neutron radiography 
techniques, using the thermal column of the TRIGA 
reactor, had been perfected. Sintered UO2 fuel had 
been prepared. Wood-plastic combination materials 
had been produced, and further research was in 
progress. The carbon-14 dating laboratory, in which 
die carbon of the specimen to be dated was converted 
into benzene and mixed with scintillation 
liquid, had been completed. With the help of that 
method it had been possible to assign an accurate 
date to Korean artefacts several thousand years old, 
the age of which had till recently been a subject 
of dispute among local archaelogists. 
121. The Radiological Research Institute of the 
Korean Office of Atomic Energy was in charge of 
nuclear medicine and the clinical applications of 
radiation and radioisotopes. Thanks to continuing 
financial support and improved equipment, the 
Institute had become a centre where cancer patients 
could be sure of accurate diagnoses and effective 
radiation therapy. Owing to the rapidly increasing 
number of patients, the Institute had recendy been 
expanded and now included a Division of Research 
as well as a cancer hospital. The hospital itself 
possessed most of the latest equipment for diagnosis 
and therapy, including a scanning unit, a cobalt-60 
remote control therapy unit, a laryngography unit 
and X-ray radiography and irradiation facilities. 
122. Further progress had been made in the applications 
of radiation therapy and radiochemical 
techniques in two odier large hospitals: Seoul 
National University Hospital, which had installed 
a modern scintigraphy unit, and Yonsei University 
Hospital at Seoul, which had opened a cancer department. 
Both were using many of the short-lived 
radionuclides produced by the Atomic Energy 
Research Institute. 
123. Radiation and radiochemicals had also been 
applied in four types of agricultural work, namely 
plant mutation, soil chemistry, food preservation 
and insect control. The Radiation Research Institute 
for Agriculture, also under the Office of Atomic 
Energy, was the principal organization entrusted with 
those tasks. In the work on radiation mutagenesis, 
efforts were being concentrated largely on producing 
desirable mutations in rice and soy bean, various 
strains of which were at present being tested at the 
Institute's experimental farm. The Institute would 
also have a gamma greenhouse by the end of the 
year, where the effects on various plants of chronic 
exposure to gamma rays could be investigated. 
124. The progress of atomic energy in all fields was 
heavily dependent on training. Korea's training programme 
included four separate courses relating to 
power reactors, industrial applications, agricultural 
applications and medical applications. Nearly 100 
electrical and mechanical engineers of the Korea 
Electric Company had completed the first course 
during the past year: those were the scientists who 
would eventually be responsible for the construction 
and operation of Korea's first power reactor. About 
50 scientists and engineers were to be trained each 
year in each of the courses. 
125. Turning to die industrial applications of nuclear 
energy, with special reference to the developing 
countries, he said that Korea had two closely related 
problems. One was to establish the feasibility of 
an industrial project by means of a pilot plant, 
and the second to finance the pilot plant. To solve 
those problems, die Korean Government was 
— 12 — 


planning to request, through the Agency, assistance 
under the United Nations Development Programme 
( UNDP) with a view to establishing its first radiation 
processing pilot plant. The relevant documents would 
be submitted to UNDP early in 1970 so that the 
project could start in 1971. His Government was 
convinced that the project would mark a turning 
point in the industrial applications of atomic energy 
in Korea. 

126. In conclusion, he expressed the deep respect 
which his country felt for the Agency and 
communicated his Government's assurance that it 
would give strong and continuing support to the 
Agency's activities. 
127. Mr. da COSTA RIBEIRO (Brazil) said that, 
anticipating that it would without doubt obtain the 
unanimous approval of the General Conference, he 
wished to welcome the decision to reappoint 
Dr. Sigvard Eklund to the post of Director General. 
He likewise welcomed the entry of Ireland into the 
Agency. 
128. He wished first of all to refer to the technical 
assistance programme. Like many other delegates, 
he regretted that that programme had not developed 
at the same rate as other programmes which were 
being given greater attention by the Agency. Possible 
ways of ending the existing stagnation should be 
given more thorough study. The Brazilian delegation 
considered diat fusion of the Regular and Operational 
Budgets would probably be the best means of 
achieving that end, although an amendment of the 
Statute would be required. 
129. Member States had been recommended to 
increase their voluntary contributions. Brazil's contribution 
for 1970 would be slighdy higher than the 
proportion of its assessment suggested by the Director 
General. 
130. The technical assistance activities carried on 
by the Director General and the Secretariat were 
praiseworthy, considering the limited resources at 
their disposal. He expressed his satisfaction with and 
appreciation of the Agency's contribution to Brazil's 
nuclear programmes. 
131. With regard to the review of Article VI of the 
Statute, die Brazilian delegation shared die concern 
of other delegations which wanted a formula to be 
found which, without departing too far from die 
present wording, laid the basis for a reform 
acceptable to the majority of Member States. For 
that reason, the Brazilian Government was in favour 
of a solution along the lines of the Italian Government's 
revised proposal. 
132. The action taken by the Agency in requesting 
the main States which were suppliers of special 
GC(XIII)/OR.132 

fissionable materials to increase die amount of 
enriched uranium to be provided through the Agency 
to interested Member States was commendable. 

133. Referring then to the Agency's programme for 
1970, he said that die Brazilian delegation wished 
to draw attention to two activities of universal 
interest. The first was the work on hydrology which 
for the past two years had been the subject of close 
co-operation between die Agency and the Brazilian 
National Nuclear Energy Commission; there were 
plans for extending die programme which die Agency 
might undertake die following year in die Latin 
American countries. The second activity which he 
had in mind was the work on dosimetry, in view 
of the modest but effective effort the Agency was 
devoting to the subject. At a meeting sponsored 
recendy by the Agency, the growing need to devote 
more resources to dosimetry in Latin America had 
been demonstrated. The Commission would support 
the steps taken by the Director General in that 
direction. 
134. With regard to the progress made by Brazil 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he said that 
the Government's contribution to die Commission's 
budget had been increased in 1969, making it 
possible to carry out a programme which included 
the improvement of already existing laboratories, the 
construction of new installations and an increase 
in the senior staff. 
135. The Commission was continuing to support 
the activities of the country's three main centres for 
nuclear studies, which, like die Commission itself, 
were maintainingdieir collaboration widi the country's 
universities and research institutions. 
136. Brazil was continuing to develop and intensify 
its search for uranium and thorium, using advanced 
techniques, modern equipment and a greater number 
of staff. The surveys carried out in the Pocos de 
Caldas deposits in the State of Minas Gerais offered 
new prospects from die point of view of die 
economics of ore prospecting in that region, but 
die reserves at present being investigated did not 
exceed a few thousand tons of uranium. There were 
other districts in diat region with encouraging 
prospects. Still better prospects had come to light 
in the north-eastern region, where, in addition, the 
minerals could be more easily processed industrially. 
Other regions of Brazil continued to be the subject 
of systematic surveys. 
137. Various Brazilian institutions were making 
rapid progress in dosimetry. The Commission was 
re-equipping its installations and drawing up a new 
programme of work for its dosimetry laboratory so 
as to create the capacity and conditions needed 
to enable it to discharge its new and extended 
responsibilities. 
-13



GC(XIII)/OR.132 

138. The country's first nuclear power station, with 
a capacity of 500 MW(e), was to be constructed in 
the central southern region. The relevant technical 
and economic studies had been carried out by 
Brazilian study groups with occasional foreign 
participation; the Agency had contributed in arranging 
the visit of a group of experts to Brazil from April 
to June 1968. Conclusions relating to the siting of 
the power station were now being formulated and 
the specifications for die installations and equipment 
were being drawn up. It was foreseen that the 
power station would be incorporated in the grid 
in 1976. 
139. The intensive study of the large reserves of 
water power in Brazil was being continued in order 
better to determine their power-producing potential 
and economic viability, taking into account the 
necessary transmission lines. Many of those reserves 
required an investment of less than $200 per kW of 
installed power, which was economically attractive 
for hydroelectric power stations. It was because of 
the existence of that very economic water power 
potential that, in the nuclear power programme, 
provision had been made — to give some idea of 
The meeting 

the orders of magnitude involved — for levels of 
1500 MW(e) in 1980, some 13 000 MW(e) in 1990 
and a total installed capacity of 35 000 MW(e) in 
the year 2000. 

140. The Institute of Radioactivity Studies in Belo 
Horizonte was continuing its studies on the development 
of natural-uranium, heavy-water reactors, with 
the possibility of using thorium. The Atomic Energy 
Institute in Sao Paulo was studying high-temperature 
reactors, while the Institute of Nuclear Engineering 
in Rio de Janeiro was carrying out studies on fast 
reactors. 
141. Finally, he wished to reaffirm the confidence 
and hope inspired in the Brazilian authorities by 
the lofty aims of the Agency. Despite the difficulties 
that had been encountered, the Agency had rendered 
real services to Member States, and in particular to 
the developing countries. It was his fervent hope 
that co-operation between Member States would make 
possible the rapid development of the Agency's 
activities on an international scale so that it could 
fully attain the objectives laid down in its Statute. 
at 5.45p.m. 

-14



Paragraphs 

1-42 

1— 8 

9—23 

24—38 

39—42 

43—58 
59—77 
78—79 
80—83 
84—87 
88—90 
91—95 
96—97 

98—99 

Item of the 

20 
11 
21 
22 
23 
13 
14 
15 

GC(XIII)/418. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XIII)/OR.133 
27 January 1970 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(23-29 SEPTEMBER 1969) 

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 29 September 1969, at 10.40 a.m. 

President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 

CONTENTS 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1968-69 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Indonesia 
Pakistan 
Italy 
Ghana 


Credentials of delegates to the thirteenth regular session 

(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 
Appointment of the Director General 
Opening date of the fourteenth (1970) regular session 
The Agency's annual reports to United Nations organs 
Appointment of the External Auditor 
Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 
The Agency's budget for 1970 
Scale of Members' contributions for 1970 
The Agency's responsibility to provide services in connection 
with nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/114/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.133 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1968-69 
(GC(XIII)/404, 416) (continued) 

1. Mr. SUDARSONO (Indonesia) regretted the 
steady decline in the funds available to the Agency 
for the provision of technical assistance, which was 
certainly its most important activity from the point 
of view of developing countries. He pointed out 
that for 1968 and 1969 Indonesia had pledged 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund in 
amounts which were the same percentage of the 
target for each year as its percentage assessments 
under the Regular Budget, and it would do so again 
for 1970. It was gratifying that certain advanced 
countries had offered to arrange for the provision 
of additional resources for technical assistance or 
were seriously considering doing so, and he hoped 
others would follow their example. 
2. He was pleased to note that several items 
on the Conference agenda related to matters which 
had been the subject of resolutions adopted by the 
Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States1). He 
welcomed the report submitted to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations by a group of experts 
on all possible contributions of nuclear technology 
to the economic and scientific advancement of the 
developing countries2), which was an extremely valuable 
document. 
3. His delegation was concerned at the very rapid 
increase in the cost of safeguards activities, since 
it was detrimental to other activities which were of 
more direct benefit to developing countries. Safeguards 
activities and the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) served a very useful 
purpose, but the proposed increase in expenditure 
on them was excessive and should be more gradual. 
4. In providing services relating to the use of 
nuclear explosives for peaceful purposes, the Agency 
could play a very valuable role; there should be no 
discrimination against any State and, if possible, 
non-nuclear-weapon States should not be required 
to pay the cost of research and development. 
5. The developing countries were justifiably concerned 
at the difficulty of financing nuclear power 
projects, which were becoming increasingly important 
in their economic development, and steps should 
be taken to ensure that such countries were not 
prevented from benefiting from nuclear power through 
lack of funds. 
6. He noted with satisfaction that nuclear Powers 
were making special fissionable materials available 
to Member States and was particularly grateful to 
1) See United Nations document A/7277. 
2) See United Nations document A/7568. 

the United States of America for its provision of 
such materials to his country. 

7. The review of Article VI of the Statute had 
taken up a long time and had not yet been completed, 
but it had been generally agreed that there 
should be a modest increase in the membership of 
the Board of Governors. When the future composition 
of the Board came to be determined, he hoped 
account would be taken of the desire of the developing 
countries to be more equitably represented and 
play a more effective part in its deliberations. 
8. He welcomed the Agency's efforts to promote 
regional co-operation. His country was carrying out 
a programme of co-operation in many fields, including 
scientific research and education, and he 
suggested that in the case of research contracts 
undertaken on behalf of the Agengy within the area 
to which Indonesia belonged, the participation of 
research scientists from various countries in that 
area would be very helpful. 
9. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan) said his delegation 
welcomed the unanimous appointment by the Board 
of Dr. Eklund as Director General of the Agency 
for a third term. Although in principle no more 
than two consecutive terms should be given to any 
elected office holder at the highest level in international 
organizations, exceptions must be made in 
the case of exceptional men. Dr. Eklund could rely 
on his delegation's support just as it hoped to be 
able to rely on his impartiality, experience and sympathetic 
approach to the problems of developing 
countries. 
10. During the last 15 years tremendous progress 
had been made in the application of nuclear science 
and technology in the fields of power generation, 
industry, agriculture, medicine and the development 
of natural resources. In its report to the Secretary-
General on the contributions of nuclear technology 
to the economic and scientific advancement of the 
developing countries the group of experts had emphasized 
the importance of the role of energy and 
had concluded that "the most notable peaceful application 
of nuclear technology is the generation of 
electric power" 5). Within the following decade the 
operation and maintenance of proven types of power 
reactors would present problems no different from 
those of conventional power plants; and yet the 
"third world" would play little part in that development. 
Of a total of about 300 nuclear power plants 
in operation, under construction or firmly planned 
at the present time, only 10, having less than 2% of 
the total capacity, were located in six developing 
countries. 
11. He deeply regretted that the Agency had somewhat 
disappointed the developing countries by failing 
3) Ibid., para. 49. 


GC(XIII)/OR.133 

to help them introduce nuclear power as a spur to 
their overall programme of economic development. 
Year after year the Conference had heard about the 
inability of the Agency to persuade the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development to provide 
money for small or medium-sized power 
reactors on the grounds that they were "uneconomic". 
But that term was surely a relative one. There was 
no coal, oil or hydro potential in East Pakistan, 

where the price of coal was $20 per ton compared 
with $6 in the United States of America and about 
$ 13 in Western Europe. Furthermore, the very orr 
ganizations which refused to consider the financing 
of nuclear plants in developing countries because 
they were "uneconomic" agreed to finance small 
industrial plants in those countries even though 
their output could never compete with that of plants 
of large industrial corporations. In fact hardly any 
industrial plant financed in a developing country 
could be termed truly competitive in output and 
prices when compared with plants in advanced 
countries. It seemed anomalous that the yardstick 
for financial assistance for nuclear power plants 
should be different from that adopted for industrial 
installations. In any event, the advanced countries 
had started with small power reactors of less than 
100 MW capacity and gradually developed the bigger 
ones of up to 800-1000 MW capacity. 

12. It would be interesting to know whether the 
financing agencies would agree to provide loans for 
nuclear power pojects if the effective difference between 
the cost of nuclear and conventional plant 
were to be met out of a "special nuclear fund" which 
the Agency might help to raise. If that were the 
case, the proportion of the cost which would be 
required of such a fund to help finance 300 MW of 
nuclear power every year in developing countries 
in the decade 1970-80 would be modest. His delegation 
hoped to invite the attention of the Board 
to such possibilities at the appropriate time. The 
Agency's competence to provide services in connection 
with the production of power for developed 
and developing countries alike was clearly outlined 
in Articles III.A.l and 2 of its Statute, and he believed 
there were other articles which would allow 
the Agency to receive voluntary contributions, generate 
revenues and even raise loans, all of which 
could contribute to form the "special nuclear fund" 
he had referred to earlier. 
13. The Agency should seriously contemplate 
acting as broker for fissionable material and nuclear 
fuel. If the nuclear Powers were to help the Agency 
by releasing those materials at specially reduced 
prices, Member States would use the Agency as an 
intermediary, with the result that Agency safeguards 
would automatically apply to the nuclear material 
involved. Two purposes would thus be served: by 
entering the fuel brokerage business, the Agency 
would earn revenue, and it would at the same time 
be in a position to safeguard the nuclear material 
involved. 

14. In consonance with its policy of supporting 
the universal application of the Agency's safeguards 
system, his Government had decided to place its 
first power reactor KANUPP (137 MW), nearing 
completion at Karachi, under the system. The Board 
would have before it for approval a draft trilateral 
agreement between Pakistan, Canada and the Agency 
at its first meeting after the General Conference. 
He urged the developing Member States to have 
their nuclear facilities and supplies secured under 
project agreements with the Agency rather than 
under bilateral agreements. At the same time he 
appealed'to the Agency to simplify the safeguards 
system without sacrificing its effectiveness. 
I 

15. It was estimated that inspection of all the 
nuclear reactors that would be used for peaceful 
purposes "in the 1970s would cost about $20 to 
$30 million per year, or roughly twice the present 
budget of the Agency. He wondered where the 
funds would come from and hoped the non-nuclear 
nations would not be asked to contribute to the 
cost of safeguards. 
16. Of the three important roles which the Agency 
played, one was connected with the enforcement 
of safeguards, standardization of nuclides, framing 
of criteria for health and safety, etc. The second 
was the dissemination of scientific knowledge and 
information through the work at its centres and 
laboratories and through the scientific seminars and 
symposia. The third was the technical assistance 
which the Agency provided to developing countries. 
In the first two of its roles, the Agency had acquitted 
itself extremely well, except that 80% of the symposia 
and seminars continued to be held in Europe. 
If that practice were to continue, his delegation 
hoped the Director General would consider providing 
more generous travel grants to scientists who 
had to travel long distances. 
17. It was, however, a matter of deep concern 
that on average the total technical assistance provided 
by the Agency per year during the last decade 
had been of the order of $1.7 million, spread over 
more than 75 developing countries. If technical 
assistance were to have a real impact, funds proportionate 
to those expended on safeguards would 
be required. 
18. The award of the Atoms for Peace Prize jointly 
to the Director of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste, the Director General and 
Professor Smyth was a rare tribute to the foresight 
of the Agency and the Government of Italy in 
establishing that Centre, at which scientists were 
able to meet and derive the necessary inspiration 
and stimulation. 

GC(XIII)/OR.133 

19. His delegation welcomed the general consensus 
among Member States that the membership of the 
Board should be enlarged and that Article VI of 
the Agency's Statute should be amended. He hoped 
that his country's proposal on the subject*), which 
embodied the principle of reducing the permanent 
seats to the minimum and subjecting others to 
election by the General Conference, would be taken 
into account, and that by the following year the 
developing countries of Africa, Latin America and 
above all of Asia would be more equitably represented 
on the Board. 
20. Of the four nuclear Power belonging to the 
Agency only the United Kingdom had ratified NPT. 
France had not so far indicated any desire to sign 
it and ratification by the Soviet Union and the 
United States of America was still awaited. Ninety 
per cent of the non-nuclear countries were in the 
category of "Never be"s and 10 per cent in the 
category of "Can be"s, and the testing of so-called 
peaceful devices by "Can be"s should be prevented 
at all cost. He therefore appealed to nuclear and 
non-nuclear Powers alike to forestall that development 
by ratifying NPT forthwith. 
21. The non-nuclear Asian countries would do well 
to follow the example of the Latin American countries 
and work for a nuclear-free zone in their area. 
22. Finally, the Soviet Union and the United 
States of America should start negotiations for arresting 
the vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons in 
the spirit of Article VI of NPT. 
23. Since the discovery of atomic energy a new 
generation of scientists and technologists had emerged 
with new approaches to problems of atomic energy. 
Given the chance, the younger men would surely 
take imaginative steps to promote international relations 
and to solve the crucial problems now facing 
the Agency. He hoped the Director General would 
contemplate the possibility of injecting "new blood" 
into the Secretariat since the dynamism of younger 
men would certainly help the Agency to implement 
its current programme and face the challenge of the 
next decade. 
24. Mr. PEDINI (Italy) said that the exploitation 
of the new source of energy, nuclear energy, represented 
without doubt one of humanity's most significant 
steps towards the goal of universal well-being 
and lasting peace. 
25. It was encouraging to see an awareness of the 
importance of international collaboration in the sphere 
of peaceful applications of nuclear energy; within 
the framework of international policy, that awareness 
was increasingly essential. It was in concrete co4) 
GOV/1324. 

operation between advanced and developing countries 
in the nuclear field that the surest proof of the 
political will of the industrialized countries to contribute 
effectively to the economic development of 
the less-developed countries would be found. 

26. The Italian Government was happy to see 
that the Agency had carried out its activities in 
accordance with the directives laid down by the 
General Conference at previous sessions, in particular 
the twelfth session, by orienting its practical 
work towards the fields of major and priority interest 
to the less-developed countries, since those fields 
were direcdy related to the improvement of the 
standard of living. 
27. It had particularly appreciated the Agency's 
activities in the training of specialists in the use of 
agricultural, medical, biological and food techniques. 
Italy had co-operated extensively in that work by 
organizing seminars and courses on the use of radiation 
for crop improvement. 
28. In addition to its contribution to the Agency's 
Regular Budget, which amounted to almost 3%, 
and to its voluntary contributions to the technical 
assistance programmes, Italy had continued to offer 
fellowships to research workers and students from 
less-developed countries. Mention should also be 
made of the satisfactory development of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, 
particularly in the wake of the agreement concluded 
between the Agency and UNESCO5^. One hundred 
and eighty-seven scientists, 78 of them from developing 
countries, had taken part the year before in an 
international congress on theoretical physics held at 
the Centre, which had been striking proof of the 
part that the Centre was playing as a meeting point 
for men of science from all over the world. 
29. Among the Agency's activities there was one 
programme for which his country reaffirmed its full 
support, namely INIS, which would be all the more 
successful in that it was to be set up and run in 
close collaboration with Member States, among other 
reasons because of the high cost involved. Italy 
would therefore welcome the conclusion of a cooperation 
agreement between the Agency and the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
under which INIS could be developed in such a way 
that all interested parties stood to benefit from the 
expertise gained by EURATOM in the field of 
nuclear information. 
30. During 1968/69 Italy had continued to step 
up its national programme for the use of atomic 
energy and development of nuclear techniques. According 
to available figures, Italy occupied third 
place in the world in terms of the amount of nuclear 
5) INFCIRC/132. 

-4



GC(XIII)/OR.133 

electrical power generated by 31 March 1969. The 
construction of the prototype of a heavy-water 
reactor, a fast reactor for fuel element tests, and a 
nuclear-powered ship was now well under way. The 
Italian Government believed that the time was now 
ripe to give priority to the building of a European 
facility for uranium isotope separation. 

31. Notwithstanding the valuable contribution 
which the Agency had made and was still making 
to international co-operation in the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy, what had been done so far 
was still not enough to ensure that the new technologies 
were of real help in the economic development 
of all countries, in particular the less favoured 
ones. 
32. His Government had already expressed its 
views on that subject at the Conference of NonNuclear-
Weapon States and also on the occasion of 
the twenty-third session of the General Assembly 
of the United Nations. 
33. The problem of industrial development in the 
"third world" was a very far-reaching one. It was 
certain that further progress in industrial and agricultural 
production, and in public health, depended 
to a large extent on the peaceful applications of the 
new source of energy. The organization filling the 
main role in respect of international co-operation 
in that field must be so structured that its organs 
were capable of dealing with the important tasks 
they would encounter. That applied especially to 
the Board of Governors. 
34. One year previously Italy and other Member 
States had broached the subject of a change in the 
composition of the Board. A resolution had been 
adopted at the twelfth session of the General Conference6). 
There was now no doubt that a large 
number of Members recognized the need to adapt 
the Agency's executive body to the new circumstances 
prevailing in the world. The Italian Government 
had spared no effort in trying to make a constructive 
contribution towards the solution of that 
vital and urgent problem. In December 1968, it 
had submitted a proposal7) which it regarded as a 
sound basis for discussion. After the setting up of 
an ad hoc committee in which all Member States 
could participate — thereby ensuring an open and 
fruitful discussion of the various aspects of the problem 
— additional proposals for amending Article VI 
of the Statute had been submitted by other States. 
His Government, appreciating the value of some of 
the suggestions, had modified its original proposal8). 
6) GC(XII)/RES/241. 
7) GOV/1307. 
8) The modified proposal is reproduced in document 


GOV/COM.20/10. 

35. It had tried to take into account the justifiable 
interests of all groups of countries, endeavouring 
for one thing to ensure a more equitable geographical 
distribution in the Board's composition. The 
Board would continue to be an efficient organ even 
if its membership was increased. Clubs with restricted 
membership were not necessarily the best, 
since they often tended to degenerate into sterility. 
36. He thanked those delegates who had clearly 
stated that their Governments supported the Italian 
proposal, or that they regarded it as the best basis 
of discussion. His Government did not presume 
to think that its proposal was perfect or that it 
satisfied the legitimate desires of all countries. 
Nevertheless, it believed that the solution it had 
proposed — a practical and realistic one — would be 
the most likely to ensure that the Agency could 
perform the new and important duties which might 
be entrusted to it. 
37. The discussion on the subject which had 
taken place in the Board and in the ad hoc committee 
during the last six months had served to 
clear the ground of a number of problems which 
really were not problems at all and to reveal the 
existence of various points of agreement. The time 
had now arrived to proceed to the final stage in the 
discussion of the subject. 
38. His Government wished to stress the special 
importance it attached to finding an early solution 
to the problem posed by the composition of the 
Board. It considered it essential to reach a rapid 
agreement because it was convinced that that was 
in the interests of the Agency and of all its Members. 
It was indeed clear that if the Agency was to assume 
certain new functions, there should be no delay in 
making the changes in its structure which would 
enable it to do so. Excessive delays could only 
increase the uneasiness which was beginning to appear 
and which everybody hoped would quickly be 
dispelled. 
39- Mr. QUARTEY (Ghana), recalling that the 
Director General had pointed out in his opening 
statement that the process of self-examination to 
which some United Nations organizations had recently 
been subjected could be carried too far9), said 
that if that happened, it would make it more difficult 
for the Agency to fulfil its obligations and benefit 
from such self-examination. Member States, and 
even some States that were not Members of the 
Agency, were keenly interested in the review of 
Article VI of the Statute. That was understandable 
since the non-nuclear-weapon States were called upon 
to surrender part of their sovereignty voluntarily, 
and that in turn had given rise to a legitimate desire 

9) GC(XIII)/OR. 127, para. 46. 


GC(XIII)/OR.133 

on the part of many developing countries to be 
more equitably represented in the Board so as to 
play their proper role in the formulation of the 
Agency's policy. His delegation was convinced that 
if the review of Article VI was carried out properly, 
the Agency would subsequendy be able to perform 
its functions more effectively. 

40. The availability of adequate funds for the 
provision of technical assistance was of the greatest 
importance to developing countries, and Ghana was 
grateful for the assistance it continued to receive 
from the Agency. In response to the Director General's 
appeal for increased voluntary contributions to 
the General Fund, Ghana had increased its contribution 
for 1969 to a percentage of the target for that 
year which was substantially higher than its assessed 
ratio under die Regular Budget, and it would make 
a contribution at the same level for 1970. He hoped 
all Member States, particularly the more advanced 
countries, would do likewise since the total number 
of voluntary contributions was still very low. 
41. In making requests for technical assistance 
account should be taken of the resources available 
to the Agency, and it would be in the interest of 
Member States if the possibility of financing the 
more capital-intensive projects was explored with 
other appropriate international institutions. 
42. In conclusion, he approved the reappointment 
of the Director General and assured the Agency 
that it could count on Ghana's continued support. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE 

THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 

(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COM-
MITTEE (GC(XIII)/426) 
43. The PRESIDENT announced that the Credentials 
Committee had examined the credentials of delegates 
in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of 
Procedure; its report, containing two draft resolutions, 
was to be found in document GC(XIII)/426. 
44. Mr. PELE (Romania) said he regretted having 
to repeat at the current session the views his delegation 
had been expressing since the Agency's inception 
on the need to apply the principle of universality 
in die Agency. 
45. The persistent refusal to give the People's 
Republic of China its rightful place within the 
Agency was not only unjust, but was contrary to 
the principle of universality. His delegation was in 
favour of recognizing the rights of the People's Republic 
of China and of admitting the representatives 
of its Government as the sole legitimate representatives 
of China; it was against the Credentials Committee's 
proposal to recognize the credentials of the 
Chiang Kai-shek group, which represented no one. 

46. The Romanian Government recognized the 
representatives of the Provisional Revolutionary 
Government of South Viet-Nam as being the sole 
representatives of the Government of South Viet-Nam 
and could only accept credentials issued by that 
Government. 
47. His delegation reaffirmed the need for the 
participation of the German Democratic Republic, 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the 
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam in the work of 
the Agency. 
48. His delegation was convinced that if the principle 
of universality was implemented in conformity 
with its views, the prestige of the Agency and its 
effectiveness would be enhanced. 
49. Mr. QADIR (Pakistan) said that his Government 
did not recognize the credentials presented by 
those who styled themselves as the representatives 
of China in the Agency and the General Conference. 
It maintained that the Government of the People's 
Republic of China was the only authority entided 
to represent the Chinese people in the United Nations 
and elsewhere in die world. 
50. Mr. CHU (Republic of China) said he wished 
to protest against the derogatory remarks made 
about the representation of his country at the Conference. 
Such remarks only served to disturb the 
harmonious atmosphere and were irrelevant to the 
objectives of the Conference. His Government was 
the only legally constituted Government of China, 
recognized by the majority of sovereign States of 
the world and by the United Nations and its specialized 
agencies and the Agency. In that capacity, 
it had been formally invited to participate in the 
Conference as a full Member of the Agency. 
51. The credentials of his delegation had been 
found in good order and had been accepted by the 
Credentials Committee; they were not open to any 
form of challenge. Consequendy, there were no 
grounds whatsoever for questioning die rights of 
his delegation to represent China at the Conference. 
Any statement or reservation denying recognition of 
those established rights and facts must be considered 
out of place and out of order. 
52. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said his delegation had frequently drawn 
attention to the loss caused to the Agency by not 
allowing the German Democratic Republic to become 
a Member because of the opposition of a 
number of countries. 
-6



53. The German Democratic Republic was not 
only advanced in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and in the industrial, scientific and cultural fields, 
but was a signatory of the Partial Test Ban Treaty 
and NPT and was willing to place all its nuclear 
facilities under the Agency's safeguards. Moreover, 
its parliament had recently ratified NPT. Continued 
deprivation of its right to membership would only 
impede the implementation of the Agency's aims 
and the tasks it was to assume under NPT. 
54. The policy of denying the German Democratic 
Republic its right to membership was all the 
more anomalous in view of the fact that, since the 
last session of the General Conference, a number of 
African States had established diplomatic relations 
with it. The Federal Republic of Germany was a 
Member of the Agency and had been represented on 
the Board of Governors, which also went to prove 
that the policy was arbitrary and unjust. The time 
had come to remove the anomaly, the arbitrariness 
and the injustice. 
55. Mr. LEWIS (United States of America) said 
his delegation supported the adoption of the draft 
resolutions recommended by the Credentials Committee. 
The remarks which had been made concerning 
East Germany were irrelevant to the matter 
under consideration and he did not therefore intend 
to comment on them. His Government's position 
on the subject was in any case well known. 
56. Mr. PHAN-VAN-THINH (Viet-Nam) said he 
had been saddened to hear once more remarks of 
a political nature which had nothing to do with 
the Conference or with the aims of the Agency. 
57. He did not intend to answer what had been 
said about his country. All were aware that his 
country had been accepted as a Member of the 
Agency many years previously and had been represented 
on the Board of Governors in 1961-1963. 
It had a long history of co-operation with the 
Agency and had been represented at all sessions of 
the General Conference and at all Agency meetings 
held in the region in which it was situated. It was 
also a Member of the United Nations and all the 
specialized agencies. Its rights could not be 
contested. 
58. The draft resolutions in document GC(XIII)/426 
were adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(GC(XIII)/402) 

59. The PRESIDENT recalled that in June the 
Board of Governors had appointed Mr. Sigvard 
Eklund to the post of Director General for a further 
term of four years to run from 1 December 1969. 
There was a request by the Board for approval of 
GC(XIII)/OR.133 

the appointment in document GC(XIII)/402, which 
contained a draft resolution that the Board was 
recommending the Conference to adopt. 

60. The draft resolution in document GC(XIII)/402 
was adopted by acclamation. At the invitation of the President, 
Mr. Eklund entered the meeting. 
61. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Eklund that 
the General Conference had approved his appointment. 
He was pleased to be the first to congratulate 
him and invited him to take the oath of office prescribed 
by the Agency's Staff Regulations10). 
62. Mr. EKLUND took the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, 
discretion and conscience the functions entrusted to 
me as Director General of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, to discharge these functions and to 
regulate my conduct with the interests of the Agency 
only in view, and not to seek or accept instructions 
in regard to the performance of my duties from 
any government or other authority external to the 
Agency." 

6 3. He said he wished to take the opportunity to 
say how very grateful he was for the expression of 
support implied in his reappointment as Director 
General of the Agency and for the many kind references 
to his service made by delegates in the 
course of the general debate. He looked back on 
the past eight years not with complacency but with 
a sense of gratitude that he had been given the task 
of guiding the Agency towards the fulfilment of 
its goals. International organizations often served 
as a barometer of the world's political weather. 
His service with the Agency had begun at a time of 
considerable international tension. Although many 
problems still remained to be solved, the general 
climate of understanding among nations had vastly 
improved and the Agency was accordingly able to 
carry out its duties more efficiendy. 
64. He was grateful, too, for the good relations 
which prevailed between the Secretariat and the 
representatives of Member States. The spirit of 
understanding had been enhanced by his visits to 
Member States, where he had acquainted himself 
with atomic energy programmes and with the special 
problems they raised in each country. He had thus 
been able to see how die Agency's assistance could 
be employed most profitably, and to appreciate clearly 
the difficulties encountered by the Agency in 
rendering essential assistance. He had also come 
to see that the Agency's resources, though small, 
nevertheless made a valuable contribution to the 
implementation of national programmes. 
10) INFCIRC/6/Rev.2, Regulations 1.11 and 1.12. 


GC(XIII)/OR.133 

65. It must be recognized that there were some 
frustrations involved in working for an international 
organization. The Agency was formally the employer, 
but in reality each Member State exercised certain 
functions which normally, in a national organization, 
were the sole prerogative of the employer. The 
conventional line of authority was consequendy 
broken up by dialogues between staff members and 
the delegations of their home countries. On the 
other hand, the views and ideas given to the Secretariat 
through such informal channels had often 
provided valuable guidance. 
66. There were still, at the present session of 
the Conference, some delegates who had participated 
in the work of the Conference on the Statute. He 
felt sure they would agree that the principal motive 
underlying the establishment of the Agency had been 
a conviction among leading statesmen and responsible 
scientists that mankind, having acquired in atomic 
energy a source of energy far more powerful 
than anything known before, must take steps to 
promote its peaceful application and to present its 
use for military purposes. 
67. Events since 1957 had demonstrated the Tightness 
of the founders' belief in the potential of the 
new energy source. The explosive power of nuclear 
weapons had increased by a factor of one thousand. 
The great public concern caused by nuclear tests 
and the resulting contamination of the atmosphere 
had undoubtedly hastened the conclusion of the 
Partial Test Ban Treaty in 1963. Simultaneously, 
the use of atomic energy for power production had 
developed rapidly, presenting problems — in connection 
for example, with legal liability, transport 
of fuel and safe operation of reactors — which only 
an international organization could solve. 
68. Power reactors were now being built at such 
a rate that by 1980 they would produce some 
300 000 MW(e) as compared with 10 000 MW(e) in 
1968; that meant that in future fissile materials 
would be available in large quantity to a number of 
countries which had no access to them now. Unless 
adequate safeguards were applied, those materials 
could be used for military purposes. That was why 
he considered the Agency's role in safeguards to be 
of the utmost importance for the future. It was a 
role which would be further enhanced by the control 
functions which the Agency was to assume under 
NPT. Thus, at the risk of repetitiveness, he thought 
it difficult to over-emphasize his conviction that the 
Agency's greatest challenge during the next four 
years would lie in performing its function under 
NPT, namely the operation of a safeguards inspection 
system acceptable to all; obviously it would be 
necessary to gain the confidence of Governments — 
to convince them that their vital national and commercial 
interests were being protected. 
—

69. During the general debate the Conference 
had heard many references to the cost of the safeguards 
programme and its effects on other activities 
of the Agency. The goal of ensuring peace through 
NPT would inevitably require financial outlays, but 
since the blessings of peace were universal the cost 
of safeguards was something which all Member 
States, whether nuclear or not, should be happy 
to share. 
70. Some of the Agency's Members had so far 
been reluctant to sign and ratify NPT, for reasons 
which commanded respect. It was to be hoped that 
the obstacles which prevented them from doing so 
could soon be overcome. It would be a matter of 
great concern, however, if any Member of the Agency 
were to oppose NPT actively, thereby disavowing 
the most cherished objectives of the organization 
to which it belonged. 
71. The Agency's safeguards system undoubtedly 
had imperfections and could, in time, be improved. 
Fundamental questions related to safeguards should 
be discussed among Member States in the widest 
possible forum so as to ensure that the agreements 
which the Agency would eventually have to conclude 
with individual Member or groups of Members under 
NPT would be acceptable to the greatest possible 
number of Members. 
72. He was in fact very worried by the failure of 
the Agency's safeguards system and NPT to gain 
wider political acceptance. The Agency was now 
safeguarding 70 reactors in 30 countries, two of 
which were nuclear-weapon States. All Member States 
in Latin America, South East Asia and the Far East 
which possessed reactors had submitted them to 
the Agency's safeguards. In Europe, on the other 
hand, the proportion of States which had placed 
their nuclear facilities under the Agency's safeguards 
had been much smaller, a fact which worried him 
in relation to NPT. Nor were matters improved 
by the failure of two of the Treaty's main sponsors 
to ratify it - a failure which was unlikely to reassure 
other States that were still hesitant about signing 
and ratifying it; the reluctance of the latter to do so 
might well have been increased by the underground 
tests carried out during the period in which the 
Treaty had been open for signature and ratification. 
73. What alternatives were there to NPT? Unless 
a more acceptable scheme could be devised, one 
could only envisage the further spread of nuclear 
weapons. The consequences of that situation had 
been well described in a report submitted to the 
General Assembly of the United Nations in 1967, 
entided "Effects of the possible use of nuclear weapons 
and die security and economic implications 
for States of the acquisition and further development 
of these weapons"11), in the preparation of which 
11) United Nations document A/6858. 

8



members of the Agency's Board and of its Scientific 
Advisory Committee had taken part. That report, 
unfortunately, seemed to have been all but forgotten; 
but it should be recalled by all who were interested 
in the problems which NPT was intended to solve. 

74. The role die Agency would have under NPT 
had refocused attention on the question of whether 
the composition of the Board should be changed. 
As he had indicated in 1965, it was desirable that 
an organization such as the Agency should consider 
amending its statute from time to time to reflect 
the changes which occurred in the world12). Speakers 
in the general debate had pointed out that 
great care should be taken in amending Article VI 
of the Statute to ensure that the changes made 
would not impair, but rather contribute to, the 
Agency's efficiency. That, and not the time required 
to obtain a wide measure of agreement, should, he 
would suggest, be the overriding consideration; delays 
resulting from obstruction would, of course, be 
unjustifiable. He wished, in particular, to point out 
that no satisfactory solution to what was admittedly 
a difficult problem could be found unless Member 
States made a sincere effort, in a spirit of mutual 
trust and unselfishness, to formulate an amendment 
that was acceptable to at least two thirds of them. 
75- The General Conference met annually, as required 
by the Statute, and under present circumstances 
he thought it highly desirable that Member 
States should continue to have the opportunity of 
discussing each year die complex questions facing 
the Agency, particularly in view of the likely entry 
into force of NPT. The General Conference had 
only once met outside Vienna- in Tokyo in 1965. 
He felt, however, that it would be advantageous if 
a session could be held from time to time in a 
country other than Austria, and more particularly 
outside of Europe. If, as was the case in 1965, the 
host country bore the resulting extra expenditure 
(on the transport of the necessary staff, for example) 
the only other financial consideration would be a 
redistribution of the travel costs of delegations. The 
political advantages of having occasional sessions 
away from Headquarters were too obvious to need 
any comment. 

76. When the application of nuclear. technology 
in a particular discipline became routime, the activities 
within the Agency in respect of that application 
could be reduced or terminated. The resources in 
manpower and equipment thereby released could be 
used to initiate similar activities in the developing 
countries. 
77. In conclusion, he assured the Conference that 
it was his intention to work closely with the authorities 
of Member States, as he had tried to do in 
12) See document GC(IX)/OR.98, para. 16. 

GC(XIII)/OR.133 

the past. The purpose of an international organization 
— that of giving service to Member States, 
severally and collectively — could be achieved only 
by a continual dialogue between the organization's 
Secretariat and the representatives of its Members. 
The confidence placed in him and the responsibilities 
entrusted to him through his reappointment would 
lead him to renew his dedication to the service of 
the Agency, for only in that way could he adequately 
repay the trust of Member States. 

OPENING DATE OF THE FOURTEENTH 
(1970) REGULAR SESSION 

78. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee had authorized him to 
put forward its recommendation diat the opening 
date of the fourteenth regular session should be 
Tuesday, 22 September 1970. 
79-The recommendation of the General Committee was 
accepted. 

THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORTS TO 
UNITED NATIONS ORGANS (GC(XIII)/403) 

80. The PRESIDENT drew attention to draft resolution 
A in document GC(XIII)/403, concerning 
the Agency's report to the General Assembly of 
the United Nations for 1968-69. As it was couched 
in exacdy the same terms as similar resolutions 
adopted by the Conference in the past, he suggested 
that it would be acceptable. 
81. The draft resolution was adopted. 
82. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
consider draft resolution B in document GC(XIII)/ 
403, concerning the Agency's report to the Economic 
and Social Council of the United Nations for 
1969-70. Since that resolution, too, was analogous 
to past resolutions concerning the Agency's reports 
to the Economic and Social Council, he assumed 
that the Conference would wish to adopt it. 
83. The draft resolution was adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

84. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference 
that the present External Auditor, who was Auditor 
General of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, had 
been appointed by the Conference to audit the 
Agency's accounts for the years 1968 and 196913X 
It was accordingly necessary for the Conference to 
appoint an External Auditor to audit the Agency's 
accounts for subsequent years. 
13) See the booklet GC(XI)/Resolutions (1967), Other 
Decisions, decision number GC(XI)/DEC/9. 

-9



GC(XIII)/OR.133 

85. He had been informed that the Auditor 
General of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic was 
willing to continue to serve as the Agency's External 
Auditor, and also that the Czechoslovak Government 
was willing to make him available for that task. 
He proposed, therefore, diat the Auditor General 
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic should be 
appointed to audit the Agency's accounts for the 
years 1970 and 1971. 
86. The President's proposal was accepted. 
87. The PRESIDENT said he was sure the Conference 
would wish him to convey its gratitude to 
the External Auditor for the capable and thorough 
work which he and his staff had done and were 
doing in auditing the Agency's accounts for die 
previous two years, and its appreciation of his 
willingness to continue to serve the Agency. Thanks 
were due likewise to the Government of the 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic for continuing to 
place its Auditor General at the disposal of the 
Agency. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF 
PENSION COMMITTEE 

88. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members and 
two alternates elected by the Conference. The members 
were at present Mr. Bittencourt of Brazil and 
Mr. Nejedly of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, 
the alternates Mr. Butler of Australia and Mr. Pahr 
of Austria. However, Mr. Butler had left Vienna 
and was therefore no longer available to serve on 
the Committee. To replace him as alternate member, 
he (the President) suggested Mr. Tachibana of Japan. 
89. Mr. Tacbibana {Japan) was elected an alternate 
member of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee. 
90. The PRESIDENT thanked Mr. Tachibana for 
undertaking to serve on the Committee. He also 
took the opportunity to express the Conference's 
gratitude to the members and the other alternate 
member who were giving of their time to serve on 
the Committee - particularly Mr. Bittencourt, who 
had acted most ably as its Chairman for nearly 
four years. 
The meeting 

THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1970 
(GC(XIII)/423) 


91. Mr. NEJEDLY (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur 
of the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the Agency's 
budget for 1970 (GC(XIII)/423). 
92. The draft resolution in Annex I to document 
GC(XIII)/423 (Regular Budget appropriations for 1970) 
was adopted. 
93. The draft resolution in Annex II to that document 
(Operational Budget allocations for 1970) was adopted. 
94. The draft resolution in Annex III (Use of the 
Working Capital Fund in 1970) was adopted. 
95. The draft resolution in Annex IV (Financing of 
Nuclear Projects) was adopted. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 
1970(GC(XIII)/424) 

96. Mr. NEJEDLY (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur 
of the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the scale of 
Members' contributions for 1970 (GC(XIII)/424). 
97. The draft resolution in that document was adopted. 
THEAGENCY'SRESPONSIBILITYTOPROVIDE 
SERVICES IN CONNECTION WITH NUCLEAR 
EXPLOSIONS FOR PEACEFUL PURPOSES 
(GC(XIII)/425) 

98. Mr. NEJEDLY (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur 
of the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report concerning the 
Agency's responsibility to provide services in connection 
with nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
(GC(XIII)/425). 
99. The draft resolution annexed to that document was 
adopted. 
at 12.40 p.m. 

-10



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XIII)/OR.134 
26 January 1970 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 


ENGLISH 
RECORDS OF THE THIRTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(23-29 SEPTEMBER 1969) 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 29 September 1969, at 3.20 p.m. 
President: Mr. TORKI (Tunisia) 
Item of theagenda* 
12161718192425CONTENTS 
Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
The Agency's accounts for 1968 
The Agency's relations with intergovernmental organizations 
Review of Article VI of the Statute 
Fund of special fissionable materials 
Voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 1970 
Closing of the session 
Paragraphs 
1—21 
22—23 
24—25 
26—27 
28—29 
30 
31—42 
GC(XIII)/418. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIII)/INF/114/Rev.2. 


GC(XIII)/OR.134 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XIII)/401, 420) 

1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
report of the General Committee in document 
GC(XIII)/420, in paragraph 1 of which the 
Committee notified the Conference that seven 
Members had to be elected to the Board of 
Governors. In paragraph 2 the Committee specified 
the geographical areas in respect of which elections 
were required and in the final paragraph drew attention 
to the fact that the elections had to be 
conducted with due regard to equitable representation 
on the Board as a whole of the Members in the 
geographical areas specified in Rule 83 of the Rules 
of Procedure. Rule 79 provided that the elections 
would be by secret ballot and that there could be 
no nominations. 
2. At the invitation of the President, a member of 
the Finish delegation and a member of the Iranian delegation 
acted as tellers. 
3. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Latin America. 
The result of the vote was as follows: 

Ballot papers returned: 67 
Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes: 56 
Required majority: 29 
Votes obtained: 

Uruguay 55 
Chile 1 

5. Having obtained the required majority, Uruguay was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
6. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Eastern Europe. 
The result of the vote was as follows: 

Ballot papers returned: 66 
Abstentions: 11 
Valid votes: 55 
Required majority: 28 

Votes obtained: 

Hungary 52 
Romania 3 

8. Having obtained the required majority, Hungary 
was elected a Member of the Board. 
9. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect two Members from the area of Africa and 
the Middle East. 
10. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Members to be elected: 2 
Ballot papers returned: 136 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 10 
Valid votes: 125 
Required majority: 32 
Votes obtained: 

Nigeria 47 
Morocco 37 
United Arab Republic 28 
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo 11 
Israel 1 
Tunisia 1 

11. Having obtained the required majority, Nigeria and 
Morocco were elected Members of the Board. 
12. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from die area of South Asia. 
13. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 67 
Invalid votes: 7 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 54 
Required majority: 28 
Votes obtained: 

Pakistan 54 

14. Having obtained the required majority, Pakistan was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
15. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of the Far East. 
16. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 67 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 19 
Valid votes: 47 
Required majority: 24 
Votes obtained: 

Viet-Nam 37 
Cambodia 10 

17. Having obtained the required majority, Viet-Nam 
was elected a Member of the Board. 
18. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
fill the remaining vacant seat on the Board. 
19-The result of the vote was as follows: 

Ballot papers returned: 65 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 7 

— 2 — 


GC(XIII)/OR.134 

Valid votes: 5 7 
Required majority: 29 
Votes obtained: 

Spain 57 

20. Having obtained the required majority, Spain was 
elected a Member of the Board. 
21. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Article VI.D of the Statute, the Members just elected 
to the Board would hold office from the end of the 
thirteenth regular session of the General Conference 
until the end of the fifteenth regular session. He 
congratulated Hungary, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, 
Spain, Uruguay and Viet-Nam on their election, 
and thanked the tellers for their work. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1968 
(GC(XIII)/421) 

22. Mr. TAÇAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the Administrative 
and Legal Committee, introduced the 
Committee's report on the Agency's accounts for 
1968(GC(XIII)/421). 
23. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XHI)/421 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 
(GC(XIII)/422) 

24. Mr. TAÇAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the Administrative 
and Legal Committee, presented the 
Committee's report on the Agency's relations with 
intergovernmental organizations (GC(XIII)/422). 
25. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XIII)/422 was adopted. 
REVIEW OF ARTICLE VI OF THE STATUTE 
(GC(XIII)/427) 

26. Mr. TAÇAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, presented the 
Committee's report on the review of Article VI 
of the Statute (GC(XIII)/427). 
27. The draft resolution annexed to document 
GC(XIII)/427 was adopted. 
FUND OF SPECIAL FISSIONABLE MATERIALS 
(GC(XIII)/428) 

28. Mr. TAÇAR (Turkey), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, presented die 
Committee's report on the fund of special fissionable 
materials (GC(XIII)/428). 
29. The proposal set forth in paragraph 2 of document 
GC(XlIT)j428 was adopted. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 
GENERAL FUND FOR 1970 (GC(XIII)/4l4/ 
Rev.4) 

30. The PRESIDENT said that by 6 p.m. on 
26 September the Director General had received 
pledges of voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund for 1970 from 53 Member States to a total 
amount of $828 616, as stated in document 
GC(XIII)/414/Rev.4. Since then pledges of 
contributions had been made by Colombia ($2000), 
Norway ($7800), Poland ($8333), and Uganda 
($1000). Including those four pledged amounts, 
the total thus reached $847 749. At the corresponding 
time the previous year, the total voluntary contributions 
pledged to the General Fund for 1969 had 
been a little under $1 240 000, a figure which had 
since risen to $1421 265. The voluntary contributions 
for the current year would be closer to the target 
than in any preceding year. The General Conference 
had again fixed the target at $2 million. The total 
amount so far pledged for 1970 therefore represented 
only a small fraction of the target but it was to be 
observed that more than one Member State that 
had regularly made substantial contributions in the 
past was not at that stage in a position to announce 
its pledge for next year. He expressed the hope 
that every Member would do what it could to pay 
into the General Fund for 1970 a contribution large 
enough to enable the target to be reached. 

CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

31. Mr. TRIVEDI (India) expressed to the 
President, in the name of delegations in his and 
other areas of the world, his appreciation of the 
skill which he had shown in the conduct of the 
business of the session. Mr. Torki, apart from his 
well-known qualities as an eminent scientist, enjoyed 
an even greater advantage in that he was a national 
of one of the developing countries and thus had 
a profound understanding of their needs; it was 
not surprising therefore that he had been able 
so rapidly to complete the business of a session 
which would represent a milestone on the road 
to attainment of the Agency's objectives. 
32. Furthermore, at the conclusion of the 
thriteenth session of the General Conference it was 
reassuring for delegations to know that the 
administration of the Agency would remain in hands 
as competent as those of Mr. Eklund. 
33. Mr. BITTENCOURT (Brazil) speaking in the 
name of all the delegations from the American 
continent, associated himself unreservedly with the 
congratulations expressed by the Indian delegate 
to the President and the Director General. 
34. Mr. McADAM CLARK (United Kingdom) 
wished to express to the President, on behalf of 
-3



GC(XIII)/OR.134 

the countries of Western Europe, his recognition 
of the competence, impartiality and firmness with 
which he had presided over the debates of the 
session which was now drawing to a close. 

35. Mr. STRAUB (Hungary) conveyed to the 
President the congratulations of the delegations 
from the socialist countries of Eastern Europe on 
the manner in which he had directed the business 
of the session. At the conclusion of the session 
the delegations of the socialist countries were equally 
happy to know that the direction of the Agency 
would remain in the capable hands of Mr. Eklund. 
36. Mr. ASANTE (Ghana) declared himself proud, 
in the name of all delegations from the countries 
of Africa, that the Presidency of the thirteenth 
session of the General Conference had been entrusted 
to an eminent scientist from the African continent. 
The countries of Africa hoped furthermore that his 
election would mark a turning point in the efforts 
being made to bridge the technological gap between 
the poor and the rich countries. 
37. He also thanked the Director General and the 
Secretariat for the work which they had performed 
before and during the Conference. Finally he wished 
to thank the Government and people of Austria for 
their hospitality and generosity. 
The meeting 

38. The PRESIDENT in his turn thanked the 
delegations for the words of praise which had been 
addressed to him, but wished to stress that the 
General Conference had been able to carry out its 
work successfully and so expeditiously only because 
of the goodwill, understanding and spirit of collaboration 
shown by all delegations throughout a particularly 
fruitful session. 
39. He expressed his gratitude to the Director 
General and the Secretariat for the careful preparations 
they had made for the session. Finally he wished 
to thank the Austrian authorities for having been 
good enough to place at the disposal of the Agency 
the premises and installations necessary for the smooth 
conduct of the work of the Conference. He concluded 
by expressing the hope that the business of the 
session would have added a new stone to the edifice 
of world peace, to the erection of which it was the 
Agency's mission to contribute. 
40. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited delegates to observe one minute 
of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
41. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
42. The PRESIDENT then declared the thirteenth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
rose at 3p.m. 

-4



