International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XIV)/OR.135 
18 February 1971* 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1970, at 3.10 p.m. 

Temporary President: Mr. BEN MENA (Tunisia) 
President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraphs 
brovisional 
1 Opening of the session 1— 4 
2 Election of the President 5—13 
3(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 14—15 
Election of the Vice-Presidents 16—20 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 21—24 
7 Statement by the Director General 25—57 
Statement by the Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations 58 66 

A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 September 1970. 
GC(XIV)/429. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 


GC(XIV)/OR.135 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the 
fourteenth regular session of the General Conference 
open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited the Conference to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
the delegates from Member States, an observer from 
a State not yet a Member of the Agency, and the 
representatives of the United Nations and other 
intergovernmental organizations and of non-governmental 
organizations who had come to take part 
in the work of the session. The opening of the 
session was also honoured by the presence of the 
Vice-Chancellor of the Republic of Austria and the 
State Secretary in the Federal Chancellery, as well 
as senior officials of the Federal Government. He 
thanked them for the interest they were taking in 
the Agency's work and for attending the meeting 
in spite of the heavy demands on their time. 
4. He transmitted to the General Conference 
the best wishes of the President of the Republic 
of Tunisia, Mr. Bourguiba, for a successful session. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations 
for the office of President. 
6. Mr. WALPITA (Ceylon) nominated 
Mr. Sarabhai, the delegate of India and Chairman 
of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission. 
Mr. Sarabhai was an eminent physicist and his experience 
of international organizations made him 
an excellent candidate for the office of President. 
7. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina)andMr.FAHMY 
(United Arab Republic) supported the nomination. 
8. Mr. Sarabhai {India) was elected President of the 
General Conference for its fourteenth regular session by 
acclamation. 
Mr. Sarabbai {India) took the chair. 

9. The PRESIDENT thanked the General Conference 
for the great honour it had done his country 
in electing him to the high office of President. He 
recalled that the late Mr. Homi Bhabha, former 
Chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission, 
had made a significant contribution to the establishment 
of the Agency and the convening of the First 

United Nations Atoms for Peace Conference. 

10. Atomic energy was now at a cross-road, so 
that the deliberations of the present session were 
of special importance. It was necessary to take 
note of the urgent need to enhance the economic 
and social development of all peoples and to take 
firm action to that effect, overcoming all ideological, 
political and other barriers. Such a task called for 
wisdom and maturity, coupled with a high degree 
of mutual trust and understanding, it being understood 
that all decisions and action taken should 
be in strict conformity with the spirit and letter of 
the Agency's Statute. 
11. The past year had been marked by the work 
of the Safeguards Committee (1970), entrusted with 
preparing the Agency for the new duties it had to 
assume in connection with the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)1' . There 
were positive signs of an emerging rational system 
of safeguards application. The Committee had requested 
the Director General to study the financial 
implications of the safeguards activities which would 
devolve upon the Agency; that was an extremely 
important matter in view of the magnitude of those 
activities and the need for the Agency to maintain 
equilibrium between its regulatory and its promotional 
functions. 
12. Pollution of the environment was a matter of 
understandable concern. The delegations present 
were aware of the efforts which had been made to 
prevent pollution through the applications of atomic 
energy. So far, moreover, very few accidents had 
occurred. Nevertheless, the moment had arrived for 
the Agency periodically to bring together specialists 
to study that problem and to suggest action which 
would ensure that the utmost caution was taken 
in the development of atomic energy. 
13. A long-term plan to enable the developing 
countries to benefit from the advantages of atomic 
energy, and the means to implement such a plan, 
were indispensable in an effective approach to the 
problems which would probably arise during the 
next decade. Unless the norms of international cooperation 
and assistance were revised, the gap between 
countries with advanced atomic technologies and 
those without would rapidly widen, and there would 
be a risk of a situation still more dangerous than 
that which would result from die clandestine diversion 
of fissile products. In that connection, he thought 
that the establishment of low-cost nuclear energy 
centres would help to strengthen political and social 
bonds in all parts of the world. 
1) Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 


GC(XIV)/OR.135 

APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE 

14. The PRESIDENT proposed, in accordance with 
Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, that a Credentials 
Committee should be appointed consisting of the 
following nine Members: Ecuador, Iran, Japan, 
Mexico, Spain, Thailand, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
and the United States of America. 
15. The proposal was adopted. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

16. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 34 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference was required 
to elect its Vice-Presidents after the election 
of the Chairmen of the two Main Committees. He 
therefore intended to suspend the plenary meeting 
for a short time to enable the two Committees to 
elect their Chairmen. 
The meeting was suspended at 3.35 p.m. and resumed 
at 3.45p.m. 

17. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President. 
18. Mr. FRANGELLA (Uruguay) nominated the 
delegates of the following States: Argentina, Australia, 
Brazil, Gabon, Japan, Romania, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
19. Mr. AFABLE (Philippines) seconded the 
nominations. 
20. The delegates nominated were declared elected to 
the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL 
COMMITTEE 

21. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the General 
Conference was required to elect four additional 
members to the General Committee. He invited 
nominations. 
22. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) nominated the 
delegates of the following States: France, Poland, 
Uganda and the United States of America. 
23. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) seconded the 
nominations. 
24. The delegates of the States nominated were declared 
elected to the General Committee, which was thus duly 
appointed in compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 

STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

25. The DIRECTOR GENERAL recalled that the 
year 1970 marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of 
the United Nations; it also marked the entry into 
force of NPT and the first talks on strategic arms 
limitation (SALT). The spirit of co-operation 
evidenced by the conclusion of NPT and the opening 
of the SALT meetings constituted grounds for reasonable 
optimism and it was in that context that the 
Agency's activities should be discussed. 
26. For the second time, the General Assembly 
of the United Nations had invited the Secretary-
General, in co-operation with the Agency, to organize 
a conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy2), 
and that conference would be held at Geneva during 
the period 6-16 September 1971. 
27. During the past year an Ad Hoc Committee 
of the Whole and the Board of Governors had, at 
the request of the General Conference3), given 
lengthy consideration to Article VI of the Statute. 
Despite the efforts which had been made it had 
not yet been possible to reach agreement on an 
amendment to that Article, but he hoped that the 
discussions and consultations to take place in the 
coming few days would bring a satisfactory solution 
in sight. 
28. The Safeguards Committee set up in 1970 
by the Board had succeeded, through hard work 
over a period of several weeks, in preparing the 
Agency for the negotiations which it had to open 
with parties to NPT in order to conclude the agreements 
provided for under the Treaty. During its 
next series of meetings, to begin on 13 October 
1970, the Committee would be called upon to examine 
the detailed technical procedures for the application 
of safeguards as well as the financial problems. 
29. The question of safeguards — and in particular 
their application under NPT — was a challenge 
which the Agency would have to meet during the 
next decade. It would have to revise and apply 
safeguards in such a way as to ensure their optimum 
acceptability and efficiency, and it would also have 
to convince Governments that their commercial interests 
were being protected. 
30. He stressed that the Agency's safeguards system 
was and would continue to be in constant 
evolution. All available documentation proved that 
the Agency had remained faithful to that principle 
2) General Assembly resolution 2046 (XXIII). 
3) GC(XIII)/RES/261. 

-3



GC(XIV)/OR.135 

for eight years, and NPT represented a new stage 
oi that evolution. Thanks to the collaboration of 
interested Member States the Agency had for the 
past two years been the repository of knowledge 
acquired throughout the world in matters relating 
to safeguards. 

31. During the past year experts had been invited 
to define the technical objectives and the principles 
governing inspection as well as methods for quantitative 
evaluation of the results of inspections; technical 
working groups had studied the requirements for 
information in relation to installations, accounting and 
reports. The Symposium on Progress in Safeguards 
Techniques, held at Karlsruhe in July 1970, had 
demonstrated that important results had been obtained 
in systems analysis, instrumentation and other 
techniques. 
32. The financing of safeguards had given rise to 
considerable anxiety. Clearly every effort should be 
made to keep costs low while at the same time 
maintaining the system's efficiency. States could help 
to reach that goal by constituting their own safeguards 
systems, as similar as possible to the 
Agency's one. The Agency proposed to organize 
courses for the training of safeguards specialists 
who could perform, on the national plane, many 
of the tasks at present entrusted to highly qualified 
inspectors; that too should result in savings. Furthermore, 
80%-90% of the analyses which would have 
to be made could be entrusted to national 
laboratories so as to reduce the burden on the 
Agency's own Laboratory. 
33. Safeguards activities under existing agreements 
had continued to increase: the Agency was now 
party to 44 agreements with 32 States, covering 
nine power reactors and 54 research reactors. In 
1971 more than 12 power reactors were expected 
to be among the 180 installations under safeguards. 
34. He realized that the efforts devoted to NPT 
had caused anxiety among certain Member States 
regarding the Agency's other activities. He shared 
those fears to a certain extent but felt confident 
that the General Conference and the Board would 
see to it that the Agency's other statutory functions 
did not suffer, the more so as Article IV of NPT 
made it a duty of States Parties to the Treaty to 
co-operate in contributing to the further development 
of the applications of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes, with due consideration for the 
needs of the developing areas of the world. The 
success of that action would depend in large part 
on the financial assistance provided by Member States. 
In 1970 voluntary contributions had for the first 
time reached more than 80% of the target. Since 
1962 the Agency's technical assistance programme 
had been financed from voluntary contributions, the 
target for which had been set at $2 million, and 

the Board had now recommended that the target 
should be raised to $2.5 million for 1971. He had 
himself proposed a target of $3 million and felt 
that the target of $2.5 million would not be enough 
to outweigh the effects of inflation on the real value 
of the programme. In fact $2.7 million would be 
required to carry out the same programme as in 
1962. Obviously the Agency should be in a position 
to meet most of the balanced and technically justified 
requests of Member States, but for several years it 
had not been able to furnish more than a quarter 
or a third of the aid requested. He was pleased, 
however, that he had been requested to consider 
an increase in the target for future budgets, and 
he would not fail to do so. An increase in voluntary 
contributions would be very much in keeping with 
the spirit of Article IV of NPT. 

35. In the past year the Agency had been assisted 
in its technical assistance efforts by the co-operation 
of the Swedish International Development Authority 
and by the launching of co-operation programmes. 
He hoped that other countries would follow that 
example and that countries engaged in bilateral programmes 
would channel their assistance to developing 
countries through the Agency. 
36. The Pearson Report4) had recommended that 
countries supplying aid should devote a large part of 
their research and development resources to projects 
of particular interest for the developing countries. 
According to that report multilateral lending agencies 
should finance research and development projects 
on a much larger scale than heretofore. The difficulties 
encountered by developing countries were 
largely financial. To meet the goals they had set 
for themselves they should be generating between 
20 000 MW and 25 000 MW of nuclear power by 
1980, or less than 10% of the nuclear power 
expected to be installed in the world at that time ; 
but to reach that goal they would have to obtain 
$3000 to $4000 million from abroad. 
37. The use of small and medium-power reactors 
in certain developing countries with high fuel costs 
was to be considered by a symposium which would 
meet in Norway in October 1970, and a co-ordinated 
programme of research agreements on the technical 
aspects of power reactors with a capacity of less 
than 500 MW had already been launched. Without 
wishing to prejudge the conclusions of the symposium 
or the results of the research agreements, he thought 
it reasonable to say that small nuclear power plants 
could not at present be justified on economic 
grounds, except in very special circumstances. 
38. The developing countries were using nuclear 
techniques to an ever greater extent and the Agency 
4) Report of the Commission on International Development, 
Partners in Development, Pall Mall Press, London, 1969. 

-4



was playing an active role in that connection in such 
spheres as hydrology, agriculture, medicine and 
industry. 

39. Regarding the agricultural programme conducted 
jointly by the Agency and FAO, he stressed 
that the immediate danger of a catastrophic famine 
had been banished by the "green revolution" i.e. 
the use of numerous high-yield varieties of wheat 
and rice obtained by radiation-induced mutations. 
Even so, half the world's population still lacked 
sufficient food while the other half was worried about 
slimming methods. 
40. The application of nuclear techniques to solve 
the grave problems of pollution from pesticides was 
also being given increased attention by the Agency. 
In that connection it was to be regretted that the 
real value of the Agency's research contracts was 
being reduced by inflation. 
41. Regional co-operation was opening up 
encouraging possibilities as far as assistance to the 
atomic energy programmes of developing countries 
was concerned. The India-Philippines-Agency project 
was a case in point. Clearly it would be desirable 
to expand that type of regional co-operation; preliminary 
discussions had been started to that end, 
and at the present session of the General Conference 
attempts would be made to formulate an agreement. 
42. The General Conference would be called upon 
to approve the 1971 budget5^. For the first time 
the document before the Conference had been established 
entirely in accordance with die "programmebudget" 
system — in other words all estimates were 
related to the programme to be executed rather 
than to the objects of expenditure. Moreover, the 
estimates were now presented in conformity with 
the recommendations of the United Nations Ad Hoc 
Committee to Examine the Finances of the United 
Nations and the Specialized Agencies6). Such increases 
as had been approved were essentially in 
support of safeguards. The budget did not provide 
funds for all the posts authorized in the approved 
manning table, nor did it provide for the salary 
increases which, as it now appeared, would become 
effective in the United Nations system in 1971. 
43. In that connection he wished to draw the 
attention of the General Conference to the growing 
disproportion between staff costs and programme 
costs. In I960, programme activities had accounted 
for 42% of the budget and in 1965 for 37%; in 
1971, the figure would go down to 26%. For 1971 
the International Civil Service Advisory Board 
(ICSAB) had recommended the General Assembly 
to approve a general salary increase which, for the 
5) See document GC(XIV)/433. 
6) See United Nations document A/6343. 

GC(XIV)/OR.135 

Agency, would mean an increase of between $700 000 
and $800 000 over the budget submitted by the 
Board to the General Conference. The Agency had 
been alone in opposing that proposal, believing that 
a world-wide increase could be justified only after a 
general review of the salary scales for international 
civil servants. He believed that Member States should 
devote much more attention to those matters in the 
organs of the United Nations where they were 
decided, for once a decision had been taken by the 
General Assembly, the Agency was bound to follow 
the salary scales adopted there; and when the increase 
took on such proportions, a corresponding 
increase in the budget became inevitable. 

44. Studies were in progress with a view to 
establishing a better balance between programme 
and staff costs. Those studies were designed on the 
one hand to remedy existing structural defects and 
ensure better use of personnel and on the other, 
to eliminate from the programme all activities of 
secondary importance or activities which could be 
more usefully entrusted to other organizations. However, 
that was an extremely complex problem. 
45. Reverting to the subject of nuclear power, he 
noted that there had been a significant increase in 
orders for nuclear power plants throughouttheworld. 
The rising capital costs associated with nuclear power 
represented a disadvantage, but it had been offset 
by increases in conventional fuel prices, while uranium 
prices had risen scarcely at all. 
46. With regard to nuclear fuel supplies, the Agency 
had pursued a joint undertaking with the European 
Nuclear Energy Agency the purpose of which was 
a periodic assessment of uranium resources in the 
western world. The latest survey indicated that while 
reserves of low-cost uranium had increased in recent 
years they would be exhausted before 1985 if present 
reactor types continued to be used. However, if 
the current intensity of prospecting was maintained 
it seemed likely that the reserves would increase 
and that nuclear power would continue to expand 
with a reasonable degree of price stability. 
47. The growing demand for nuclear fuels also 
held out favourable prospects for the developing 
countries: as 95% of the uranium reserves at present 
being exploited were in the industrialized countries 
one might reasonably assume that large undiscovered 
reserves existed in the developing countries. 
48. As nuclear power continued to expand, its 
effects on the environment were being carefully 
assessed. In fact the public appeared to be badly 
informed on the subject, for nuclear power was often 
cast in the role of the villain before any attempt 
had been made to examine the problem in perspective. 
In the past year the Agency had tried to 
fill that "information gap"; the Symposium on En

GC(XIV)/OR.135 

vironmental Aspects of Nuclear Power,Stations, held 
in August 1970 with the co-operation of the United 
States, Atomic Energy Commission, • had come to 
the conclusion that nuclear power stations contributed 
far less to environmental degradation than did other 
forms of power production. It had been suggested 
in'the course of that Symposium that the, Agency 
should become the central repository for data on 
radioactivity released in connection with the civilian 
uses of nuclear energy. 

49. The Agency had also taken an interest in die 
disposal of radioactive wastes into the seas and 
oceans. Over the years he had appealed to Governments 
to provide the Agency, on a voluntary basis, 
with. information on . their releases of radioactive 
waste into the sea. The Inter-Agency Group of 
Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution 
had recommended that a single international register 
be kept of all such releases and a panel to meet 
in November 1970 would discuss procedures for 
establishing limits for radioactive nuclides in the sea. 
50. Turning to the legal problems that had to 
be faced in connection with nuclear activities, he 
stressed the importance of ensuring adequate financial 
protection against nuclear risks. The 1963 Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
had established the framework for a special legal 
system to deal with such problems at the international 
level. The panel of experts which had met 
in 1969 to advise on the particular problems encountered 
by developing countries in respect of 
financial protection against nuclear damage had 
decided that the Vienna Convention provided a highly 
satisfactory basis for the establishment of national 
legislation in that field. Unfortunately the Vienna 
Convention still needed one further ratification before 
it could come into force. 
51. The International Nuclear Information System 
(INIS) had become a reality. However, the results 
obtained so far amounted to only half of what had 
been expected and the Board of Governors had 
accordingly decided to establish, in February 1971, 
a committee to review the operations of INIS. To 
encourage greater participation in INIS, especially 
by the developing countries, a series of training 
seminars for the preparation of input was being 
organized, the first to be held in Bombay in 
November and December of 1970. Apart from the 
ATOMINDEX, INIS provided a monthly magnetic 
tape service and reproduced abstracts on microfiche. 
5 2; Within the framework of international co-operation 
in the nuclear data field, the Agency had taken 
an active part, during the past year, in the development 
of the EXFOR system for automated handling 
of information, and from 1971 onward it would 
publish the international reference manual CINDA. 

5 3,. The Agency was actively engaged in preparing 
the programme of the Fourth International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
which, owing to budgetary restrictions, would be more 
limited than that of previous conferences. It would 
be the Agency's task to print the preparatory documentation 
and, subject to agreement with the 
United Nations, the proceedings as well. The 
Agency's regular conference programme for 1971-72 
would be reduced to allow for participation in the 
Geneva Conference. 

54. Significant progress had been made in 
connection widi research on controlled nuclear fusion. 
The panel which had met in June 1970 to consider 
the status of fusion research had felt that fusion 
might indeed become a major source of power in 
the> future, not only tapping a limitless supply of 
energy but also offering economic and, environmental 
advantages. The panel had also recommended that 
the Agency establish an International Fusion Research 
Council to review progress and to discuss coordination 
of national programmes. 
55- As in previous years, he wished to express 
sincere gratitude to the Austrian Government and 
administrative authorities for the valuable assistance 
which they were continuing to give the Agency, 
and also for the additional premises that had been 
put at the Agency's disposal. He hoped that the 
Austrian authorities would soon take a final decision 
regarding the permanent headquarters of the Agency 
and UNIDO, bearing in mind the views of the two 
organizations. 

56. He took great pleasure in welcoming Ireland 
as the 103rd Member State of the Agency. 
57. Twenty-five years had passed since mankind 
had witnessed the first military nuclear explosions, 
and nuclear weapons were still being produced, 
despite the NPT; that was a matter for deep regret. 
Nevertheless, he expressed the hope that that Treaty 
would soon become an important instrument of 
peace. In 1970 the United Nations was celebrating 
its twenty-fifth anniversary. At its preceding session 
the General Assembly had resolved that the anniversary 
year should be marked by a strengthening 
of the United Nations role in the world. Member 
States would have to decide whether the world 
needed new international organizations, or whether 
it would be better to reorganize die existing ones 
to make them more efficient and better equipped 
for their tasks in serving die countries of the world. 
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS 

58. Mr. WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI(Representative 
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations) 
-6



GC(XIV)/OR.135 

said that it was his privilege to transmit to the 
General Conference the greetings of the Secretary-
General and his good wishes for the success of its 
work. 

59. He thanked the Director General for his remarks 
about the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United 
Nations and took great pleasure in paying tribute 
to his competent and untiring leadership of the 
Agency in the advancement of the goals and ideals 
of the United Nations. 
60. Sometimes, as at present, wider echo was 
evoked in public opinion by dramatic events and 
failures in peace-keeping than by the painstaking 
efforts to build the conditions and safeguards for 
peace. Nevertheless, the twenty-fifth anniversary of 
the United Nations was marked by a number of 
important achievements — sometimes not very spectacular 
— which should encourage Member States to 
work together in even closer community. In that 
context, die United Nations was proud to be closely 
associated with the work of the Agency whose 
reports, year after year, constituted a record of the 
considerable amount of work accomplished. The 
current report revealed the striking convergence of 
the principal activities and occupations of the Agency 
and those of the United Nations on a number of 
important subjects, among which diere were in 
particular: problems relating to developing countries, 
human environment, the forthcoming Geneva Conference 
on the peaceful uses of atomic energy and, 
of course, safeguards. 
61. As regards aid to the developing countries 
— an area to which the United Nations had been 
giving major emphasis for a number of years — he 
was glad to note that on the threshold of the launching 
of the Second United Nations Development 
Decade further progress had been achieved by the 
Agency in ensuring that the benefits of the peaceful 
atom were shared by various countries, including a 
growing number of developing countries. The spread 
of nuclear power in developing countries was made 
difficult by the relative smallness of their power 
grids, the magnitude of the investment and the 
foreign exchange required, and the advanced character 
of die techniques that were often needed. However, 
it was gratifying to note that the Agency had been 
making steady efforts to overcome those handicaps. 
To quote only a few examples, the Agency was 
trying to promote interest in the erection of smaller 
nuclear power plants; it was increasing its technical 
assistance, for which it had received considerably 
more voluntary contributions in 1970 than in any 
previous year; it had launched in those countries a 
number of research programmes relating to radioisotope 
applications in food and agriculture, hydrology 
and medicine. The Trieste International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics had successfully contributed to 
the training of young scientists from developing 
countries. 
62. The problem of the environment had attracted 
more and more attention in United Nations circles 
in recent months. The General Assembly of the 
United Nations had decided to convene a major 
conference on the human environment at Stockholm 
in 1972, which would be preceded by a conference 
on the problems of the environment to be held by 
the Economic Commission for Europe at Prague in 
1971. The question of pollution had been one of 
the constant preoccupations of the Agency since its 
inception, as fear of pollution might hamper the 
programmes of utilization of nuclear plants. On the 
other hand, the Director General had given reassurances 
on that subject when he had stated, in the 
Economic and Social Council, that nuclear power 
afforded a far cleaner alternative to oil- or coalburning 
plants and a means of reducing instead of 
adding to air pollution. The activities of the Agency 
in that field would contribute to the global effort 
of the United Nations family in helping in die protection 
of the environment. 
63. Among other fields in which the Agency and 
the United Nations were co-operating, mention 
should be made of the activities of the United 
Nations Scientific Committee on die effects of atomic 
radiation; diere was also the common work on the 
economic aspects of power: a symposium on the 
economic integration of nuclear power stations in 
electric power systems, organized jointly by the IAEA 
and the Economic Commission for Europe, would 
take place in Vienna immediately after the General 
Conference. 
64. In view of the convergence of dieir interests 
in a number of fields, the Agency and die United 
Nations were closely co-ordinating dieir activities at 
all levels. There were some cases, such as uranium 
prospection — which die Director General had 
mentioned — where the principles which guided the 
activities of the respective organizations might result 
in duplication. But that was rare, and it was up to 
all Members to transform possible conflicts of competence 
into areas of common and joint work. A 
remarkable example of co-ordination between the 
United Nations and the Agency was the current 
preparation of the Fourdi International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. 
65. Particular attention must be drawn to the 
new functions incumbent upon the Agency widi the 
coming into force of NPT. The aim of nonproliferation 
had always had die strong support of 
the Secretary-General who had followed the international 
negotiations towards that end in the 
disarmament talks in New York, Geneva and elsewhere. 
It was gratifying diat the Agency had achieved 
an encouraging measure of success in adjusting its 
safeguards system to die provisions of NPT and 
that die Safeguards Committee (1970) had approved 
a set of principles to be used in negotiations between 
the Agency and States parties to the Treaty. Wide 

GC(XIV)/OR.135 

acceptance of the principles and practical guidelines 
of the safeguards agreements would lead to wider 
international acceptance of NPT itself. Implementation 
of the safeguards agreements meant in effect 
that the Agency had reached a point in its existence 
when it was about to shoulder new and historically 
important responsibilities. 

66. He expressed satisfaction at the co-operation 
between the United Nations and the Agency in connection 
with the preparation of a number of reports 
requested by the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General in the fields of applying nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes and of implementation of the 
results of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States. In that spirit of close co-operation and understanding 
he extended his best wishes to the 
General Conference for the success of its important 
deliberations. 

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XIV)/OR.136 
18 February 1971* 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1970, at 10.30 a.m. 

President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 

CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda** 
Paragraphs 
8 Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items for 
initial discussion 1— 3 
9 General debate and report of the Board of Governors 
for 1969—70 4—115 
Statements by the delegates of 
United States of AmericaSouth AfricaSpainCanadaAustraliaBulgaria 
5— 32 
33—57 
58—69 
70— 88 
89—103 
104—115 
* A provisional versiGC(XIV)/442. 
on of this document was issued on 28 September 1970. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 


GC(XIV)/OR.136 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND 
ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL 
DISCUSSIONS (GC(XIV)/441) 

1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the report 
by the General Committee in document GC(XIV)/ 
441 on its consideration of the provisional agenda 
for the sessionJ). 
2. In the absence of any comments, he proposed 
that the Conference approve the agenda as set forth 
in that document and also accept the Committee's 
recommendations regarding the allocation of items 
for initial discussion. 
3. It was so decided. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1969—70 
(GC(XIV)/430, 440) 

4. The PRESIDENT drew attention to a revised 
statement on the studies of financial contributions 
to the Agency (GC(XIV)/440), which was up to 
date as of 22 September 1970 and accordingly superseded 
that contained in Annex E to the Board's 
report (GC(XIV)/430). He then invited delegates 
to participate in the general debate. 
5. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) 
paid tribute to Mr. Henry D. Smyth on his retirement 
after nine years of distinguished service to the 
Agency as United States representative and member 
of the Board of Governors, and noted that he had 
been succeeded by another outstanding nuclear 
pioneer, educator and science administrator, 
Mr. T. Keith Glennan. 
6. He wished to read the following message to 
the Conference from the President of the United 
States: 
"It is my pleasure to send cordial greetings 
to the delegates to the Fourteenth General Conference 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 


"With the coming into force of the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, the Agency has had placed on 
it the most important responsibilities it has ever 
held and also the greatest opportunities for advancing 
the interests of its Member States in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. The United States 
will wholeheartedly support the Agency's efforts to 
meet these responsibilities and to fulfil these 
opportunities. 


"The common understandings and contacts 
that the Agency has fostered over the years contribute 
to the emerging pattern, be it in the field 


1) GC(XIV)/429. 

—

of arms control or of foreign policy generally, which 
allows us to enter into the present decade as an 
era of negotiation. 

"Thus, the Agency has an important place in 
our international life, and your deliberations at the 
General Conference will further shape and determine 
the Agency's future." 

7. The General Conference was meeting for the 
first time since the coming into force of the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT)2). One of the Treaty's most significant contributions 
would be its effect on promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. By increasing the 
confidence of each contracting Party that the nuclear 
programmes of other signatories were truly peaceful, 
the Treaty would greatly facilitate the expansion of 
nuclear power applications to meet the world's rapidly 
growing needs for electric power. 
8. The industrial and technological advances being 
made were creating increasing demands for cheap 
electric power. In the United States the total electrical 
generating capacity estimated for 1980 was 
about 300 000 MW. A realistic estimate of the projected 
growth of American electrical generating capacity 
by the year 2000 was about 2 100 000 MW, 
which would require adding the equivalent to a total 
of 18 000 power plants of 1000-MW capacity each. 
Extrapolating that estimate to a global scale, it could 
be calculated that some 5000 new electric generating 
plants of 1000-MW capacity each would be needed 
over the next 30 years. While there was no doubt 
that a large fraction of future energy requirements 
would continue to be furnished by fossil fuels, their 
rate of depletion was rapid and in time die world 
would have to depend largely on the atom as its 
source of energy. 
9. During the past year he had made two extensive 
trips, which included visits to many of the 
Agency's Member States in Africa and Asia. In 
every country visited, the presence of the Agency 
was evident and, once again, showed the importance 
of its technical assistance activities, which, while 
comparatively modest, had been making, and continued 
to make, important contributions in each of 
those countries. 
10. One of the commonest complaints voiced by 
African scientists was that many of them felt somewhat 
cut off from their colleagues in the main stream 
of scientific activities. Owing to a lack of funds, 
they were unable to travel abroad, participate in 
international scientific meetings and to keep in touch 
with current trends and developments. The Agency 
had already taken some steps to deal with that 
problem by providing travel allowances for scientists 
from developing countries to attend scientific meet2) 
Reproduced in INFCIRC/140. 

2



ings organized by it. At the same time, however, 
the Agency should give more attention to convening 
scientific meetings from time to time in the African 
countries on subjects of interest both to African 
scientists as well as to scientists in other parts of 
the world. For example, there had never been an 
Agency symposium or conference in Africa, and it 
was to be hoped that that imbalance would be 
corrected. 

11. Among other countries visited were Japan, 
Korea, China, the Philippines, Singapore, Indonesia, 
Thailand and Iran. Japan was rapidly becoming a 
world leader in the use of nuclear power and its 
first light-water power station, plus two additional 
reactors of that type, were scheduled to begin 
commercial operations in October 1970. 
12. The present year had also seen the dedication 
of the first full-time nuclear power plant in a developing 
nation: the 400 000-kW station at Tarapur in 
India. That outstanding project was not only providing 
much-needed electric power to India on an 
economical basis, but had demonstrated the practical 
advantage of nuclear power for the developing 
nations. 
13. Korea had decided in 1969 to set up its first 
nuclear power plant. The Korean Atomic Energy 
Research Institute had carried out a great deal of 
interesting work on the development of irradiated 
wood-plastic products with the collaboration of the 
United States. 
14. China had placed orders for two 600-MW 
light-water power reactors to meet its rapidly increasing 
power requirements, which were growing at 
a rate of more than 15% per year. 
15. His visits to Asian countries had shown convincingly 
that regional projects were of great importance 
in making the best use of limited resources, 
and that the Agency could be instrumental in furthering 
co-operation among scientists from neighbouring 
countries in undertaking such projects. Scientists 
from a number of Member States in South Asia 
and the Far East had frequently expressed a desire 
for such co-operation. It was primarily the series 
of study group meetings on reactor utilization and 
similar subjects held in the region that had been 
most directly responsible for stimulating such interest. 
16. The NPT was important as a step towards 
eliminating the risk that the availability of nuclear 
weapons might be increased in the course of developing 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The progress 
achieved by the Safeguards Committee (1970) in 
formulating principles of the safeguards agreements 
which Parties to the Treaty were to negotiate with 
the Agency was very gratifying. His Government 
attached great importance to two key principles 
GC(XIV)/OR.136 

which the Committee agreed should be incorporated 
in safeguards agreements. Those were, first, the 
principle of independent verification by the Agency, 
and second, the principle that the Agency should 
make full use of national systems of control in 
carrying out safeguards. 

17. On the basis of United States experience, 
those principles would not interfere with the economic 
operation of plants or the security of proprietary 
information. At the same time, it was strongly advisable 
that the continuing evolution of the IAEA 
safeguards system should take full advantage of all 
technical advances permitting improved efficiency 
of safeguards. 
18. The financing of safeguards was to be discussed 
in the Safeguards Committee meetings to be 
held in October 1970. The United States attached 
great importance to the principle embodied in the 
present system of financing Agency safeguards costs 
under the Agency's Regular Budget, in view of the 
world-wide benefits which resulted from the safeguards 
system. Nonetheless, it recognized that there 
was room for differences of opinion as to the relative 
weight to be given to various factors to be used to 
determine the degree of participation of each of the 
Agency's Members in meeting those costs, and the 
United States would play an active and constructive 
role in the discussions on that matter. 
19. With regard to the proposed programme for 
1971-76 and the Budget for 19713; , including the 
safeguards appropriations, the United States felt that 
they merited the support of all Member States. 
20. With regard to technical assistance, the past 
year had witnessed impressive growth in the Agency's 
ability to assist Member States. The amount pledged 
in support of the Operational Budget for 1970 was 
about 10% higher than that for 1969, and the target 
for 1971 had been increased by 25% over that for 
1970, i.e. to $2.5 million. The voluntary contributions 
made by the United States in cash and in kind 
to the Operational Budget for 1970, totalling 
$1 400 000, were 40% higher than the amount contributed 
in 1969- It was expected that the pledge 
for 1971 would be at least an equivalent amount, 
subject to appropriations by the Congress of the 
United States. 
21. For the twelfth consecutive year the United 
States had pledged to donate up to $50 000 worth 
of special nuclear material for use in Agency projects 
in research and in medical therapy, and would also 
continue to make available, on a cost-free basis, 
the services of experts, training opportunities in 
American institutions, and items of equipment, as 
far as was possible. 
3) GC(XIV)/433. 


GC(XIV)/OR.136 

22. The Agency had reason to be proud of its 
fellowship programme, as well as its continuing 
support for the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste, both of which had made important 
contributions in stemming the "brain-drain" 
from developing countries. During the period 19581967 
about 95% of the persons awarded Agency 
fellowships had returned to their own countries 
upon completion of their training, and less than 4% 
of diose were employed in fields not directly related 
to their studies. The Centre had also been successful 
in stimulating useful scientific contacts between East 
and West, as well as good relations between scientists 
from advanced and developing countries. 
23. His Government was gratified by the continuing 
activities and progress being made in the field of 
peaceful nuclear explosions. The Agency had 
responded positively and promptly in expanding the 
exchange and dissemination of information in that 
field, through scientific and technical meetings, and 
through the publication of a comprehensive bibliography, 
and inclusion of the subject in the initial 
phase of its International Nuclear Information System 
(INIS). 
24. The Agency was also to be commended for its 
studies concerning its prospective function under 
Article V of NPT. The United Nations General 
Assembly had recommended that the Agency undertake 
to study ways of observing peaceful nuclear 
explosions on an international scale when they were 
carried out. The Director General was planning to 
convene a panel of experts to study that complex 
matter. The United States was ready to provide 
advice and assistance as necessary. The Agency 
should be encouraged to continue its efforts in that 
field, particularly with respect to detailed procedures 
that might be developed for facilitating arrangements 
for peaceful nuclear explosions, at such time as they 
became technically and economically feasible. The 
Agency was the most appropriate organization to 
foster international co-operation in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear explosions, and to assume 
the functions and responsibilities anticipated for an 
international organization under Article V of NPT. 
25. The Agency's increased interest and efforts in 
the environmental field were also timely and important. 
The Symposium on Environmental Aspects 
of Nuclear Power Stations, held in August 1970, 
had been a significant step forward in sharing up-todate 
information and experience in that area and, 
hopefully, in bringing about a greater degree of 
public understanding of the contribution that nuclear 
power made to a healthier environment. The Agency 
could make another important contribution by serving 
as a central repository for data on the amounts and 
concentrations of radioactivity released in connection 
with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy; that could 
eventually lead to an international network of monitoring 
stations, operated under Agency auspices. In 
that connection, the Agency's recent booklet on 
Nuclear Energy and die Environment, which set forth 
very clearly the relationship of nuclear energy to the 
environment and listed die many active programmes 
in the field that the Agency had been engaged in 
since its inception was commendable. 

26. The United States was glad to note that INIS 
had begun operating on a limited basis. Embarking 
on a pioneering venture of that kind was often 
fraught with difficulties. There was every reason 
to believe, however, that INIS would turn out to 
be one of the wisest investments made by the Agency 
to meet its responsibilities for the exchange and 
dissemination of scientific and technical information 
in the field of nuclear energy. 
27. Another important Agency effort that deserved 
special mention was the programme aimed at improving 
the protein content of food crops through 
the use of nuclear techniques. The United States 
had agreed to assist that effort by providing the 
Agency's Seibersdorf Laboratory widi an amino acid 
analyser for its work in that promising field, and 
the Federal Republic of Germany had indicated its 
readiness to contribute over diree-quarters of a million 
dollars to support the programme. The success of 
that programme could have a profound impact on 
the future of all mankind in view of the continuing 
struggle to feed die world's expanding population. 
28. Another project relating to die adequate supply 
of food in future years was the new International 
Food Irradiation Project, sponsored jointly by the 
European Nuclear Energy Agency, FAO and the 
Agency, which was expected to get under way during 
die coming year. Some 12 countries, including the 
United States, were expected to contribute to the 
project which would put major stress on testing 
irradiated foods for wholesomeness so as to facilitate 
the clearance of those products for human consumption. 
That undertaking illustrated once again the 
value of international co-operation in attaining objectives 
of importance to the entire world community. 
29. A number of American scientists had reported 
on the outstanding work being done at the Agency's 
Seibersdorf Laboratory in connection widi die insect 
pest eradication programme. Given increasing public 
concern over the use of pesticides and dieir effects 
on the environment, it was likely that more attention 
would be devoted in the future to the use of the 
sterile-male technique for pest control. The Agency 
had assumed an increasingly important role in developing 
the technique for a number of insect pests, 
and should be encouraged to continue its efforts. 
30. In conclusion he wished to refer to an important 
issue before the General Conference, namely, 
die composition of the Board of Governors. 

31. In 1968, the General Conference had requested 
the Board to review its composition so that it would 
more adequately reflect, first, the progress in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy achieved by many 
Member States of the Agency; second, an equitable 
geographic distribution of seats; and third, the continuing 
need to ensure the Board's effectiveness as 
the executive body of the Agency4). Since the adoption 
of that resolution, the conclusion and entry 
into force of NPT made the reconstitution of the 
Board of Governors even more important. There 
was a close relationship between wide-spread adherence 
to NPT and enlargement of the Board of 
Governors. Five separate proposals for amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute were to be considered 
by the Conference5^. The United States Government, 
along with 20 other Member States, had co-sponsored 
one of the proposals in the belief that it most fully 
met the criteria laid down by the 1968 General 
Conference. That proposal had achieved by far the 
widest support among the Member States which had 
thus far expressed their views. It was to be hoped 
that the necessary two-thirds support for the proposal 
would be forthcoming so that the Member 
States could have before them a concrete proposal 
for action at an appropriate time. 
32. The coming year would be another milestone 
in the international development of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, i.e. the fourth in a series 
of major conferences on the peaceful uses of the 
atom to be held at Geneva. Glancing into the 
future, he believed that the tone of that important 
conference would be one of optimism and satisfaction 
at what had been accomplished in a short space of 
time. The world would see broad adherence to 
NPT, including its adoption by a number of the 
most important industrial nations, and the beginning 
of the application of Agency safeguards under the 
terms of the Treaty. Secondly, there would be a 
new surge in the use of nuclear power as countries 
began to understand the urgent need for electricity, 
and to realize that, in many circumstances, that 
need could be met most economically by nuclear 
power. Thirdly, there would be greater understanding 
that the Agency was the principal international forum 
for the promotion and effective control of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and that, as such, 
it was one of the most important and effective 
members of the family of international organizations. 
33. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) recalled that a 
year previously he had made a plea for adequate 
deliberation before decisions and had stressed the 
theme of "festina lente"6). In his view that counsel 
had governed the activities of the Agency during the 
year — perhaps to too great an extent in some 
4) GC(XII)/RES/241. 
5) See document GC(XIV)/437. 
6) See document GC(XIII)/OR. 128, paras 24—46. 


GC(XIV)/OR.136 

respects — and there had fortunately been no 
tendency for the Agency to be stampeded by the 
pressure of events or political motivation. That 
was in keeping with the fact that in the short span 
of fourteen years the organization had come to be 
recognized as one of the leading international agencies 
and one of the most efficient. None of the many 
problems had proved unamenable to solutions which 
were acceptable to all, a fact that was largely attributable 
to the scientific character of the Agency and 
to the belief of the majority that it was not a 
political forum, but rather a scientific workshop 
dedicated to the promotion of peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. 

34. There were at least two outstanding matters 
which might stretch and test to the utmost the 
Agency's ability to maintain its cool, detached scientific 
approach, namely the coming into force of NPT 
and the amendment of Article VI of the Statute. 
35- Both were matters of vital importance to the 
Agency, both had aspects wide open to political 
intrusion, and it was imperative that all but the most 
relevant technical considerations be eschewed by 
identifying and eliminating underlying extraneous 
motives. 

36. As to NPT, while no-one present would do 
other than subscribe whole-heartedly to its ultimate 
objective, many of the non-nuclear-weapon Member 
States were understandably relectant to surrender, 
almost irrevocably, long-held sovereign rights without 
having precise details of all the implications, expecially 
in respect of safeguards obligations. 
37. It was therefore a matter of considerable satisfaction 
to South Africa that a Safeguards Committee 
had been set up to advise the Board on safeguards 
issues arising out of the Agency's responsibilities 
under NPT and to provide all Member States with 
an opportunity to ventilate their ideas, their hopes, 
their doubts and their difficulties with respect to 
the operation of various facets of the safeguards 
system. It was quite apparent that the fears which 
had led the Soviet Union and the United States for 
so long to oppose the setting-up of that Committee 
had been based on misconceptions regarding the 
attitude of the non-nuclear States most directly interested 
in the problems at issue. The Safeguards 
Committee (1970) had so far worked usefully and 
constructively, although its time-table would have 
been less cramped had it started work not in June 
1970, but 18 months ago, as South Africa and 
others had recommended. 
38. In the South African view the Safeguards 
Committee would have a continuing task. As more 
States became directly affected by the operation of 
the Agency's inspection system, so there would be 
a steady increase in the number of Member Govern

GC(XIV)/OR.136 

merits desiring to participate in the further evolution 
of the safeguards system. Such interest should be 
encouraged because if die Agency's safeguards system 
were to be successful, a climate of mutual cooperation 
and confidence was required. 

39. His delegation was therefore disturbed by the 
tendency in certain quarters to devote scant attention 
to constructive proposals by non-nuclear States. A 
prime example was the question of the starting point 
of safeguards, the two main contentions centring 
on the conversion plant and on the presence of 
special fissionable material. To reconcile those views 
and many other points of variance would require 
patience, wisdom and true co-operation. 
40. As the financial implications of safeguards 
would be examined in depth by the Safeguards 
Committee in October 1970, he would content himself 
by reiterating that the identifiable costs of safeguards 
should be regarded as "recoverable under agreements 
regarding the application of safeguards between the 
Agency and parties to bilateral or multilateral arrangements" 
in terms of Article XIV.C of the Statute. 
41. In connection with the review of Article VI 
of the Statute, he had emphasized at the previous 
General Conference the complexity of the issues 
involved and had stressed the importance of reaching 
a conclusion that would be sure of obtaining not 
only the votes, but also the ratifications of the overwhelming 
majority of Member States. It was a matter 
of considerable regret to South Africa that no consensus 
had been reached that was sufficiently wide 
or general to permit specific recommendations to 
be submitted to the General Conference by the 
Board of Governors. Although South Africa had a 
preference amongst the five formal proposals before 
the Conference, it had refrained from committing 
itself to the support of any one of them because if 
believed that it was fundamentally important to the 
continuing success of the Agency that on so delicate 
apolitical issue there should be a genuine consensus. 
Otherwise there was a very real danger that what 
was, and should be, essentially a scientific Agency 
might become too political a forum, where scientists 
would be progressively frustrated by the time and 
energy expended on rancorous political disputation. 
South Africa favoured a modest increase in membership 
of the Board to take account of the changes 
since South Africa had introduced the previous amendment 
of the Statute, but without undermining the 
basic pattern and political balance as evolved by the 
original framers of the Statute in Washington. South 
Africa believed that there was a general consensus 
on that particular aspect of the problem, but 
recognized that there were differences of opinion as 
to how a consensus in principle was to be implemented 
in detail. 
42. It would therefore be wise to make a further 
effort to achieve a general consensus and if such a 
prospect should emerge during the present Conference, 
South Africa would support a proposal to 
defer consideration of the proposed amendments 
until the fifteenth General Conference in the hope 
that during the intervening period a formula would 
be devised more likely to obtain the ratifications of 
two-thirds of the membership of the Agency. If, 
however, the Conference decided to press the matter 
to a vote now, South Africa would record its preference 
accordingly. 
43. The two major issues referred to had largely 
overshadowed and obscured the main work of the 
Agency over the past year, that of promoting the 
advancement of peaceful nuclear techniques throughout 
the world. That task was constantly hampered 
by the insufficiency of funds and it was to be hoped 
that the increased target for the General Fund would 
achieve a mesure of alleviation. South Africa had 
taken the lead in the Board of Governors in proposing 
an increase in that target from $2 million to 
$2.5 million. South Africa regarded the increase as 
fair and equitable to all concerned and had suggested 
it even before the Director General himself had proposed 
an increase in the target. His country would 
base its contribution to the General Fund on the 
increased target and would again appeal to all 
Member States to contribute to the General Fund 
strictly on the basis of their percentage contribution 
to the Regular Budget. His delegation had noted 
widi satisfaction the declaration by one of the major 
Member States of its intention to make a substantially 
larger contribution to the General Fund which 
would then be in line with that of the assessed ratio. 
44. Apart from the direct voluntary contribution 
to the Agency's funds, South Africa was also 
maintaining its indirect support by continuing its 
policy of seeking to provide bilateral aid for those 
projects in the nuclear field on which countries in 
its area might wish to embark, but for which the 
Agency had insufficient funds. In such cases the 
donor, as well as the recipient, benefited to a remarkable 
degree — largely from the cross-fertilization 
of ideas and also, of course, from greater mutual 
understanding. 
45. His delegation had on more than one occasion 
expressed its appreciation of the procedure introduced 
some two years ago, whereby details of the progress 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy in Member 
States during the preceding year were circulated in 
printed form to Conference delegates. It was not 
his wish to repeat the printed work to any extent, 
but there was one part of the South African document 
7) to which he wished to refer briefly. 
7) See document GC(XIV)/INF/124. 


GC(XIV)/OR.136 

46. The relevant portion concerned the announcement 
that scientists of the South African Atomic 
Energy Board had developed a new process for the 
enrichment of uranium. There was not much that 
he could add to what the Prime Minister of South 
Africa, Mr. B.J. Vorster, had already said other than 
to provide further elucidation of a few aspects. 
47. In the early 1960s it had become clear that 
enriched uranium power reactors offered undoubted 
advantages over those based on natural uranium and 
that in consequence the demand of the world's 
nuclear power programme would be mainly for uranium 
in the enriched form. South Africa, as a large 
uranium producer, thus had a strongly motivated 
interest in producing its own enriched uranium. 
48. How to achieve such self-sufficiency had been 
another matter. The development of gaseous diffusion 
technology and the construction of an economic 
plant had been, for all practical purposes, beyond 
the capacity of South Africa. To embark independently 
on her own research and development on either 
of the other two processes in the hope of establishing 
a more attractive process than other developed 
countries working in that field had appeared to be 
senseless duplication. The only reasonable approach 
had therefore appeared to be to try to find a new 
route. Such a route had eventually been devised — 
new at least, in so far as South Africa was aware — 
and pursued in the years that followed by intensive 
research and development. 
49. In the previous year the stage had been 
reached where laboratory-scale work had advanced far 
enough to warrant the construction of a pilot plant. 
Everything possible had been done to bring it into 
operation as rapidly as possible. The most important 
purpose which the pilot plant would serve would be 
the reliable determination of design and cost parameters 
for a full-scale plant. Naturally, the ultimate 
objective was the construction of an economical 
full-scale plant or plants. 
50. Careful estimates based on the present state 
of development had indicated that a full-scale plant 
could be constructed that would be competitive with 
existing plants in the western world. More important 
still, the process and its application offered a wide 
potential for further development which, if it could 
be successfully exploited, ought to lead to a uranium 
enrichment route having a decided advantage over 
known existing routes. Research and development 
work was being pursued with unremitting zeal. 
51. In view of the great promise inherent in the 
process his Government had decided in the interests 
of the world not to restrict the exploitation of the 
process to South Africa, and had declared itself 
prepared to share the knowledge and technology 
with other countries, subject to conditions which the 
South African Prime Minister had broadly outlined. 
52. Another important aspect of the announcement 
had been the re-affirmation by his Government of 
the peaceful objectives of its nuclear energy programme 
as a whole. Over many years his country 
had demonstrated by its active participation in the 
activities of the Agency — and especially those 
relating to the acceptance and implementation of an 
effective but realistic safeguards system — that it 
was in earnest in contributing to the prevention of 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The exploitation 
of its enrichment process purely for peaceful 
purposes would be an express condition in the 
conclusion of any co-operative agreement with another 
country. 
53. In considering those affairs of the world at 
present in the forefront of public interest and 
concern, few people present would omit that of 
environmental pollution. Man's reaction to the warnings 
of ecologists and environmental scientists had 
been of a somewhat non-analytical character and it 
was perturbing that nuclear energy should be regarded 
with suspicion as one of the pollutors of the 
environment. Now was the time for the Agency 
and indeed everyone concerned to ensure that a 
true picture of the peaceful potentialities of the atom 
was presented realistically and in true perspective 
to those entrusted with the responsibility of protecting 
the environment, so that the role of nuclear 
technology in ensuring a clearer atmosphere could 
be properly appreciated. Every opportunity should 
be seized to stress the stringent precautions which 
had been applied throughout the history of peaceful 
nuclear applications to prevent any deleterious environmental 
effects. The Agency's brochure on 
Nuclear Energy and the Environment was a very 
useful beginning. 
54. One particularly pertinent aspect was that of 
the disposal of radioactive waste into the sea. His 
delegation had noted with approval the activities of 
the Monaco Laboratory in the accumulation and 
evaluation of scientific data, standardization and the 
co-ordination of research investigations. Such preparatory 
work was essential for the ultimate aim 
which, he hoped, was that of drafting international 
standards for the control of discharge of radioactive 
wastes into the sea. In the meantime it behoved 
the Agency to encourage and promote research, 
especially in those ocean regions where available 
information was perhaps scanty. There had been a 
somewhat disturbing tendency to neglect the potential 
contribution in that field by Member States well 
equipped to garner and supply oceanographic information. 
55. The time had come to criticize (constructively 
if possible), to guide and to aid the Agency in its 
mammoth task of organizing the scientific aspects 
of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. The deadline for 

GC(XIV)/OR.136 

the submission of abstracts of papers to be presented 
was near. He wished to point out that the proposed 
greater use of review papers was not without its 
dangers. A review article by its very nature must 
eschew detail to a large extent, yet the majority of 
delegation members attending the Conference — 
particularly those attending as advisers and ob-
servers — would be there in search of detailed knowledge. 
Possibly one of the main functions of such 
gigantic meetings was the advancement and progress 
resulting from the interchange of ideas, sparked off 
in turn by the release of know-how and other information 
painstakingly acquired in the laboratory. 
The very laudable enlightening of the less "nuclearly" 
oriented planners, economists and public officials 
should not be accomplished at the expense of the 
scientists, the engineers and their fellow technologists. 

56. South Africa, by comparison with other 
advanced countries, was extremely limited in terms 
of scientific manpower. Nevertheless, like every other 
nation, it had its talented sons and daughters, and 
by judicious selection it had built up in the nuclear 
field a team which had been responsible for a 
number of modest achievements. The Agency had 
followed the same precepts and over the years had 
built up a team which each year was faced with 
greater and greater responsibilities. Most of the 
scientists were of necessity birds of passage who 
made their contribution to the world picture of 
nuclear energy before returning to their home 
countries. There was also, however, a solid firm 
foundation provided by the Agency's permanent staff 
of Professional and General Service members. Without 
them and dieir efficient services normal operation 
and progress would be impossible. His delegation 
therefore paid tribute to those members of the 
Secretariat. 
57. He urged that the Agency continue its deliberate 
and responsible progress, that it cherish its 
scientific character and that it uphold its vital charter 
by nurturing and applying all its resources. In that 
way only could it discharge its duty — that of bringing 
to the whole of mankind the progress, health 
and welfare of the peaceful applications of atomic 
energy. 
58. Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) said that 
the Spanish Nuclear Energy Board had continued to 
make progress in the main spheres of nuclear activity, 
including the fuel cycle, nuclear reactors, desalting 
of sea water, isotopes and basic research. It 
had also given advice to private undertakings and to 
the Government on matters relating to process control, 
contamination and nuclear safety. A great effort 
had been devoted to aerial prospecting, which by 
the end of 1969 had covered 29 000 km2. That 
work had yielded a considerably greater geological 
knowledge of extensive tracts of country, revealing 
potential uranium deposits in some and leading to 
more intensive working of ore in others. As a result 
of research and development work, the capacity of 
heap-leaching plant had now reached 36000 tons 
per year, excluding the new concentrate plant intended 
for the area of Ciudad Rodrigo. The Andujar 
uranium plant was continuing to produce concentrates 
at its rated output of 60 tons of U3O8 
per year. 

5 9. Experimental work on the production of nuclear 
materials, including fuels, was also continuing. The 
M-l reprocessing plant would treat fuel from the 
Swiss Saphir reactor under a sub-contract with Eurochemic. 
The CIES radioactive waste processing plant 
had already asphalt-treated 81 027 litres of low-level 
and 24454 litres of intermediate-level wastes and 
had cement-treated 30 712 litres of intermediateactivity 
materials. 
60. The improvement of the facilities and services 
at the JEN-1 and JEN-2 reactors was continuing. 
A number of specialized experiments had been carried 
out in die CORAL-1 fast reactor. 
61. Interesting experiments were going ahead in 
connection with the desalting of see water and it 
was intended to employ a computer to process the 
data obtained. 
62. The number of isotope users had shown a 
furdier increase, amounting to 624 at the end of 
1969. By that time 317 establishments using radiations 
had been licensed to operate. The most important 
new development in diat field was the 
CESAR facility, acquired by a private undertaking 
widi governmental authorization, for radiosterilization 
of surgical materials. Authorization had also been 
given for the commercial irradiation of potatoes. 
The production of isotopes and labelled compounds 
was continuing. 
63. As he had said on other occasions, nuclear 
power had reached, in Spain, a position of direct 
comptetitiveness with other sources of power — 
particularly witfi stations which used Spanish fuel. 
The first Spanish nuclear power station, of 15 3 MW 
capacity, had started up at the end of 1968 and 
had already generated 1500 million kWh. The second 
nuclear power station, of 460 MW capacity, would 
go onto full power in 1971 at a location in the 
nordi of Spain and the third station, producing 
480 MW, would start up by the end of 1972 in the 
province of Tarragona. During the present year 
tenders would be received for the construction of 
two stations, each made up of two 800-MW units, 
and situated on the northern coast of the country 
near Bilbao and in Extremadura. Negotiations were 
in progress for the licensing of a further station, 
likewise comprising two 800-MW units, to be erected 
on the banks of the River Ebro in the province of 
Tarragona. The Nuclear Energy Board was providing 
substantial technical assistance for all those projects. 
— 8

64. The Institute of Nuclear Studies had stepped 
up its activities considerably during the past year. 
The promotion of fundamental research had been 
extended to most of the universities and research 
centres. Particular mention should be made of investigations 
in theoretical physics, molecular biology 
and the solid state. The courses organized by the 
Institute had been of an essentially practical charactet 
and the personnel trained in them had been placed 
immediately in industrial undertakings. 
65. Further fellowships had been awarded for research, 
and the average number of projects in that 
category had risen to about 70 during the past 
year. The work of the Institute at the international 
level had been equally important: it had sponsored 
and directed the research activities of fellows from 
abroad sent by the IAEA and by countries which 
had bilateral co-operation agreements with Spain. 
66. With regard to Spain's international relations 
in the nuclear field, mention should be made of 
the signature in July 1970 of a bilateral nuclear 
co-operation agreement with the Government of 
Portugal and the signature of another agreement, 
in January 1970, between the Spanish Nuclear Energy 
Board and the Atomic Energy Commission of the 
United Arab Republic. 
67. Spain possessed a number of important nuclear 
installations which it had voluntarily submitted to 
the Agency's safeguards. It had also been strongly 
in favour of the establishment of a permanent committee, 
directly under the Board of Governors, for 
the purpose of scrutinizing the safeguards system and 
its application, so that as time went on all available 
technological improvements which might yield greater 
efficiency could be introduced. A permenent 
committee of the type advocated by Spain through 
its representative on the Board of Governors had 
not been set up, but his Government considered 
that the establishment of the Safeguards Committee 
(1970), which concerned itself specifically with safeguards 
under NPT, constituted a definite advance. 
68. The Spanish delegation noted with satisfaction 
from the Annual Report of the Board of Governors 
that the number of research contracts on safeguards 
had increased8); one of those contracts related to a 
Spanish power station. It was to be hoped that 
such activities would continue to expand and that 
their results would lead to a simplification of safeguards 
techniques, something which was not only 
of technical interest, but which would also help to 
dispel the anxieties of many countries that the application 
of the safeguards system would prove too 
burdensome. Otherwise, any excessive cost of such 
services would prejudice other important activities 
of the Agency, such as technical assistance. 
8) See document GC(XIV)/430, para.115. 

GC(XIV)/OR.136 

69. The Spanish delegation wished to thank the 
Director General for having engaged a Spanish 
scientist as a Director in the Department of Safeguards 
and Inspection, an appointment which marked 
a first step towards increased participation by Spanish 
professional staff in the work of the Secretariat. 
70. Mr. BERLIS (Canada) said that the Conference 
was one of particular importance in the Agency's 
history because of the challenge the Agency had 
now to face in meeting the safeguards responsibilities 
devolving on it with the entry into force of NPT, 
while at the same time assuring continuity in its 
traditional promotional and technical assistance 
activities. 
71. Canada's strong support for the Agency partly 
lay in the interest and relevance of the Agency's 
activities in the promotion of nuclear science and 
technology, nuclear power production and uranium 
exploration and production for its own nuclear energy 
programme. The close co-operation Canada enjoyed 
with such developing countries as India and Pakistan 
had also enhanced its awareness of the valuable 
assistance the Agency was furnishing to the developing 
countries. 
72. Canada, as an important supplier of uranium, 
fully supported the Agency's efforts in organizing 
symposia and collecting information on uranium 
resources and exploration. Although uranium was 
currently in over-supply on the world market, projections 
of world requirements up to 1980 would 
predicate a three-fold increase in present production 
and Canada, with only 20 per cent of its known 
low-cost reserves committed and its significant additional 
potential, would be in a good position to 
share in the growing world market. The tempo 
of uranium exploration in Canada had therefore remained 
high in 1969; moreover, its uranium production 
capability had been significantly enhanced 
by the recent completion of the uranium hexafluoride 
plant at the uranium refinery in Port Hope, Ontario. 
73. During the past year, Atomic Energy of Canada 
Limited had continued to make important progress 
in all its areas of responsibility. The prototype 
nuclear power station at Douglas Point, Ontario, 
had had a successful year; since 1 March 1970, 
the date of the first on-power refuelling, some 1000 
fuel bundles had been replaced during the reactor 
operation. The 250-MW Gentilly nuclear power 
station in the Province of Quebec was nearing completion 
and was scheduled to go into operation in 
1971. The first two units of Ontario Hydro's fourunit 
MW Pickering generating station, Canada's first 
full-scale nuclear power installation, were also nearing 
completion; they were expected to go critical in 
1971. Significant progress had also been made on 
the Bruce nuclear project, which would include a 
3000-MW nuclear power generation station, an 800-
9



GC(XIV)/OR.136 

ton-a-year heavy-water production plant and the existing 
Douglas Point nuclear power station; when completed 
it would be one of the world's largest nuclear 
power plants. 

74. With regard to Canadian-designed nuclear 
power stations abroad, the installation for the first 
unit in Rajasthan, India, was virtually complete, and 
the comprehensive programme for the training of 
Indian staff in Canada, carried out over the past 
six years under the auspices of the Canadian International 
Development Agency, had also been completed. 
In Pakistan, the 137-MW KANUPP project 
was scheduled to go critical within the next few 
months, and again many Pakistan personnel had 
received training in Canada. An agreement had been 
concluded in 1969 for Atomic Energy of Canada 
Limited to supply a nuclear research reactor to the 
Atomic Energy Council in Taiwan, and construction 
of that project was now under way. 
75. Research and development programmes at 
Chalk River and Whiteshell nuclear research establishments 
were continuing, both on potential improvements 
of the present line of nuclear power 
stations and also on possible new future systems. 
At the same time, much research and development 
work on other applications of nuclear energy was 
going on in the universities and elsewhere. 
76. His Government believed that the entry into 
force of NPT signified a major development in the 
quest for arms control. It was now incumbent on 
the States possessing nuclear weapons to seek agreement 
as quickly as possible on the limiting of the 
nuclear arms race in order to create the necessary 
atmosphere for nuclear disarmament. Success in 
the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) would 
follow logically from the 1963 Partial Nuclear Test 
Ban Treaty, the Treaty establishing a nuclear-free 
zone in Latin America, the 1967 Treaty banning 
the test of nuclear explosive devices in outer space, 
and lastly NPT. In order to maintain the momentum 
gained and produce the impetus for negotiations 
on nuclear disarmament, the few remaining States 
which had not as yet signed NPT should do so 
without delay. 
77. It was gratifying that the Safeguards Committee 
(1970) had been able to agree on the principles 
and the structure of die safeguards agreements envisaged 
under NPT. The completion of Part I of 
the Committee's report to the Board of Governors 9) 
would allow the Agency to commence negotiations 
in accordance with Article III.4 of the Treaty; 
Canada was already in touch with the Director 
General with a view to meeting the requirements 
of that Article. The Safeguards Committee, he was 
confident, would be able to agree without delay 
9) GOV/1420. 

on the technical provisions required to implement 
the principles laid down. The Committee's work 
had been greatly helped by the experience available 
in the Agency's Secretariat on the application of 
safeguards over the years. 

78. The cost of implementing safeguards under 
NPT should be regarded as an investment offering 
a possible high return in benefit to international 
security. Canada was therefore prepared to support 
budgetary measures which would enable the Agency 
fully to carry out its responsibilities in the matter. 
And since the effective application of safeguards under 
the Treaty would furnish all the Members with an 
additional measure of security, it was appropriate 
that financing of the cost should be met by all the 
Members under the Regular Budget. The alternative 
of financing largely by the non-nuclear-weapon States 
directly concerned would place an additional financial 
burden on any developing country wishing to launch 
a peaceful nuclear programme under NPT safeguards. 
At the same time, the larger share of the Agency's 
increased resources to be devoted to safeguarding 
activities should not be obtained at the expense of 
its other important work. 
79. As a contribution towards the development of 
effective safeguards measures, Canada was participating 
in a joint programme with the United States of 
America to develop and evaluate tamper-resistant 
unattended safeguards techniques for on-power fuelled 
reactors (TRUST). The programme was centred 
on the testing of safeguards surveillance instrumentation 
and techniques at the nuclear power demonstration 
reactor at Rolphton, Ontario. The installation 
of equipment was under way and integrated tests 
were planned to begin in the autumn of 1970. The 
Director General was being kept informed of the 
results obtained through periodic progress reports. 
80. Canada supported the Agency's budget for 
1971 and programme for 1971-76. The Director 
General's review of manpower utilization and 
deployment in the Secretariat had been noted and 
Canada strongly supported continued efforts to ensure 
the most efficient use of both manpower and funds. 
81. The Agency's technical assistance work, including 
activities under the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP), was being carried out with 
competence. In addition to supporting UNDP, 
Canada had regularly contributed to the Agency's 
voluntary fund in accordance with its assessed target 
amount. Although it would prefer to see additional 
funds for technical assistance channelled through 
UNDP, Canada fully understood the problems facing 
the Agency in meeting urgent requests from its 
newer Members. It therefore supported the proposed 
increase in the target of the voluntary fund from 
$2 million to $2.5 million and was prepared to 
increase its contribution accordingly. It was to be 
hoped all Members would support the new target. 
-10



82. The financing of nuclear power programmes 
was a matter of particular relevance for the developing 
countries. The Canadian Government had established 
programmes providing either direct financing 
for the purchaser of capital goods or Government 
guarantees to private banks, where the private sector 
was involved in the financing. That policy had important 
implications for developing countries considering 
nuclear power development projects. The 
Canadian Development Corporation might provide 
loans or guarantees in respect of financing 
of Canadian exports including, in appropriate circumstances, 
nuclear power plants. 
83. The revision of Article VI of the Statute concerning 
membership of the Board of Governors was 
an important issue before the Conference. Five 
proposals for revision had been submitted for its 
consideration. As the matter was one that had been 
exhaustively discussed in the Board of Governors 
over the past two years, his Government hoped that 
the Conference would be able to reach a decision 
on die plan best meeting the criteria for amendment 
set out in Resolution 241 of the Twelfth General 
Conference and, with that object in view, Canada 
had co-sponsored the proposal for revision submitted 
by Argentina and other Member States. 
84. In view of the fact that wide practical application 
of the technology of nuclear explosions for civil 
purposes was at best some years off, his Government 
considered that the Agency should confine its initial 
activities in regard to the possible establishment 
of an international service for nuclear explosives to 
exchange and dissemination of information. The 
orderly fashion in which the Agency had been proceeding 
in examining and defining its role in the 
matter, in consultation with Member States, was 
a matter for satisfaction. 
85. With regard to the Fourth International Conference 
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, his 
Government recognized the increasingly important 
role which the peaceful applications of nuclear energy 
would play in everyday life. The benefits, although 
potentially enormous, were as yet largely unrealized 
and Canada was supporting activities contributing 
to more widespread dissemination of information 
in that field. It was particularly gratified to note 
that the Fourth Conference would place emphasis 
on subjects of interest to public officials, economists 
and planners, as well as to scientists. A national 
co-ordinating committee had been established to 
organize Canadian participation in the Fourth Conference 
and in the scientific exhibition attached to it. 
86. Due to its natural interest in the matter, 
studies were under way in Canada on the probable 
thermal effects on lakes and rivers of nuclear and 
other thermal power plants. The tentative results 
so far obtained indicated that attention must be 
GC(XIV)/OR.136 

paid to that problem in the future siting of power 
plants. The Agency had an important role to play 
in identifying present and future problems arising 
from the environmental aspects of nuclear power 
plants, particularly in regard to the development 
of international standards and regulations. 

87. Canada had taken an active part in the work 
of the Preparatory Committee of the United Nations 
General Assembly responsible for bringing together 
proposals for an international development strategy 
for the Second United Nations Development Decade. 
The Agency had made a valuable and constructive 
contribution to that work; and Canada had strongly 
supported the inclusion of the section on science 
and technology which was of particular interest to 
the Agency. Under that section, the Agency would 
be given the broad authority required to carry 
forward more actively than ever before its important 
work in, for example, the use of isotopes in industry, 
agriculture and medicine; the role of nuclear energy 
as a source of power; and the possible uses of 
nuclear power in desalination; as well as the expansion 
of its technical assistance to the developing 
countries. The final text of the strategy had still 
to be considered by the General Assembly but it 
would undoubtedly provide sound positive guidance 
both to Governments and agencies in the United 
Nations system for the development of assistance 
programmes in the 1970s. 
88. Lastly, vital as were the Agency's enhanced 
safeguarding responsibilities, it must continue to 
give at least equal emphasis to its traditional promotional 
and technical assistance activities, which 
obviously merited undiminished attention and unflagging 
effort. 
89. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia), referring to 
certain features of Australia's atomic energy programme 
during the preceding year, said that his 
Government had decided to proceed towards the 
construction of its first nuclear power station. Tenders 
had been invited for the construction of a station 
with a capacity of about 500 MW(e) from firms 
supplying power reactors, and 14 different tenders 
had finally been received from seven suppliers in 
four countries. The proposals included boiling-water 
reactors, pressurized-water reactors and steamgenerating 
heavy-water reactors, all using enriched 
fuel, as well as natural-uranium reactors of the 
pressure-tube and pressure-vessel types. A final choice 
was to be made towards the end of the current year. 
Bidders had been required to propose a station 
capable of operating on fuel which could be prepared 
and manufactured within Australia from local 
resources. The station was expected to go into 
commercial operation by the end of 1975. 
90. The Commonwealth of Australia would finance 
the construction of the station (the Atomic Energy 

GC(XIV)/OR.136 

Commission having immediate responsibility for it), 
and would own both die station and the fuel. The 
power generated by the station would be sold to 
die Electricity Commission of New South Wales, 
which would operate the station. 

91. The step thus taken marked die beginning of 
a substantial nuclear power industry, and had an 
obvious bearing on the question of Australia's nuclear 
fuel reserves, which were now large enough not only 
to satisfy domestic, but also export demands. The 
ban on the export of uranium had been partially 
relaxed since 1967 to encourage exploration, as a 
result of which the number of companies engaged 
in the search for uranium had doubled since June 
1969 (to more than 60). Reserves had consequently 
increased. The reserves of UjOg which could be 
recovered at a cost under $10/lb had been about 
23 000 short tons at the beginning of the current 
year, and promising discoveries had been reported 
since then. 
92. Australia had kept in touch with international 
developments in uranium enrichment and had noted 
the tripartite agreement recently concluded between 
the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of 
Germany and the Netherlands relating to exploitation 
of die centrifuge process. 
93. The discussions on future ownership of diffusion 
plants in the United States and on the 
enlargement of capacity and the probable trends of 
enrichment costs had been followed with keen interest 
in Australia, where substantial progress with enrichment— 
particularly widi the gas centrifuge process — 
had also been made. 
94- In recent years the demand for radioisotopes 
had increased to such an extent that the supplying 
facilities were greatly strained. Eighty per cent of 
the radioisotopes supplied by the Australian Atomic 
Energy Commission were used for medical purposes. 
At present, more than 1500 doses of very short-lived 
radiopharmaceuticals for diagnosis were dispatched 
every week by a carefully co-ordinated air/road system 
of transport from the Commission laboratories at 
Lucas Heights to hospitals throughout the country. 
By 1972 the weekly supply was expected to exceed 
2700 doses. Radioisotopes were also exported to 
countries widiin die Asian and Pacific area. 

95- Outstanding progress had also been made with 
industrial applications, particularly analytical and 
control techniques of great value in the mining 
industry. 

96. He expressed gratitude to the United Kingdom, 
Canada, the United States, France, India and also 
to the Agency for their collaboration with Australia. 
The exchanges of personnel and information made 
possible by collaborative arrangements were of considerable 
mutual benefit, and he hoped that such 
international co-operation would continue in the 
future. 

97. His Government had taken pleasure in providing 
research facilities to overseas scientists at 
Lucas Heights during the past year, and in training 
Agency and Colombo Plan fellows. Australia hoped 
to be closely associated with the Agency's activities 
during the next twelve months and, in particular, 
with' the work of the International Nuclear Data 
Committee and the INIS Programme, which were 
of real value to all Member States of the Agency. 
98. His Government had noted with pleasure that 
an Australian expert, Dr. A.R.W.Wilson, had been 
appointed Chairman of the first IAEA panel on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear explosions, held in Vienna 
in March 1970, and hoped that collaboration with 
the Agency in technical studies related to that subject 
would develop furdier. 
99 • Referring to the Agency's major activities during 
the past year, he said that the work of the Safeguards 
Committee (1970) was of the utmost importance 
to the whole international community. 
Australia had declared its general views in its 
communication to the Director General10) and in 
its statements at the Committee's meetings. The 
Australian delegation had participated actively and 
constructively, if at times critically, in the Committee's 
deliberations. 

100. At present, Part I of the model safeguards 
agreement11) had been redrafted and accepted by 
the Board as the basis for negotiation by the Agency 
of agreements with States Parties to the Treaty. 
The outcome of such negotiations would clarify the 
practical situation and illuminate the issues involved 
for all concerned. That would be helpful to all — 
to the Agency and in particular to those countries 
such as Australia, whose ultimate position with regard 
to ratification of NPT had not yet been determined 
and depended a good deal on the outcome of the 
negotiations. 
101. A number of very thorny problems remained 
to be solved in the Safeguards Committee: Part II 
had to be drafted, for example, in such a way as 
to reflect and interpret, in technical provisions, the 
principles accepted and embodied in Part I. The 
question of financing was also far from being settled. 
Despite those difficulties, however, and the fact that 
many of the proposals put forward by Australia had 
not been accepted, the Australian delegation was 
neverdieless encouraged by the progress made, and 
would continue to contribute, in a co-operative spirit, 
to the successful accomplishment of the Committee's 
task. 
10) See document GOV/COM.22/2, section 1. 
11) See document GOV/1420. 

— 12

102. Another matter of major importance to the 
Agency during the past year had been the review 
of Article VI of the Statute. Australia took note 
of the fact that no consensus had been reached on 
the question of the Board's composition and was 
aware of the difficulty of reconciling many different 
interests and points of view. At the present session 
of the Conference, his delegation would do its 
utmost to help find a balanced, fair and effective 
solution. 
103. In conclusion, he said that the Australian 
delegation was in favour of adopting the Annual 
Report of the Board of Governors to the General 
Conference. 
104. Mr. VASSILIEV (Bulgaria) said that the present 
session was being held six months after a most 
important event in international political life which 
had, and would continue to have, a great influence 
on the life and activities of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, namely the entry into force of NPT, 
which represented a great and indisputable success 
in the sphere of nuclear disarmament. Under that 
Treaty the Agency was assuming functions and 
responsibilities which would increase even further its 
authority as a competent and effective international 
organization. The responsibilities laid upon it by 
the Treaty confirmed once again that the Agency 
was, along with the United Nations itself, the only 
organization in the United Nations family whose 
main function was the preservation of peace. 
105. It was a matter for satisfaction that the 
Agency, despite great difficulties, differences of 
opinion and a tight time-table, had got to grips 
with the main, immediate problem emerging from 
the Treaty, namely the application of Agency safeguards 
to secure its observance. Thanks to the 
capable work of the Secretariat, for which special 
gratitude was due to the Director General, and to 
the labours of the Safeguards Committee (1970), 
the principles for the safeguards agreements to be 
concluded between the Agency and non-nuclear 
power Parties to NPT had now been elaborated. 
The position of his country on that question was 
well known, and his delegation was well satisfied 
that it would be possible to begin negotiations on 
the agreements within the period laid down in the 
Treaty. Bulgaria had been one of the first countries 
to express its readiness to begin negotiations in the 
very near future. It was to be hoped that during 
the second series of meeting of the Safeguards Committee, 
in October 1970, the same spirit of cooperation 
and compromise would prevail so that a 
definitive text could be adopted in good time. 
106. As to the review of Article VI of the Statute, 
the Bulgarian People's Republic, in common with 
the other sponsors of the proposal set out in document 
GC(XIV)/437, section A.l, would make every 
GC(XIV)/OR.136 

effort to find a reasonable compromise, acceptable 
to all, for an amendment of Article VI. The present 
session would show to what extent such a compromise 
was possible and practicable. His delegation 
continued to hold the view that the increase in the 
size of the Board should not be allowed to impair 
its efficiency, and that the Board should accordingly 
consist of no more than 29-31 members. The increase 
should, in his delegation's view, be made in 
the elective seats. 

107. His delegation had studied with great interest 
the main lines of work of the Agency and had noted 
with satisfaction its consistent and effective efforts 
to provide the developing countries with better 
possibilities for the utilization of nuclear energy 
in peaceful projects. 
108. All the Agency's activities were aimed at promoting 
the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy 
in the service of man. In that connection arrangements 
for co-operation between individual countries, 
on a bilateral or multilateral basis, either directly 
or through the offices of the Agency, could play 
a very important part. It was precisely in that spirit 
that his country had concluded agreements with the 
Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Yugoslavia 
and France and was co-operating with them in 
common work on certain matters related to the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
109. Having studied the Agency's programme for 
the 1971-72 and 1973-76 periods, his delegation 
believed that the measures to be taken were in 
conformity with the principles enshrined in the 
Agency's Statute and took full account of the uninterrupted 
development of modern science and technology, 
in which the special promise of nuclear 
energy and technology stood out so clearly. His 
delegation commended the prominent position 
accorded to technical assistance, which remained one 
of the Agency's most important activities. Along 
widi the general development of nuclear science and 
technology, technical assistance was acquiring progressively 
greater importance in agriculture, biology, 
physics, power generation, health, the treatment of 
radioactive wastes, information and a number of 
other fields connected widi the utilization of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. 
110. In 1969 technical assistance had been directed, 
to a considerably greater extent than heretofore, 
to agriculture and the food industry. That was the 
natural result of the efforts of certain countries to 
improve and increase their food resources. The 
assistance granted to some countries had unmistakably 
yielded positive results through the introduction of 
new methods and new varieties in grain production 
and stock raising. The recommendation of the joint 
Agency/FAO/WHO Expert Committee concerning 
clearance of the sale of irradiated potato grain and 
-13



GC(XIV)/OR.136 

grain products to consumers for a period of five 
years was in his opinion timely. 

111. He noted with satisfaction the increase of 
41% in the volume of technical assistance provided 
during the past year by comparison with 1968. He 
confirmed the notification sent by his Government 
to the Agency Secretariat that Bulgaria was prepared 
to accept the proposal for increasing the target for 
the General Fund from $2 million to $2.5 million 
and to pay the appropriate percentage. In addition, 
Bulgaria would provide two fellowships at Bulgarian 
higher educational institutes in the field of nuclear 
energy. He asked whether it would not be desirable 
for the Secretariat to consider using the nationalcurrency 
contributions of Member States to the 
General Fund — in cases where the Agency was 
unable to make use of them in some other way — 
for the organization in those countries of symposia, 
seminars or other measures. That idea would not 
only enable the Agency to employ otherwise unused 
sums available in national curency in various countries, 
but would also encourage the latter to increase the 
percentage of their contributions to the General 
Fund. The Secretariat might also consider whether 
UNESCO could participate in the organization of 
certain seminars and courses, the subject matter 
of which definitely lay within the competence of that 
organization in respect of personnel training. 
112. Bulgaria was following with great interest the 
activities of the Agency in nuclear power engineering 
and power generation, and also in the desalination 
of water. The inclusion of nuclear power reactors 
in electrical power networks also called for the intensive 
training of staff in the correct and safe operation 
of those sources of power. In that connection 
Bulgaria, apart from organizing special courses for 
the training of personnel directly engaged on the 
The meeting 

construction of nuclear power stations, had included 
certain new disciplines in the curricula of its higher 
educational institutes. He welcomed the courses, 
organized for UNDP, on the training of staff in the 
repair and maintenance of nuclear equipment. 

113. He welcomed the ready response of the Soviet 
Union to the request by non-nuclear countries to 
undertake enrichment of their nuclear raw material. 
114. It was well known that the correct utilization 
of nuclear power represented no hazard to the environment, 
and in fact that its use might rather be 
regarded as a step forward, as far as environmental 
pollution was concerned, by comparison with conventional 
power sources. The preparation and 
adoption of uniform, generally applicable standards 
in the field of equipment and technology and of 
health and safety undoubtedly represented a very 
real contribution by the Agency in that connection. 
At the same time, new legal provisions were being 
enacted at both national and international levels. 
It might be that a general classification of existing 
legal provisions would be useful to some countries 
in the preparation of their specifically nuclear 
legislation. 
115. He wished in conclusion to restate the position 
of his country, which had already been made clear 
on numerous occasions, regarding the universal nature 
of the Agency and the need to accept all States expressing 
the wish to become Members and fulfilling 
the requirements of the Statute. He had particularly 
in mind the question of membership by the German 
Democratic Republic, which would be in logical 
accord not only with the scientific and technical 
development of that country, especially in nuclear 
energy, but also with the real political situation in 
Europe and the world. 
at 12.55 p.m. 

-14



International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XIV)/OR.137 
24 February 1971* 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1970, at 3.15 p.m. 

President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 

CONTENTS 
Item of theagenda** 
Paragraphs 
9 General debate and report of the Board of Governors 
for 1969— 70 (continued) 1—115 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Sweden 
Mexico 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Finland 
Romania 
Chile 
Argentina 
China 
1— 
16— 
23— 
44— 
51— 
78— 
93— 
15 
22 
42 
43 
50 
77 
92 
105 
106—115 
— Visit of H.E. President Nicolae Ceausescu to the Agency 116—117 

*) A provisional version of this document was issued on 14 October 1970. 
.*) GC(XIV)/442. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 


GC(XIV)/OR.137 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1969-70 
(GC(XIV)/430, 440) (continued) 

1. Mr. ALER (Sweden) said that before commenting 
on some of the constructive work carried 
out by the Agency during the last year, he would 
review very briefly recent developments in the nuclear 
field in Sweden. 
2. Work was progressing on the five big commercial 
power reactors, whose total output would 
be more than 3000 MW, which were to be put into 
operation successively up to 1975- The first unit 
at Oskarshamn had been completed and was being 
tested. The joint planning organization for the 
Swedish power industry had published a new forecast 
for the next ten years. Recent trends showed that 
electricity demand was increasing faster than ever 
before and that trend was expected to last during 
the seventies. The forecast of the need for an 
installed nuclear capacity of 7000—8000 MW by 
1980 was confirmed. 
3. All the reactors ordered and planned for that 
large programme were of the light-water type. That 
fact and international market developments had led 
to a decision earlier that year to abandon the heavywater 
reactor system, notably the Marvikon project, 
and to concentrate work on the further development 
of light-water technology. Work was also being started 
on fast-reactor technology in collaboration with other 
countries. In contrast to its policy for the thermal 
reactors, Sweden did not plan an independent 
development for the fast reactor type. 
4. For the first time, the Swedish Parliament 
had that year decided on a five-year programme for 
reactor and fuel development by the Atomic Energy 
Company, the estimated cost of which was 
US $60 million. An increasing share of the development 
costs was expected to be borne by industry 
as commercial activities increased. 
5. Since the last General Conference, the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)1) 
had come into force, and although that Treaty was 
only one stop on the road towards disarmament, 
his Government recognized its immense potential 
importance; the Treaty was the only means available 
for reducing the latent threat to world security 
created by the vast amount of fissile material that 
would be produced in many countries through ex-
panding nuclear energy programmes. 
6. Although many countries had now signed and 
ratified NPT, it was regrettable that very few of 
the so-called .threshold. countries, namely nonnuclear-
weapon countries which technically and eco1) 
Reproduced in INFCIRC/ 140. 

nomically were capable of producing nuclear weapons, 
had so far ratified it. Sweden. had done so in 
January that year and formal negotiations on a safeguards 
agreement had been initiated. 

7. His Government had long ago declared its 
willingness to put all its source and special nuclear 
material under Agency safeguards and was trying 
to participate in the work of the Safeguards Committee 
(1970) as constructively as possible. Its aim 
was that safeguards agreements would be concluded 
which would make NPT into an effective peace 
instrument. It considered, however, that the agreements 
and the procedures should be worked out 
in such a way that the greatest possible number of 
States would find it in their interest to adhere to 
the Treaty. The report of the Safeguards Committee 
on its first session2) provided a very useful basis 
for further work. 
8. Turning to the question of how to deal with 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, in connection 
with which Article V of NPT stipulated that 
negotiations should commence as soon as possible 
after the Treaty entered into force, he said that two 
aspects would have to be taken into account. The 
first was the technical aspect, which the Agency 
had already started to deal with in March that year. 
It was evident that IAEA would have a very important 
role to play in connection with the execution 
of nuclear explosion projects; it must therefore be 
equipped to observe and control the execution of a 
project to make sure that it was conducted in accordance 
with existing international rules. 
9. The second aspect related to the form and 
content of the international agreement between the 
Parties to NPT through which they would fulfil 
the obligation they had accepted under the provisions 
of Article V. What was involved was mainly 
a political matter, and die most appropriate forum 
for its consideration was therefore the Geneva Disarmament 
Conference, which had negotiated NPT, the 
final decision resting with the General Assembly of 
the United Nations. 
10. One problem facing the present Conference 
was the revision of Article VI of the Statute. The 
difference between the five different proposals before 
it 3) was not very great, and his delegation was 
convinced that a compromise solution could be found, 
given some more time. It had stressed in the Board 
of Governors and in its Committee that it was 
essential to preserve the spirit of consensus and 
co-operation, which had been characteristic of the 
Agency throughout its life. His delegation considered 
that spirit necessary for the Agency's future work. 
It recognized the wish of some countries to have a 
2) GOV/1420. 
3) See document GC(XIV)/437. 


GC(XIV)/OR.137 

regular representation on the Board. That could 
be realized in different ways, either by increasing 
the number of designated seats or by making reelection 
for a seat on the Board possible. His delegation 
had indicated a preference for the second 
alternative, but it attached such importance to the 
preservation of a harmonious working climate in 
the Agency that it would put that consideration 
first. He hoped that a way of solving the problem 
which would gain wide support would be found 
during die next few days. 

11. The Director General had asked for comments 
on the proposals made by the Panel on International 
Co-operation in Controlled Fusion Research and its 
Applications, which had met in June 1970. The 
report of that meeting had been studied with interest 
in Sweden. There might well be differing views on 
the efforts still required to make fusion power a 
practical reality, but his Government would support 
the idea that a permanent International Fusion 
Research Council under the auspices of the Agency 
be created to review progress and to discuss coordination 
of national programmes. 
12. During the general debate the previous year, 
the possible effects of nuclear plant operations on 
the environment, or on public health, were mentioned 
by many speakers. That was an extremely important 
question, and he thought all agreed that the Agency 
should participate as actively as possible in the international 
co-operation which was now developing. 
The Symposium held in New York the previous 
month had been a valuable contribution to knowledge 
in that field. In that context, he stressed the 
importance of supporting the International Commission 
on Radiological Protection, so that a sound 
scientific basis should be established for national 
and international regulations. 
13. One of the important tasks of the Agency 
was to provide technical assistance, and his delegation 
therefore welcomed the decision of the Board 
to raise the target for voluntary contributions. Sweden 
had increased its own contribution accordingly. 
14. He had been gratified to hear the Director 
General's appreciative comments on the co-operation 
between the Agency and the Swedish International 
Development Authority in the provision of assistance 
to developing countries4). His Government attached 
great importance to that programme, which it felt 
had developed satisfactorily during the last year 
and of which it had high hopes for the future. 
15. Finally, the Director General had drawn 
attention to the gradual imbalance of the Agency's 
budget, and hence of its activities, caused by inflation. 
His delegation pledged its support for the 
4) GC(XIV)/OR.135,para. 35. 

efforts the Director General was making to restore 
the balance and to retain the efficiency of the Agency. 

16. Mr. WECKMANN-MUÑOZ (Mexico) said that 
the Director General's statement the previous day 
had clearly illustrated the problems facing the Agency. 
His delegation had noted with interest the desires 
expressed to reach agreement on the amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute to modify the composition 
of the Board of Governors. 
17. The Agency's safeguards activities had 
increased. He hoped those activities would not 
detract from technical assistance, which was laid 
down as a specific task of the Agency in Articles I 
and II of the Statute, and that safeguards would 
not be a charge on the Regular Budget. 
18. The holding of the Agency's General Conference 
in other geographical areas was of great 
importance for enabling the Agency to come into 
more direct contact widi other peoples. It would 
also contribute to strengthening die universal character 
of an organization in which Mexico placed some 
of its highest hopes. The General Conference had 
met in Asia in 1965, thanks to the generous hospitality 
of the Japanese Government. It would now 
be desirable for it to meet in the American 
Continent, and particularly in the first de-nuclearized 
area of the world. 
19. He was happy to inform the Conference that 
the Mexican Government was studying the possibility 
of inviting the General Conference to hold its 1972 
session in the Mexican capital. 
20. In taking that initiative, the Mexican 
Government wished also to pay tribute to die work 
of the Agency, which, under the guidance of the 
Director General, consistently strove to achieve the 
objectives laid down for it in its Statute. 
21. The meeting of the General Conference in 
Mexico City would have the advantage of enabling 
delegations to assess on the spot the work being 
carried out in his country's capital, in which the 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America (OPANAL), whose relations with the 
Agency were very cordial, had its permanent 
headquarters. 
22. If the new Administration's study of the matter 
next December led to positive conclusions, which 
he considered were desirable, the Mexican 
Government would 'transmit the appropriate official 
invitation to the Director General before the session 
of the Board of Governors planned for June 1971. 
23. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) said that the past year had been marked 
by an event which would have far-reaching con

GC(XIV)/OR.137 

sequences for the Agency: the entry into force of 
NPT, which the Federal Republic of Germany had 
signed on 28 November 1969, and which assigned 
to the Agency a new and important field of activity. 

24. Although that activity — safeguarding the 
peaceful use of nuclear materials — had been provided 
for in the Agency's Statute, it had so far been 
limited mainly to transfers of material and equipment 
by a few supplier countries to other Member States. 
But individual safeguards were now to be supplanted 
by the application of general safeguards to all 
peaceful nuclear activities in a large number of States. 
The change implied not only a substantial extension 
of the Agency's staff but, more particularly, the 
necessity of developing safeguards procedures which 
would meet the requirements of the new situation. 
25. His Government welcomed the Agency's timely 
recognition of the new requirements, which it had 
demonstrated by conducting a comprehensive systems 
analysis and convening numerous panels of experts 
whose work had brought about considerable progress 
in safeguards techniques; and also by setting up a 
Safeguards Committee which had done the essential 
groundwork for the safeguards agreements to be 
concluded under NPT. It was to be hoped that the 
Safeguards Committee (1970) would continue its 
deliberations on safeguards techn<ques and their 
financing in the same constructive spirit, and that 
its work would encourage those who had not yet 
signed or ratified the Treaty to do so. His 
Government wished to ratify NPT soon, and trusted 
that the outcome of the negotiations between the 
Director General of the Agency and representatives 
of the European Communities would enable it to 
do so. 
26. The conclusion of safeguards agreements with 
the Agency must not of course end efforts to 
improve safeguards further in point of efficiency and 
simplicity. Hence, the Federal Republic approved 
the three priorities for the further development of 
safeguards which were set out in the Agency's programme'for 
1971 to 19765): systems analysis, work 
on methods and techniques and field operations. 
The Agency's resolve to fulfil, in close co-operation 
with Member States, its growing responsibilities with 
the lowest possible increase in staff and budget also 
commanded his Government's support. The Symposium 
on Progress in Safeguards Techniques, held 
in Karlsruhe in July 1970, had demonstrated that 
efforts to make safeguards measures objective and 
automated were already bringing major advances — 
an encouraging prospect. 
27. But the duties assigned to the Agency under 
NPT, important as they were, could not justify 
neglect of other tasks. The Federal Republic had 
5) See document GC(XIV)/4}3. 

long felt that technical assistance must continue to 
receive high priority, the more so as several Member 
States were reaching a stage where the scientific 
and economic benefits of nuclear research and 
engineering were beginning to have a palpable effect 
on the national economy. Thus the German delegation 
welcomed the proposed increase in the Agency's 
technical assistance programme, even while realizing 
that a considerable proportion of the additional 
funds would unfortunately be absorbed by rising 
prices. Given limited funds and the expected increase 
in requests for technical assistance, it appeared certain 
that in the long run the Agency's programme would 
have to be streamlined if it was to succeed. That 
could be achieved by concentrating on carefully 
selected scientific and technical topics, and by promoting 
regional programmes among groups of 
countries. 

28. The main aim of the so-called Jackson report 
on the United Nations Development System^) was 
to ascertain whether available resources were being 
effectively employed and whether a programme approximately 
twice the size of the current one could 
be carried out during the next five years. That 
study, which was to be evaluated in relation to the 
Pearson Report7/ antitled Partners in Development, 
came to the conclusion that the United Nations 
Development System had already reached the limits 
of its effectiveness and that it must be reorganized 
if the programme was to be expanded. 
29. The Agency, too, would be faced with a 
number of problems if proposals for reform were 
accepted. In his annual report on the provision of 
technical assistance the Director General had 
announced that he would inform the Board of 
Governors of the decisions taken within the framework 
of the United Nations. The Federal Republic 
wished to suggest that the Director General report 
at the same time on the consequences which those 
decisions would have for the Agency, and whether 
measures would have to be taken to adapt the 
Agency's technical assistance programme to the 
changed situation. After review by the Board of 
Governors, the report should be submitted for discussion 
to the General Conference. 
30. With regard to the exchange of information, 
his Government had declared its readiness to cooperate 
in the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) and was pleased by the close cooperation 
existing between the Agency and the 
European Atomic Energy Community in that field. 
6) A Study of the Capacity of the United Nations Development 
System, United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 70.1.10 
(DP/5), Geneva, 1970. 
7) Report of the Commission on International Development, 
Partners in Development, Pall Mall Press, London, 
1969. 

-4



31. In June 1970, the Agency's Panel on International 
Co-operation in Controlled Fusion Research 
and its Applications had recommended that the 
Agency should increase its activities in fusion research. 
It certainly seemed wise that the Agency 
should devote more attention to a subject on which 
so many hopes for the future depended, and thus 
promote world-wide co-operation. In the equally 
important field of fast reactors the establishment 
of the Agency's International Working Group had 
proved worth while. The proposed International 
Fusion Research Council could be modelled on that 
example. EURATOM had for many years effectively 
co-ordinated nuclear fusion research in its member 
countries through a network of association contracts. 
For that reason co-operation with the European 
Commission would doubtless bring benefits for the 
Agency. 
32. The Agency's budget for 1971 foresaw an 
increase in assessments of approximately 10% and 
the creation of 43 new posts. Although the increase 
was hardly negligible, his delegation would approve 
the budget in view of the Agency's growing responsibilities. 
In that connection the manpower 
utilization survey currently being conducted in the 
Secretariat was to be welcomed. 
33. Turning to recent developments in nuclear 
science and technology in the Federal Republic, he 
pointed out that details were to be found in an 
information document distributed at the Conference8). 
In the Federal Republic approximately 25 000 persons 
were employed in nuclear research and engineering. 
Public expenditure in 1970 amounted to more than 
1000 million marks. Installed power plant capacity 
was 900 MW(e), and a further 5000 MW(e) were 
under construction or on order, including 760MW(e) 
for export. In July it had been decided to build 
a prototype nuclear power station with a 300 MW(e) 
thorium high-temperature reactor, in Westphalia. 
34. An important trend was that the Federal 
Republic's nuclear energy programmes were being 
integrated more and more with those of its European 
neighbours. In particular, further progress had been 
made in the co-operation between Belgium, Luxembourg, 
the Netherlands and the Federal Republic 
of Germany aimed at the joint construction of a 
sodium-cooled breeder reactor prototype: Belgian, 
Dutch and German utilities had founded, late in 
1969, a joint company, and at the beginning of 
1970 the international industrial consortium had 
submitted an offer for construction of the 300 MW(e) 
plant. 
35. In March 1970 an agreement on co-operation 
in the development and use of the gas-centrifuge 
technique for the production of enriched uranium 
8) GC(XIV)/INF/124. 

GC(XIV)/OR.137 

for peaceful purposes had been signed by the Federal 
Republic, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. 
That agreement constituted a major step towards 
meeting the future fuel requirements of nuclear power 
stations in Europe. The three countries were favourably 
considering the possibility of co-operating with 
other countries, talks had already begun with Belgium 
and Italy. Earlier that year, too, France, the United 
Kingdom and the Federal Republic had started 
discussing future co-operation in irradiated-fuel reprocessing, 
which could also be extended to include 
other countries. 

36. The Federal Republic intended to continue its 
active support of the Agency's scientific and technical 
programmes. A great many German experts (about 
300) had taken part in Agency symposia during the 
year, and German scientists had been sent to almost 
all the 80 panel and working group meetings. In 
July 1970, two symposia under Agency auspices 
had been held in the Federal Republic, on progress 
in safeguards techniques (Karlsruhe) and mammalian 
radiation genetics (Munich), respectively. Fifteen 
German research institutes were taking part in coordinated 
Agency research programmes which were 
listed in the annual report of the Board. In addition, 
German industrial enterprises were participating, 
along with Belgium, Sweden and the Soviet Union, 
in the co-ordinated research programme on mediumsized 
nuclear power stations — plants of particular 
interest to developing countries. In May 1970, a 
spectrophotometer had been presented to the Agency's 
Monaco Laboratory. Finally, Germany had given 
$127 000 in 1969 as a voluntary contribution to 
the General Fund. In 1969, the Agency had engaged 
the services of 16 German experts and had made 
use of 43 fellowship openings, 35 of which had 
been financed from German sources. 
37. The Federal Republic had always held the 
view that the Agency should have sufficient funds 
at its disposal, in particular for its tasks in technical 
assistance; accordingly it approved the increase in 
the target for the General Fund to $2.5 million in 
1971, and intended to make a voluntary contribution 
to the Fund corresponding to its percentage share 
of the Agency's Regular Budget. His Government 
would also offer an initially unlimited number of 
fellowships in 1971 covering all sectors of nuclear 
research and development. The Federal Republic 
was ready to continue nominating an increasing 
number of experts who would be available for technical 
assistance, on behalf of the Agency, to interested 
Member States. It intended to pursue its 
interest in Agency meetings, acting as host in April 
1971 to the Fifth International Conference on 
Magnetohydrodynamic Electrical Power Generation 
to be held in Munich, in May 1971 to the IAEAIMCO 
Symposium on Nuclear Ships (in Hamburg) 
and in July 1971 to the Symposium on Quick 
Methods for Monitoring Environmental Radioactivity 

GC(XIV)/OR.137 

(again in Munich). Germany was eager to participate 
in the joint Agency/FAO/ENEA programme for 
food irradiation and was pleased that the project 
centre was to be established in Karlsruhe. 

38. With regard to the joint Agency/FAO/Federal 
Republic programme in co-ordinated research to 
improve the protein content of crops through nuclear 
techniques, his Government intended to contribute 
more than $800 000 as well as the assistance of 
several German laboratories. Institutions in a large 
number of developing countries, particularly in Asia, 
were to participate in the five-year programme. 
39. In other areas, too, the Federal Republic had 
begun to draw up integrated programmes with the 
Agency's Secretariat — for example a programme for 
the application of isotopes in hydrology in Nigeria. 
Plans had also been made to donate, through the 
Agency, a training reactor to the University of 
Mexico. 
40. In conclusion, he wished to make a few 
comments on the review of the composition of the 
Board of Governors. There could be no doubt 
that a review was needed if the Agency was to 
continue its successful work in the future. The 
General Conference had debated the matter in 1968 
and 1969. The Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, 
in which about fifty Member States had been represented, 
had discussed every aspect of the problem 
in the course of numerous meetings. His Government 
regretted that the Board of Governors — 
despite two requests by the General Conference — 
had not been able to reach a consensus on a 
proposal. 
41. The question was now ripe for decision by the 
General Conference — at its present session. Five 
proposals for amendment of the Statute had been 
submitted to the Conference. By far the largest 
number of Member States supported the proposal now 
sponsored by 21 countries. His delegation, too, 
was convinced that that proposal would best satisfy 
the criteria set out by the General Conference, 
namely technical progress, geographical distribution 
and preservation of the Board's ability to function 
efficiently. The proposal had been adapted several 
times as deliberations had progressed. It should 
therefore constitute a generally acceptable compromise 
solution. 
42. Finally, he took pleasure in assuring the Conference 
that his Government would continue to 
support the Agency's activities fully in order to 
promote the peaceful applications of nuclear energy 
throughout the world. 
43. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) made the following statement*): 
*) This statement is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's 
request under Rule 92(b) of the Conference's Rules of 
Procedure. 

Translated from Russian 

(1) "Mr. President, distinguished delegates: 
allow me, Mr. President, first of all to congratulate 
you on your election to this high office. The Soviet 
delegation is confident that your work as President 
will contribute to the success of the fourteenth 
session of the General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. 
(2) "The Soviet delegation has listened carefully 
to the statements made by the Director General 
and by other delegations. We note with satisfaction 
that both the Director General and numerous delegations 
have stressed the significance for the Agency's 
work of an important international event which 
occurred this year, namely the entry into force on 
5 March of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons. Indeed, in its very essence, in 
all its substance, the Treaty oriented towards the 
fulfilment of those aims which the International 
Atomic Energy Agency is called upon to serve, 
namely the strengthening of peace and international 
co-operation, and the promotion of the use of 
nuclear energy in the interests of progress and 
creativity. We would like to stress that by reducing 
the risk of nuclear war the Treaty also opens up 
new prospects for the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
It is sufficient, in this connection, to recall the provisions 
of the Treaty, which include an obligation 
of the Parties to it to co-operate and participate 
in the exchange of equipment, materials and scientific 
and technological information on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, and the duty to contribute, 
alone or together with other States or international 
organizations, to the further development of the 
applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, 
especially in the territories of non-nuclear-weapon 
States Party to the Treaty, with due consideration 
for the needs of the developing areas of the world. 
(3) "We have no doubt that the entry into 
force of the Treaty will have a beneficial effect on 
the entire field of activity of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, an organization which was established 
especially for promoting the application of 
atomic energy for peace and progress. 
(4) "In this connection, we endorse, as a 
whole, the Agency's draft programme of work for 
the next five years, which was approved by the 
Board of Governors and has now been submitted 
for consideration to the General Conference. In 
the opinion of our delegation, the programme gives 
quite enough weight to all the principal scientific 
and technical fields which are most important at 
present or thought likely to be of great interest 
in the future. Under this programme, the Agency's 
Member States, and in particular the developing 
countries, will receive substantial assistance in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

(5) "Of the comparatively new scientific and 
technical activities to which the Agency has devoted 
a keen interest in recent years, I should like to 
mention especially the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions, 
the operation of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) and work on thermonuclear 
fusion. 
(6) "In the Agency's work on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear explosions an active part has been 
taken by leading experts from the Soviet Union, 
who have shared with others the fruit of experience 
gained in various projects of economic significance 
involving the use of nuclear explosions. And we 
intend to continue our active participation in the 
Agency's work on the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions. 
Soviet scientists are preparing for the 
panel meeting, to be held in January 1971, which 
will discuss practical aspects of the use of contained 
underground nuclear explosions for industrial purposes; 
and also for another Agency panel meeting 
which is to make a preliminary study of the problem 
of international supervision of peaceful nuclear explosions, 
in connection with the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 
(7) "We all know that in April of this year, 
after a considerable amount of preparatory work 
had been successfully completed, the Agency put 
into operation an international system for the exchange 
of scientific and technical information — the 
International Nuclear Information System or 
INIS — which represents the first achievement of 
its kind. The Soviet Union, which has always attached 
great importance to a wide international 
exchange of scientific and technical information as 
a means of accelerating scientific, technical and economic 
progress and furthering mutual understanding 
and co-operation in the world, was one of 
the initiators of the International Nuclear Information 
System and took an active part in the 
preparatory work. Leading Soviet experts on nuclear 
information took part in the work of all those 
Agency bodies which were entrusted with the task 
of working out the organizational and technical 
principles of the system. The Soviet Union was 
pleased to make available a number of its own 
experts for the regular work of INIS in the Agency's 
Secretariat. 
(8) "Every month, since March of this year, 
the Soviet Union has been feeding into INIS all 
national material on subjects embraced by the 
system. During this period, it has processed about 
800 input pieces for INIS. Our country will 
continue, in future, to contribute to the successful 
operation of the International Nuclear Information 
System through its active participation, knowledge 
and experience. 
(9) "I think we all know quite well that 
during the current year the Agency embarked upon 
GC(XIV)/OR.137 

a more thorough study of the role which it could 
play in co-ordinating research on the development 
of thermonuclear reactors. Our delegation is very 
much in favour of stimulating international 
co-operation in this sphere and welcomes in particular 
the proposal that an international council 
for thermonuclear research should be established 
under the auspices of the Agency. 

(10) "While on the subject of the Agency's 
scientific programme — which on the whole is 
excellent — one cannot but draw attention to the 
fact that the growth of the budget, as in die past, 
is outstripping the expansion of the programme by 
a considerable margin. The Soviet delegation pointed 
that out at the last session of the General 
Conference, too. Unfortunately, we find ourselves 
obliged to return to the matter again. The Soviet 
delegation cannot support a 10.1% increase in the 
Agency's budget for 1971. We would consider an 
increase of not more than 8 -9% to be justified. 
Let me express the hope that in the year to come 
appropriate action will be taken to ensure economic 
use of the Agency's limited resources. 
(11) "Distinguished delegates, the extent of 
the contribution which Soviet scientists are making, 
through the Agency, to progress in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy throughout the world, is directly 
related to the scientific and technical progress 
achieved in our own country in the recent past. 
(12) "During the year that has elapsed since 
the last session of the General Conference, the Soviet 
Union has successfully continued research on 
a broad complex of scientific and technical problems 
connected with the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy. 
(13) "In the current year, a number of important 
theoretical and experimental investigations, 
including fundamental research on nuclear physics 
and high-temperature plasma, has been completed. 
Among these Were studies carried out on the giant 
70-GeV proton accelerator which led to the discovery 
of antihelium. Important results have been 
obtained by Soviet scientists at the V.I.Kurchatov 
Institute of Atomic Energy on devices of the 
TOKAMAK series. For the first time it proved 
possible to achieve stable plasma containment for 
a plasma energy lifetime of 0.02 sec with particle 
concentrations of 5 x 1013 cm"' , an ion temperature 
of 5. million degrees and electron temperature 
of 10 million degrees. Neutron radiation of thermonuclear 
origin was recorded. These results have 
received wide international recognition. 
(14) "In nuclear physics, Soviet scientists completed 
a cycle of experiments performed over many 
years in which radiation spectra arising from thermalneutron 
capture by the nuclei of various elements 

GC(XIV)/OR.137 

were studied. This work is of great importance for 
a thorough study of the physical processes which 
take place during irradiation of materials in reactor 
cores. 

(15) "In regard to the development of nuclear 
power, we must mention the attainment of 
full design capacity by the first and second lines 
of the Beloyarsk nuclear power station, which use 
channel-type uranium-graphite reactors with nuclear 
steam superheat; start-up of the second unit of the 
Novo-Voronezh nuclear power station with a waterwater 
reactor producing 375 MW(e); and start-up 
of the BOR-60 research fast reactor using sodium 
coolant and generating 60 MW(e). 
(16) "The Soviet Union makes wide use of 
radioisotope devices in various sectors of its 
economy, and this has led to the development of a 
number of new and highly efficient instruments. 
(17) "The large volume of construction going 
on in our country, and the availability of rich ore 
deposits in vast thinly populated territories offer 
a great deal of scope for the successful application 
of nuclear explosions for industrial purposes. Hence 
the Soviet Union has been carrying out for a number 
of years an extensive research programme on the 
applications of nuclear explosions in different branches 
of the economy. 
(18) "I should like to mention the most 
interesting experimental-industrial explosions carried 
out to date in the Soviet Union. Some years ago, 
for the first time in the history of the oil industry, 
three contained underground nuclear explosions were 
carried out in one of the Soviet oil fields. As 
a result of these explosions, overall recovery from 
the oil deposit was 27-60% better than would otherwise 
have been anticipated on the basis of statistical 
calculations. Here it should be borne in mind that 
the explosions took place in a depleted field and 
that the increase in oil production from the wells 
was attained over the whole deposit, and not merely 
in the part where artificial fracturing was carried 
out. Successful exploitation of this field is therefore 
continuing, and there is reason to expect that 
the ultimate yield will be considerably increased. 
Special radiochemical analyses indicate that oil can 
even be extracted direct from the rock fracture zones 
without any contamination by radioactive products. 
(19) "One of the interesting and promising 
industrial uses of contained underground explosions 
is the control of gas and oil blow-outs. Soviet 
scientists have examined this possibility theoretically 
and tested it in practice. A nuclear explosion with 
a yield of 30 kilotons at a depth of about 2500 m 
succeeded in stopping a gas blow-out which was 
consuming as much as 1-1.5 million m3 per day 
after earlier attempts to control the blow-out by 
traditional methods had failed. 
(20) "The creation of artificial water reservoirs 
for arid regions is an extremely promising sector for 
the application of nuclear explosions. To establish 
whether this was possible in practice, a nuclear explosion 
with a yield of more than 100 kilotons was 
detonated in the USSR. The explosion shifted large 
masses of soil and created two reservoirs, one in 
the crater of the explosion itself and the other 
outside the crater. The total volume of the two 
reservoirs is 16-18 million m . 
(21) "The combination of scientific research 
and industrial tests carried out so far in the Soviet 
Union permits optimistic forecasts for the use of 
atomic explosions in the most varied branches of 
the national economy. It should be borne in mind, 
however, that the practical application of nuclear 
explosives still requires the solution of a number 
of serious and complex problems. 
(22) "The Soviet delegation takes satisfaction 
in announcing to the Conference that it is giving 
the Agency scientific and technical documentation 
on some of the Soviet projects involving the use 
of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes. 
(23) "There is no need here, and indeed it 
would be impossible, to list all our recent scientific 
and technical achievements. I should only say that — 
as might have been expected — they have been of 
particular significance this year, when all progressive 
mankind is commemorating the centenary of the 
birth of Vladimir Ilich Lenin, founder and first leader 
of the Soviet State, a scientist and revolutionary of 
genius. Our delegation notes with profound satisfaction 
that the Agency, like other international 
organizations, has arranged independently or participated 
in a number of events dedicated to this great 
anniversary. 
(24) "Distinguished delegates, the Soviet 
Union has traditionally taken a very active part in 
the implementation of the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. We attribute great significance 
to this side of the Agency's work, realizing how 
important it is to many Member States. I need 
hardly stress the fact that the importance of technical 
assistance in atomic energy has greatly 
increased with the entry into force of NPT. 
(25) "During the past year the Department 
of Technical Assistance organized and, in association 
with the USSR State Committee on the Utilization 
of Atomic Energy and other Soviet organizations, 
successfully carried out two study tours for experts 
from developing countries. One of these tours was 
devoted to in vivo measurement techniques employing 
radioisotopes, the other to the applications of 
radioisotopes and radiation in agriculture. 
_8



GC(XIV)/OR.137 

(26) "Well-known Soviet scientists have 
worked as Agency experts in a number of developing 
countries. This form of technical assistance will 
continue to receive our support. So far, practical 
use has been made of all fellowships made available 
by the Soviet Government for the training of Agency 
fellows. We note with satisfaction that this form 
of technical assistance has proved extremely effective 
and believe that it should be continued. 
(27) "Desirous of promoting the further 
development of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy — to which NPT 
will make its own contribution — the Soviet Union 
wishes to make the following statement: 
— The voluntary contribution of the 
USSR to the Agency's technical assistance 
fund for 1971 is being raised from 
150 000 roubles to 250 000 roubles, in national 
currency, for the acquisition of equipment, 
instruments and materials and for the implementation 
in the USSR of conferences, study 
tours, seminars and courses for developing 
countries. 
— In 1971 the USSR will make 
available to the Agency 25 fellowships for 
periods of up to a year to enable scientists 
and experts from developing countries to spend 
periods at scientific research centres in the 
USSR for training in various fields of science 
and technology. The aggregate value of these 
25 fellowships will be approximately 
140 000 roubles. 
(28) "Thus in 1971 the Soviet Union will 
make a total contribution to the Agency's technical 
assistance fund of 390 000 roubles. The USSR also 
affirms its readiness to make available every year 
10 fellowships for the training of experts from 
developing countries for work on installations built 
with Soviet aid or for carrying out joint scientific 
and technical work within the framework of bilateral 
agreements between the Soviet Union and the 
developing countries concerned. 
(29) "The Soviet Union's contribution to 
the development of the peaceful applications of 
atomic energy is not limited to its participation in 
the Agency's activities. It is well known that the 
USSR also contributes extensively to this process 
through bilateral agreements. At the present time 
it has such agreements widi socialist countries, with 
many developing countries and also with advanced 
capitalist countries. Under these bilateral agreements 
scientists and delegations are being exchanged, joint 
scientific and technical projects and studies are being 
undertaken, scientific equipment is being supplied and 
training is being carried out. The Soviet Union's 
co-operation with other countries in the field of 
nuclear power has been marked during this period 
by the conclusion of new contracts for the construction 
of atomic power stations, and also by the 
implementation of similar earlier agreements. 

(30) "The safeguards required by NPT must 
now occupy an important place in the Agency's 
activities. During the past year considerable attention 
has been devoted to this matter within the IAEA. 
This is quite natural, for the Treaty has confronted 
the Agency with clear and urgent tasks in the form 
of the control functions specified in Article III. 
As we all know, the Agency must now negotiate 
and conclude safeguards agreements with non-nuclearweapon 
States Parties to the Treaty. 
(31) Some 60 States have so far become 
Parties to NPT by ratifying it. The Agency's main 
task now is to conclude safeguards agreements 
within the time limit set by the Treaty and to 
commence their practical application. As soon as 
possible it must complete its formulation of recommendations 
concerning the content of the safeguards 
agreement on the basis of which it will 
conduct its negotiations with non-nuclear-weapon 
States. 
(32) "One must recall that when the Agency 
began preparations for carrying out its safeguards 
functions under NPT, it had a ready-made and 
practically-tested safeguards system at its disposal. 
This surely explains why Parties to NPT chose 
the Agency as the organization to apply safeguards 
under the Treaty. 
(33) "A good basis for the work of the Safeguards 
Committee, which was entrusted by the 
Board of Governors with the task of preparing recommendations 
for the safeguards agreements, was 
provided by the Director General's report on the 
content of these agreements. In general we believe 
there is reason to be well satisfied with the work 
carried out in the summer of this year by the Safeguards 
Committee, which prepared recommendations 
on the content of Part I of the agreements in the 
light of the Statute, the safeguards and inspectors' 
documents and the requirements of NPT. The recommendations 
in question reflect the general, 
collective opinion of the members of the Safeguards 
Committee. 
(34) "One positive result of this work was 
the authorization granted to the Director General 
by the Board of Governors to start negotiations 
for the conclusion of safeguards agreements on the 
basis of the recommendations of the Safeguards 
Committee concerning the content of Part I of the 
agreements. The Secretariat has accordingly taken 
the necessary steps, circulating the relevant information 
to all States which have ratified NPT, and also 
to States which have signed but not yet ratified 
the Treaty. 
-9



GC(XIV)/OR.137 

(35) "The scientific and technical aspects of 
safeguards problems have been examined by the 
Agency at a number of symposia and meetings of 
experts, attended by scientists from many countries. 
Believing such meetings to be useful in preparing 
the Agency for its duties under NPT, the Soviet 
Union has sent experts to attend them. These 
scientific and technical meetings on safeguards 
questions have examined the specific technical provisions 
of the safeguards system which are relevant 
to the requirements of NPT. This, in our view, 
should help the Agency to complete its recommendations 
on the content of safeguards agreements. 
(36) "A number of States have already informed 
the Agency that they are prepared, in fulfilment 
of their obligations under NPT, to start 
negotiations on the conclusion of safeguards 
agreements. Some have approached the Secretariat 
with definite proposals for the commencement of 
such negotiations during the present session of the 
General Conference. This imposes an even greater 
responsibility on our organization, and makes it 
essential that the recommendations concerning Part II 
of the agreements should be completed as soon as 
possible. The views of the Director General on 
this question, as we all know, have already been 
published in an Agency document. 
(37) "Rapid completion of the Safeguards 
Committee's work, as called for by the Board, is 
hence one of the Agency's important tasks. By 
accomplishing this task the Agency will do its part 
towards enabling the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons to be given practical effect 
within the period laid down in the Treaty itself. 
It is important — this is another point the Soviet 
delegation would like to stress — that the largest 
possible number of States should accede to the 
Treaty; and in particular, of course, we should like 
to see those States with the most highly developed 
nuclear industry join. 
(38) "An important problem before the 
General Conference at its present session is the 
revision of Article VI of the Statute, which determines 
the composition of the Board of Governors. 
I hardly need say how important this question is, 
for it is directly linked with the work of a body 
whose powers, defined in the Statute, give it virtual 
control over the work of the Agency. On the correctness 
of our approach to the question of the 
Board's composition will depend to a large extent 
the Board's successful performance of its duties 
and the successful work of the Agency as a whole. 
(39) "The principles on which the Soviet 
Union has approached this problem are reflected 
in a joint memorandum by the group of socialist 
countries, submitted in February of this year to 
the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole to Review 
Article VI of the Statute and confirmed in a letter 
addressed to the Director General in June. Since 
this memorandum was presented after the last 
session of the General Conference, and since these 
principles govern the position of the Soviet Union 
in regard to this question, we would like to recall 
these principles here, before the General Conference, 
where all Members of the Agency are represented. 

(40) "Firstly, the initial assumption in our 
approach to the review of Article VI is that 
no enlargement of the Board should be such as 
to upset that political balance between different 
groups of States which was taken as the basis of 
the Board's constitution at the time of the Agency's 
founding, and which still represents a most 
important element in its efficient functioning. This 
means that we must take into account the legitimate 
interests of all groups of countries participating in 
the work of the Agency. 
(41) "We further believe that when any change 
is made in the composition of the Board of 
Governors, particular attention must be paid to 
those historical processes which have occurred since 
the Agency's Statute was written, and which have 
led to the liberation of peoples from the colonial 
yoke and the formation of new independent States 
desirous of using nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
We believe to be well founded the wish of 
the developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin 
America to increase their representation on the 
Board of Governors and to play a more active part 
in the work of the Agency. 
(42) "Lastly, the Soviet delegation would like 
to emphasize in the clearest possible terms that 
any amendment of Article VI must be such as to 
enable the Agency to perform its functions efficiently 
and to discharge those new responsibilities which 
it will assume under the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We would like 
to recall that this requirement was specifically 
mentioned in the resolution adopted at the twelfth 
session of the General Conference on the composition 
of the Board of Governors, which defined 
the main criteria for broadening the composition 
of the Board. 
(43) "The proposal of the socialist countries, 
which in common with others has been brought 
forward for examination by the General Conference, 
represents in our view a good basis for a revision 
of Article VI. The authors of this draft amendment 
have neither sought nor obtained any particular 
advantages for themselves. The solution proposed 
by the socialist countries allows the different regions 
fair representation on the Board without granting 
a privileged position to any one of them. 
(44) "The proposal put forward by Italy and 
some other countries does not conform to the above 
-10



principles which, in the view of the Soviet delegation, 
must guide any decision affecting the composition 
of the Board. This proposal cannot therefore provide 
a basis for a solution of the question. 

(45) "At the same time, in bringing before 
the General Conference the proposal of the socialist 
countries, the Soviet delegation would like to indicate 
its readiness to continue the search for constructive 
solutions on any reasonable basis. We have 
studied with care the various proposals submitted 
for discussion and must say that, in the interests 
of obtaining a mutually acceptable solution, the 
Soviet delegation would be ready to support the 
draft proposal put forward by the delegate of 
Pakistan. We are also able to support some provisions 
of the proposal put forward by the Arab 
countries, which we feel ought to be given serious 
attention. 
(46) "In making clear our position, let me 
stress that we are coming some way towards meeting 
the desires of other groups of countries. We 
hope that this spirit of compromise will be properly 
appreciated and that it will elicit an appropriate 
response from those other groups of countries — 
a response which might then lead to solutions that 
are not of a unilateral character but rather take into 
account the interests of all States Members of the 
Agency. The question of broadening the composition 
of the Board of Governors, which as we have 
already said touches upon one of the most important 
factors in the normal functioning of the Agency, 
requires, if it is to be solved, that all relevant 
circumstances be taken into account and comprehensively 
analysed; it requires, in fact, well-thought-out 
and carefully weighed decisions. 
(47) "Attempts to impose one solution or 
the other which would not reflect the opinions of 
different groups of countries represent a serious 
risk for the Agency. They could weaken the very 
foundation on which the Agency rests and disrupt 
that spirit of co-operation without which our 
organization could never work normally. To disrupt 
that co-operation would be to threaten the work 
and even the very existence of the Agency, which 
would be particularly dangerous at the present time, 
when it is about to undertake its new responsibilities 
under NPT. In consequence, the Soviet 
delegation calls once more on all participants in 
the General Conference to approach this question 
with a full understanding of its seriousness and 
its importance for the Agency. 
(48) "In the light of the review of the composition 
of the Board of Governors — one of the 
reasons for which, as was stressed in the resolution 
adopted at the twelfth session of the General Conference, 
is the large increase in the number 
of Members of the Agency and the desire to reflect 
GC(XIV)/OR.137 

a remarkable expansion in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy in many countries of the world — 
the matter of turning the Agency into a truly 
universal organization takes on particular urgency. 
Up to now such countries as the German Democratic 
Republic, the People's Republic of China and others 
have not been represented in the Agency, nor indeed 
in certain other international organizations. 

(49) "Particularly unjustified in present circumstances 
is the absence, in tlie Agency, of a 
country like the German Democratic Republic which 
has great achievements to its credit in the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy, was one of the first 
to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons and is at present starting negotiations 
with the Agency on the safeguards agreement 
required by the Treaty. It is perfectly obvious that 
acceptance of a country like the German Democratic 
Republic for membership of the Agency would 
contribute very largely to die success of the organization's 
work in all its aspects. 
(50) "Mr. President, the work of the Agency 
is very closely connected with the preservation of 
peace on earth. This explains the special responsibility 
we have, the importance of the tasks before 
us. On the Agency's success in handling these tasks 
its future activity, indeed its future as a whole, will 
depend. Let us hope that the present session of 
the General Conference will help the Agency to 
perform these tasks with success." 
44. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) said that during the 
preceding year two of the Agency's activities had 
been of particular interest, namely, outlining a 
system of safeguards in connection with NPT and 
the review of Article VI of the Statute, the importance 
of which lay in their implication for the 
Agency's work in future. 
45- It was to be noted that the Agency's other 

— traditional — activities had not lagged behind; and 
the Secretariat's efficiency was evident from its organization 
of the Second International Conference 
on Nuclear Data for Reactors, held in Helsinki in 
June 1970. 
46. Finland was taking measures for the construction 
of her first complete nuclear power plant, which 
had been ordered from the Soviet Union. The 
question of locating the plant, which would have a 
capacity of 800 MW, and be based on two 
pressurized-water reactors, in Loviisa and of connecting 
it to the transmission system was now under 
discussion. 
47. The bilateral agreements concluded with countries 
supplying enriched uranium or enrichment services 
provided for safeguarding of the material 
received under them to be exercised by the Agency, 

GC(XIV)/OR.137 

in conformity with NPT. Considerable progress had 
been made in the consultations on the transfer to 
the Agency of the safeguards responsibilities under 
the bilateral agreements Finland had concluded with 
the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, die United 
States and Sweden. The resumption of such consultations 
in the near future would depend on the 
outcome of the deliberations of the Safeguards 
Committee (1970). Finland had submitted to the 
Agency on 19 August 1970 a formal request for 
safeguards negotiations, in accordance with NPT. 

48. He wished to point out that the consultations 
Finland had carried out widi the Agency had been 
only in connection with its own obligations. It was 
worth mentioning that it had, even before starting 
bilateral negotiations with the four States, intended 
to submit its activities to Agency safeguards. 
49. In regard to the review of Article VI of the 
Statute, recalling his country's stand at the thirteenth 
General Conference9) and at the Ad Hoc Committee 
of the Whole to Review Article VI of the Statute, 
he emphasized that a durable and realistic solution 
could be based only on the broadest possible consensus, 
and the views expressed by the Swedish delegation 
in that connection deserved careful consideration. 
"50. Referring to the peaceful use of nuclear power 
he said that the plans for its application must be 
based on reality. Nuclear power would obviously 
play an important part in the power economy of the 
world, and its advantages were not confined only 
to the fact that it would enable the world's limited 
power resources to last longer. One of its primary 
advantages was that pollution would be easier to 
control than in the case of other forms of power 
production. The extent to which it would be used 
would depend ultimately on how the various problems 
involved in the trade in and the administration 
of nuclear power were solved. Any system devised 
in that connection must not be too cumbersome, 
since, as the problems associated with NPT safeguards 
showed, it might altogether stop trade in 
nuclear power or encourage such trade to take place 

outside international safeguards arrangements, as 
was now the case with the production of nuclear 
weapons. Technical development and continuous 
systems analysis would certainly free that trade from 
the multitude of restrictive provisions and enable the 
safeguards system to be simplified, for only such a 
system would make the countries safe from nuclear 
weapons. 

51. Mr. URSU (Romania) said that the President 
of the State Council of the Socialist Republic of 
Romania, Mr. Nicolae Ceau§escu, at present on a 
state visit to Austria, hoped to be able to address 
9) See document GC(XIII)/OR.128, para. 73. 

the General Conference. That was an indication of 
Romania's interest in international co-operation in 
the nuclear field, especially within the Agency, and 
in its own development in that important branch of 
modern science, technology and industry. As from 
the beginning of 1970, the responsibilities of the 
Romanian State Committee for Nuclear Energy, under 
its new organizational structure, covered the whole 
spectrum of nuclear problems from fundamental 
research to the industrialization of atomic energy. 
Conditions for developing the technical basis and 
for training the necessary specialists for implementing 
the national nuclear programme had thus been 
created. 

52. The first step was to create an institute of 
nuclear technology so that a complete network of 
research institutes could subsequently be set up. 
That institute, as well as undertaking fundamental 
and applied research, would deal with technological 
matters relating to power reactors and nuclear 
materials and would obtain the widespread participation 
of industry in implementing its tasks. 
53. Measures had been taken to enable nuclear 
units throughout the country to intensify and diversify 
the applications of radioisotopes and nuclear 
radiations in industry, agriculture, medicine and other 
areas. A nuclear training centre had recently been 
established to extend the co-ordination of efforts in 
training nuclear specialists; specialists in different 
areas at various levels would thus be available to 
satisfy the needs of the economy. In view of the 
considerable importance of information and documentation, 
a specialized centre was in the process 
of being organized in Romania. 
54. One of the main elements of the programme 
was international co-operation; that was why 
Romania was extending and intensifying its relations 
with other States, both bilaterally and through IAEA. 
In diat connection, Romania attached particular 
importance to co-operation with the Agency, to its 
activities and to its future development. 
55. The Agency's activity could not be examined 
outside the political context in which it took place. 
During the year that had passed since the last 
Conference, there had been encouraging developments 
in the spheres of detente, co-operation and 
mutual understanding between States. In Europe, 
for example, the idea of security and co-operation 
had lately gained ground and was becoming the 
main topic of the political dialogue between 
European States. It could be said that there was 
now a consensus in principle among European countries 
and other States concerned that a conference 
devoted to security and co-operation in Europe 
would be useful. 
56. Unfortunately, however, complex and serious 
problems were still worrying mankind. Those prob— 
12

GC(XIV)/OR.137 

lems could only be settled by the elimination of war 
and the abolition for good of the use of force and 
of the threat to use force in relations between 
nations, which must be based on unanimously 
recognized principles of international ethics and 
legality. 

57. The fundamental interests of peace and security 
demanded the immediate extinction of the sources 
of tension and conflict existing in various areas of 
the world, the cessation of aggression against the 
Viet-Nam, Laotian and Cambodian peoples and the 
securing of their rights to decide their own destiny, 
and the political settlement of the conflict in the 
Middle East on the basis of the Security Council 
resolution of November 196710). The total liquidation 
of the anachronistic vestiges of colonialism as 
well as of any forms of racial oppression and discrimination 
were imperative requirements. It was also 
necessary to assist States in their efforts to achieve 
independent economic and social progress. Concrete 
steps to limit the arms race, and the adoption of 
efficient disarmament measures, first of all in the 
nuclear field, would contribute to an improvement 
in the international political climate. 
58. Starting from the conviction that all States, 
large and small, bore considerable responsibility for 
the density of mankind and for peace, Romania 
actively promoted the cause of international security 
and co-operation. 
59. The Agency, whose main task was to encourage 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy was an important link in the system 
created by the United Nations for ensuring peace 
and progress through mutual understanding and 
co-operation. It had many possibilities for contributing 
to the accomplishment of that noble cause. 
60. In that connection, one problem whose settlement 
was becoming increasingly urgent because of 
the increasing role played by the Agency was the 
universality of the organization. He was referring to 
the re-establishment of the rights of the People's 
Republic of China, a nuclear power and a country 
with 700 million inhabitants, and also to the participation 
in the Agency's work of the German 
Democratic Republic, the People's Democratic 
Republic of Korea and the Democratic Republic of 
Viet-Nam. 
61. The annual report of the Board of Governors 
for 1969—70 once more confirmed his delegation's 
positive opinion of the Agency's activities. In particular 
the way the Agency had so far accomplished the 
task it had been given in respect of nuclear power 
assured his delegation that the Agency would be 
able to play an active part in all aspects of atomic 
10) 8/RES/242(1967). 

power industrialization and that it would further 
expand the range of interests and activities to the 
whole nuclear fuel cycle. 

62. The Agency's activities in the application of 
isotopes and radiation in industry, agriculture, 
medicine, biology, hydrology, etc. had expanded 
and, at the same time, had become more selective. 
63. A remarkable beginning had also been made 
in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear explosions. 
In that area, his delegation would like future activity 
to be extended to cover all technical and economic 
aspects. 
64. His delegation considered that increased 
attention should be given to the training of national 
cadres in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
65. The Agency's skill in administering the limited 
funds at its disposal for technical assistance was 
increasing, and it was gratifying that it was being 
given more and more projects under the UNDP 
Special Fund. In his delegation's opinion that demonstrated 
the Agency's ability to manage important 
scientific, human and financial resources successfully. 
66. His delegation welcomed the fact that the 
International Nuclear Information System had been 
put into operation. The Agency was to be congratulated 
on that worthy achievement. He was 
convinced that the activity of the system would 
contribute substantially to the development of research 
and to peaceful applications of atomic energy in 
Member States. 
67. The past year had marked a step forward in 
the strengthening of co-operation with the other 
specialized agencies of the United Nations family. 
In addition to the fruitful co-operation established 
between the IAEA and FAO, there had been cooperation 
with WHO, UNIDO and UNESCO. The 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics, the high 
standard of whose activity his delegation could not 
but commend once more, had benefited from the 
co-operation widi the latter. 
68. With regard to the Agency's tasks in relation 
to safeguards under NPT, his delegation hoped 
that unanimously acceptable solutions would be found 
for the important problems not yet solved, such as 
the financing of safeguards and the Agency's responsibility 
for possible nuclear damage. 
69. A problem of particular importance which had 
also been examined during the last year was that of 
amending Article VI of the Statute. The complexity 
of the problem was confirmed by the fact that after 
two years of negotiations, five proposals had been 
submitted to the General Conference. The Romanian 
delegation favoured the adoption of a solution which 
3



GC(XIV)/OR.137 

would simplify the Board's structure, without endangering 
its efficiency, and which would ensure an 
equitable geographical distribution. In its opinion, 
the elective seats on the Board should outnumber 
the others and, at the same time, a uniform rotation 
of those seats among States witliin each zone should 
be ensured. Because of the importance of the 
problem all efforts should be made, in a spirit of 
co-operation and mutual understanding, to obtain a 
final solution acceptable to all participants in the 
General Conference. 

70. The draft programme of the Agency for the 
years 1971—1976 had been drawn up competently 
and with a sense of responsibility. Included in it 
were the various fields of international co-operation, 
from nuclear power through the various uses of 
isotopes and radiations to research. The draft 
reflected the desire to deal with the latest subjects 
in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
and to find appropriate forms for international cooperation 
through IAEA. 
71. Reasonable stress was put on nuclear power, 
and the programmes relating to the uses of isotopes 
and radiation demonstrated the Agency's intention to 
follow future developments in the fields in which 
they were used so that it could pay attention to the 
efficiency of those uses on a continuous basis. 
72. The problem of training national personnel was 
a major one, which required particular attention. In 
view of the considerable developments in the nuclear 
field, and especially in nuclear power, the Agency's 
training activities could also include the training of 
technical personnel. Co-operation with other organizations 
of the United Nations family for that purpose 
was possible. In the field of safeguards, the Agency 
could provide assistance to its Member States in the 
training of inspectors for national control systems. 
Such an activity would facilitate the Agency's tasks in 
the application of its safeguards system. 
73. His delegation would make additional and 
more detailed comments on the draft programme 
and on the budget when they were discussed in the 
appropriate committee. 
74. With regard to the future activity of the 
Agency, his delegation considered that a reasonable 
balance should be sought between the major tasks 
set forth in the Statute and its increased responsibilities 
in the domain of applying the safeguards system. 
75. The need for such a balance also derived from 
NPT. The Treaty was, in essence, a positive instrument; 
on the one hand, it constituted a link in a 
chain of measures aimed at achieving nuclear disarmament 
and, on the other, it must not hinder, but 
rather encourage, development in the States Parties 
to it in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
as well as international co-operation. In his delegation's 
view IAEA should conceive its furdier activity 
as an effective contribution to the integral application 
of the letter and the spirit of NPT. Disarmament, 
development and co-operation in the nuclear field 
were the major purposes for which the Agency 
existed. 

76. The desire for balance was at the basis of his 
delegation's position regarding the draft budget of 
the Agency. It noted that for the next year the draft 
budget provided small increases, both in absolute 
and in relative terms, for financing research activities, 
training of personnel, exchange of information, etc. 
It hoped, however, that a proper solution would be 
found in the future. His delegation would vote for 
the proposed Regular Budget. 
77. His delegation also supported the draft 
Operational Budget. In that connection, he was able 
to announce the decision of his Government to 
contribute to the Operational Budget in 1971. 
78. Mr. SERRANO (Chile) paid tribute to the 
memory of the late Dr. Pretsch, who had led the 
delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany at 
the thirteenth session of the General Conference. 
79. Referring to the Director General's statement 
to the effect that it was either necessary to set up 
more international organizations or to reorganize the 
existing ones in such a way as would enable them to 
fulfil their objectives more efficiently and serve 
Member States more effectively11), he said that it 
expressed the dilemma confronting the world community 
and now the Agency. Chile and other countries, 
in particular the developing and Latin American 
countries, in collaboration with some advanced countries, 
had been trying to carry through the necessary 
reforms which would enable the Agency to fulfil its 
objectives more efficiently and serve Member States 
more effectively, as the Director General had said. 
That was the sole purpose of the draft resolution 
submitted by 21 countries, including Chile, in 
connection with the review of Article VI of the 
Statute and the proposed enlargement of the Board 
of Governors. 
80. Bearing in mind the urgent need to change the 
existing situation in the international organizations 
and to guide their efforts in the direction required by 
present-day realities, his country, together with other 
developing lands and some more advanced countries, 
had endeavoured to find a solution to the serious 
problem of financing safeguards in connection with 
NPT; the purpose was in fact to transform the internal 
financing mechanism of the Agency, within the 
limits laid down by its Statute, and thereby to ensure 
that the organization did not become solely an inter11) 
GC(XIV)/OR.135,para. 57. 

-14



GC(XIV)/OR.137 

national police force but could continue to serve 
developing countries, providing diem with the technical 
assistance they needed so urgently. 

81. The Director General had requested that the 
target for voluntary contributions be increased to 
$3 million, but one of $2.5 million only had been 
approved. Nevertheless, the cost of applying safeguards 
under NPT would rise by 50% in the coming 
year alone. 
82. Unless Article VI was amended and the joint 
resolution— which was fair, moderate and rational — 
approved, many countries would lose interest in the 
Agency and give serious thought to establishing 
others, a possibility about which the Director 
General had already uttered words of caution. It was 
essential to find a fair and logical solution, in 
conformity with Article XIV. C of the Statute, to the 
problem of financing safeguards, without detriment 
to technical assistance to developing countries. If 
such a solution were not found, thought might be 
given, as he had said, to the establishment of a new 
organization; indeed, his country had mooted that 
possibility some time back in the United Nations 
General Assembly. 
83. Referring to the practical participation of his 
country in the process of scientific and technical 
advance, he noted with satisfaction that the nuclear 
development policy followed by Chile conformed to 
many of the recommendations contained in the 
report submitted by the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations to the General Assembly in 196912) . 
That report, entided "Contributions of nuclear 
technology to the economic and scientific advancement 
of the developing countries", stated among 
other things: 
"The decision to embark on a nuclear power 
programme should only be taken by a developing 
country after making a comprehensive study of its 
long-term power needs and of the various ways of 
meeting them. This study should also take into 
account the prerequisite level of the scientific and 
technological infrastructure, as well as the indirect 
beneficial effects that will result from the introduction 
of the new technology." 

84. Concerning the proposed nuclear study centres, 
the report added: 
"Where there is an intention to have a nuclear 
power station operating within ten years, however, 
a local research reactor is desirable... It provides 
first-hand experience for reactor physicists, chemists 
and engineers, and forms a base for the embryo 
reactor-safety organization." 

85. In the opinion of his delegation, economic 
development required an intelligent combination and 
12) United Nations document A/7568. 

concentration of natural and capital resources, which 
could not be achieved unless a high priority were 
attached to investment in human resources — to 
higher education and the establishment of a national 
scientific and technological base. For that purpose, 
his country had in recent years placed particular 
emphasis on the establishment of national institutes 
for basic and applied research. The Centro Nacional 
de Estudios Nucleares (National Centre for Nuclear 
Studies), which had started functioning in May 1970, 
was to have a 5-MW research reactor which would go 
into operation in 1971, as well as two subcritical 
piles, caesium and cobalt irradiation units and many 
other facilities for all-round development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

86. Furthermore, long-term studies of the national 
power problem had led to the preparation of a 
systematic plan for nuclear power plants in Chile, 
the first of which was expected to start operation in 
the northern (desert) zone of the country within 
five years. By the end of the 1980s several nuclear 
power plants with a total capacity of about a million 
kilowatts would be installed in the central part of 
Chile. 
87. His country would welcome further action by 
the Agency to encourage the construction of lowand 
medium-power nuclear reactors. The manufacturers 
had dius far concentrated their efforts on 
developing large nuclear plants. Studies had been 
carried out in Chile with a view to determining the 
size at which small reactors would become economically 
attractive, but costs had generally been found 
to be too high owing to the rise in the price of 
nuclear plants in recent years. 
88. An international meeting on low-power nuclear 
plants had already been held under the auspices of 
the Agency, and another was expected to be held 
later on. On die basis of the ideas put forward in 
those studies, his country had established contacts 
at the Latin American regional level to see whether 
it would be possible to stimulate a common interest 
in preparing joint requests for projects in a number 
of countries of the area. The Agency, through a 
mechanism of that type, could play a very valuable 
role in combining and standardizing existing projects 
in developing countries. 
89. His delegation wished to stress the need for 
joint action by the potential users of low-power 
reactors. They should try to establish common bases 
and specifications in order to create a sufficiently 
attractive market so that industrialists of the 
advanced countries could, within the framework of a 
multinational project, which would bring into play 
the facilities of commercial exchange available between 
interregional markets, implement a single project 
involving much lower investment costs than those 
prevailing at present. That would permit the gen

GC(XIV)/OR.137 

eration of nuclear electric power in developing countries 
which otherwise had to import conventional 
fuel — and at a cost competitive with that of the 
power generated by such fuel. In other words, Chile 
wished to propose the establishment of a "club of 
small nuclear power users", and hoped that the 
Agency would give it due consideration. 

90. In pursuing its national development plans, 
Chile did not subscribe to the criterion advocated 
by some financial organizations, namely that a country's 
first nuclear power plants should be evaluated 
on a strictly economic basis. There were, in fact, 
elements which were difficult to quantify but which, 
nevertheless, had a real and decisive impact on the 
social development of a country; the new technology 
acted as a catalyst in stimulating a general improvement 
of educational, scientific and technical standards, 
and made itself felt in industry, agriculture, administrative 
organization, and so on. 
91. Development was basically the task of the 
peoples concerned. But the interests of peace among 
nations, and indeed the properly understood interests 
of the rich countries, made it important to help 
those who helped themselves. The Agency was a 
tool which could, and should, be used in furthering 
those high purposes. Holding that conviction as it 
did, his country highly appreciated the steady and 
timely technical help it received under the regular 
technical assistance programmes of the Agency. 
92. Lastly, his delegation wished to propose that 
a regional officer, like the one for Asia and the Far 
East, be appointed for Latin America. 
93. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said that outside 
assistance had helped channel Argentina's own 
efforts, which were now reflected in a nuclear programme 
for the next decade, involving the massive 
application of nuclear energy to the development of 
the country. The implementation of that programme 
was possible thanks to the fact that the work done 
and the results obtained by the Argentine Atomic 
Energy Commission were indicative of a state of 
maturity sufficient to permit formulation of the following 
immediate objectives: 
(1) The use of nuclear power — by means 
of the installation of a series of power reactors — 
in projects to meet the growing demand for electricity. 
Argentine industry was participating to the extent 
of 40% in the Atucha Nuclear Power Station, which 
would go into operation in 1973. Industry was 
expected to participate to the extent of 60% in a 
second nuclear power station, of 500 MW capacity; 
to be constructed in the Province of Cordoba and 
scheduled to go into operation in 1976. A further 
two stations, of even larger capacity, were planned 
for 1978 and 1980; 
(2) The development of resources in the 
field of nuclear fuel, ranging from the design, testing 
and fabrication of fuel elements in an industrial 
plant to their reprocessing and the disposal of radioactive 
wastes; 
(3) Promotion of the applications of radioisotopes 
and radiations; 
(4) Development of the existing scientific 
and technological infrastructure; 
(5) The introduction of ever more advanced 
safety measures to protect the population against 
radiation hazards. 
94. A vital feature of that programme consisted of 
the progressive transfer of its component items to 
the various activities constituting the Argentine 
economy, beginning with the primary sector and 
continuing via agricultural and stockbreeding applications 
to. support for industry, which was being 
invited to participate in implementation of the programme. 
95. The progress which had been made in 
Argentina in the nuclear field over the past five years 
and which showed an average annual expansion of 
40%, made it possible to look forward with optimism 
to the future. A programme of that kind was closely 
bound up with effective support at international 
level, and valuable co-operation was awaited from 
IAEA. 
96. An analysis of the annual report of the Board 
of Governors and of the Agency's budget for 1971, 
which his delegation fully accepted, revealed various 
satisfactory trends as regards the organization's cooperation 
with Member States. 
97. His delegation wished to express its satisfaction 
at the progress made in the co-ordinated research 
programmes in the fields of food and agriculture, 
which represented activities of vital importance for 
the developing countries and therefore ought to 
receive preferential attention in the future. 
98. The programme on nuclear power and reactors 
and on health and safety, which constituted a source 
of advice for the developing countries, likewise 
deserved full support. 
99- His delegation wished to stress its interest in 
the full success of the INIS programme and hoped 
that the system would extend its field of action to 
cover the maximum volume of information available 
in the world on the subject. 

100. The continuing lack of proportion between 
the funds allocated to technical assistance and the 
volume of the requests submitted to the Agency by 
Governments continued to be a subject of great 
-16



GC(XIV)/OR.137 

concern. The extent to which available resources 
had increased up to the present time scarcely compensated 
for the rise in costs and did not meet the 
needs which arose from the expansion of nuclear 
activities in the developing countries. His delegation 
also shared the concern of the group of Latin 
American countries at the fact that funds earmarked 
for that region had been decreasing. It was hoped 
that that situation would be corrected in the future. 

101. Regarding the application of safeguards, he 
considered that it was one of the basic activities of 
the Agency to ensure that nuclear materials were 
devoted to peaceful uses and accordingly Argentina 
had agreed that its first nuclear power station should 
be voluntarily placed under the safeguards system. 
102. He noted that the funds allocated for safeguards 
activities were rapidly increasing, while on 
the other hand it had not been possible to provide 
for an adequate expansion of technical assistance 
activities. 
103. Argentina recognized and appreciated the 
efforts of the Director General to find solutions for 
any difficulties which had arisen, and considered it of 
the greatest importance that the Agency should 
redouble its efforts to develop procedures and 
systems for the efficient and economic application of 
safeguards. 
104. He was pleased to inform the Conference that 
his Government had authorized him to state that 
Argentina would maintain its voluntary contribution 
at the same rate as hitherto, furnishing the sum of 
$21000. 
105. On the subject of the Argentine attitude to the 
amendment of Article VI of the Statute, as defined at 
the February series of meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee 
of the Whole, at which his delegation had 
presented the proposal now before the Conference 
in document GC(XIV)/437, section A.5, he wished 
in conclusion to recall what had been said on that 
occasion: 
"Although not ideal, our proposal nevertheless 
presents a compromise formula which best reconciles 
the need of the Board of Governors for an improvement 
in its organization with the interests of 
Member States. It is in this spirit that we are submitting 
it, as an imperfect human achievement, but 
the best which can be offered under the present 
circumstances." 

106. Mr. YANG (China) said that it was a great 
honour and privilege for him to report to the fourteenth 
regular session of the General Conference 
on the present position of the Republic of China in 
the field of nuclear research and to put forward his 
country's views on some pertinent problems relevant 
to that field. 
107. The year now ending was the first year following 
ratification of NPT. That Treaty was, of 
course, a great landmark in the history of the development 
and peaceful use of nuclear energy, and the 
Republic of China lent whole-hearted support both 
to NPT and to the Agency's programme thereunder. 
The year now ending had seen the Agency adopt an 
even more important and more complex role on the 
world stage: on the one hand it had promoted even 
more vigorously the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy, and on the other, it had assumed the duty of 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
108. In 1969 his delegation had reported to the 
Conference China's plans for the construction of a 
nuclear power plant, which would be the first of a 
series 1}). Considerable progress had been made 
towards completing that plant, and the plans for the 
entire series had now crystallized to a large extent. 
The first BWR-type nuclear power plant of 
604 MW(e) had already been contracted for, and it 
was planned to have that unit in commercial operation 
in 1975. The second unit, a duplication of the 
first, was expected to go into operation in 1976, and 
the third plant, of 800 MW(e) capacity, was scheduled 
for operation in 1980. His Government wished 
to express its gratitude to the Agency for sending a 
team of experts to assist in the site selection for 
those projects and for its offer of assistance in the 
evaluation of the safety analysis of the proposed 
plant. 
109- Another project that had first been reported 
in 1969 had been the erection of a materials testing 
reactor of heavy-water type. Construction work was 
now under way and the reactor was scheduled for 
completion in 1973. In conjunction with that facility, 
a 10-kW pool-type reactor using spent fuel of the 
existing Tsing Hua Open-pool (THOR) Reactor was 
also under construction. 

110. All the reactors to which he had referred 
would naturally require the application of Agency 
safeguards, and in due course China would submit a 
request to the Agency for that purpose. 
111. Increasing difficulties faced the Agency in the 
safeguards field. The two most important problems 
were probably the shortage of qualified personnel 
and the provision of financial support. One possible 
way of coping with the first problem would be to 
encourage Member States to establish their own 
national nuclear materials management systems in 
harmony with Agency requirements, a move which 
might well decrease manpower requirements. The 
second problem — that of financial support — was 
also a serious one, which had to be solved in such 
a way that the financial burden would not be beyond 
the capacity of the developing countries. 
13) See document GC(XIII)/OR.lJl, para. 65. 

-17



GC(XIV)/OR.137 

112. His delegation also wished to express its 
appreciation of the immense contribution made by 
regional and interregional co-operation in the field 
of nuclear science under the Agency's auspices. Since 
regional co-operation was one of the most effective 
and economical ways of promoting nuclear research 
in developing countries, it was his earnest hope that 
a solid and realistic programme could be formulated 
in that department. 
113. Apart from the services of a capable staff, the 
Agency needed the direction of its policies and programmes 
by a Board of Governors which reflected 
the views of the entire membership. If the provisions 
of the Statute concerning the composition of the 
Board of Governors were to be amended and a reapportionment 
of regional representation carried out, 
it was his delegation's hope that the result would be 
a well-balanced representation in which the claims of 
no section were overlooked. He would point out 
that there were many rapidly-developing and denselypopulated 
regions of the world, including the region 
in which China was situated, which were well 
deserving of increased^ representation. 
114. Among die programmes which had merited his 
Government's support and appreciation, special 
mention should be made of those which had contributed 
so much to the exchange of information. Those 
programmes involved fellowships, visiting professors, 
technical experts and various conferences and 
symposia on a number of important topics. China 
hoped that all those programmes, and others such as 
The meeting 

the research contracts programme, would be expanded 
and developed in die years ahead. 

115. In closing, he wished to express his appreciation 
of the admirable work done by the Secretariat 
in preparing a sound programme for the period 
1971—76 and a well-balanced budget for the coming 
year. His Government was happy to support the 
programme and the budget which would finance it. 
Following its customary policy and in response to 
the Agency's request, China would place at the 
Agency's disposal a cash contribution of US $ 10 000, 
together widi some domestically manufactured nuclear 
equipment. His country was indeed happy to have 
the opportunity to give some token of its devotion 
to the great work which the Agency was performing 
and its appreciation of the contribution it had made 
to China's own welfare. 
VISIT OF H.E. PRESIDENT 
NICOLAE CEAU§ESCU TO THE AGENCY 


116. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that 
His Excellency Mr. Nicolae Ceaus.escu, President of 
the State Council of Romania, was to visit the 
Agency on Friday, 25 September 1970, and had 
expressed a wish to address the General Conference. 
117. He was sure he would be expressing the views 
of all in saying that delegations would feel honoured 
to be addressed by His Excellency at the beginning 
of the plenary meeting that morning. 
at 5.55p.m. 

-18



GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XIV)/OR.138 
24 February 1971* 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 

ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 24 September 1970, at 10.40 a.m. 

President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
Paragraphs 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1969—70 (continued) 1—117 

Statements by the delegates of 

Viet-Nam 1— 8 
Japan 9- 21 
France 22— 46 
Austria 47— 55 
Netherlands 56— 62 
Hungary 63— 72 

Gabon 73— 78 
Norway 79— 82 
Belgium 8 3— 99 

Poland 
100—117 

A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 September 1970. 
GC(XIV)/442. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 


GC(XIV)/OR.138 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1969-70 
(GC(XIV)/430, 440) 

1. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam) was pleased 
to note that the Agency had prepared a sound and 
rational plan for its activities during the following 
six years, and congratulated and thanked the Director 
General and the Secretariat. The programme indeed 
laid down the guidelines for concerted action at 
international level, which would help Member States 
to develop their nuclear programmes in a way that 
would promote international and regional cooperation. 
2. Viet-Nam commended the Agency's unrelenting 
efforts to promote such collaboration between 
various countries in South East Asia and the Far 
East by helping them to prepare a number of sound 
and useful projects and outline an appropriate legal 
framework within which those projects could be 
executed jointly by the countries concerned. In that 
respect, the results achieved at the meeting organized 
by the Agency at Bangkok in July 1970 were most 
encouraging, since they reflected the desire of the 
countries in the region to participate in co-operative 
projects which were assured of definite assistance 
by the Agency. His country therefore wished every 
success to diat laudable attempt to integrate research 
and training projects in a regional context. 
3. In spite of the chronic scarcity of resources, 
the Agency's record in the field of technical assistance 
was praiseworthy, and it was gratifying that 
the programme took account of the aspirations of 
most of the developing countries. It was indeed 
remarkable that the proportion of the resources 
allotted to equipment had, in the current year, 
reached the highest level so far, namely 25 % of the 
total commitment. Furthermore, the proposed programme 
for the coming years gave evidence of a 
novel approach and of an attempt to impart flexibility 
to the implementation procedures. He took 
note of all the new prospects which the Agency's 
programme offered: the possibility of supply of equipment 
without expert services in justified cases, the 
use of Agency staff members for short-term expert 
missions, the grouping of projects of the same nature 
with a view to entrusting them to the same expert, 
and the dispatch of small missions to help national 
authorities prepare technical co-operation requests 
and, where appropriate, to interest several Governments 
in regional projects of common interest, for 
which more substantial assistance could then be made 
available. Such an approach was bound to mean 
increased effectiveness in regard to the receiving 
countries. 
4. In that connection, the agreement concluded 
the previous year between the Agency and Sweden 
for financing technical assistance projects was another 
proof of the Agency's efforts and a gesture of international 
solidarity, which deserved to be greeted 
warmly. He expressed the hope that other industrially 
advanced States would also increase their 
financial support to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. 

5. The scarcity of qualified technicians remained 
one of the major concerns common to all developing 
countries. It was therefore necessary to encourage 
training, preferably within a regional framework, 
through the utilization of existing nuclear facilities 
and research establishments, since that would lead 
to a considerable reduction in the costs devolving 
upon trainees, ensure training under living and working 
conditions comparable to those prevailing in their 
native countries, and promote the establishment of 
relations favouring future collaboration. 
6. He stressed the undeniable usefulness of the 
standards and recommendations prepared by the 
Agency on nuclear safety and pointed out that the 
acceptance of many of them by WHO was likely 
to facilitate collaboration between the health authorities 
and the authorities responsible for atomic energy 
in various countries. It was at present planned to 
expand the Viet-Namese dosimetry laboratory and 
he noted with interest that in that field, too, the 
Agency would continue to provide advisory services 
and technical assistance. 
7. Referring to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)1), he stressed the 
great interest his country was taking in the deliberations 
of the Safeguards Committee (1970). However, 
the most thorny issue yet to be disposed of 
was the financing of the application of safeguards 
under NPT. He hoped that the Committee would 
be able to find a compromise solution acceptable 
to the majority of the developing countries. Otherwise, 
it would be paradoxical to proclaim that NPT 
would reinvigorate international co-operation, and, 
in particular encourage peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
in developing countries, yet start by imposing on 
them regular contributions at a level much too high 
in relation to their modest resources. It was more 
an ethical problem than one of rights and obligations, 
and the solution should not offend the 
conscience of the nations with the least means. 
8. In regard to the Director General's wondering 
whether it was appropriate to create new international 
organizations or reorganize the existing ones so as 
to make them more effective instruments, he pointed 
out that during the preceding decade the Agency 
had proved to be one of the most efficient organizations 
in the United Nations family, and he was 
pleased to note that it had been called upon by the 
international community to assume increased respon1) 
Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 

— 2 — 


sibilities in the coming years. He expressed the 
hope that one day, through some tacit agreement 
on the non-proliferation of international organizations, 
those which were functioning efficiently, such as the 
Agency, would have available the resources needed 
to carry out their mission to the full. 

9. Mr. NIISEKI (Japan) said that the present 
General Conference was especially significant as being 
the first since the coming into force of NPT which 
would lead to an increase in the Agency's safeguards 
responsibilities. At the same time the Agency was 
expected to devote increasing attention to its basic 
functions of promoting international co-operation, 
exchanging scientific and technical information, giving 
technical assistance and aiding in other ways of 
making peaceful use of atomic energy. 
10. Turning to recent developments in nuclear 
energy in Japan, he said that there were two reactors 
producing nuclear energy on a commercial basis and 
that two more would become operational the following 
month. Their total output would amount to 
approximately 1300 MW. Five more power reactors 
with a total output of 3400 MW were under 
construction. The Government was aiming at a total 
output of approximately 8700 MW by 1975 and 
approximately 27 000 MW by 1980. The Japan 
Atomic Industrial Forum had recently announced 
that its long-term objective of nuclear power generation 
was 60 000 MW by 1985 and 120 000 MW by 
1990. Nuclear power would thus become the largest 
source of power generation, representing 42% of 
Japan's total electrical power generation capacity. 
At the same time the construction of related 
machinery and the industrialization of nuclear fuel 
processing were making steady progress. With a view 
to establishing a proper fuel cycle Japan was also 
making efforts to promote, in close co-operation with 
the countries concerned, the development of uranium 
enrichment techniques, effective utilization of plutonium 
and the construction of a reprocessing plant. 
Japan was also developing an advanced type of converter 
and a fast breeder to make more efficient use 
of nuclear fuel and to reduce power generating costs. 
11. In addition to the generation of nuclear power, 
attention was also given to the multi-purpose utilization 
of reactors, including desalination, use of process 
heat and application to steel manufacturing. The 
introduction of nuclear energy into the steel industry 
to meet Japan's predictable shortage of cooking 
fuel had become a matter of great urgency. His 
country was therefore planning to embark on a 
research and development programme for a hightemperature 
reactor. 
12. As an application of radiation in the medical 
field treatment of brain tumours by the use of 
thermal neutrons in a reactor had been carried out 
and a cyclotron would be constructed in a research 
GC(XIV)/OR.138 

centre to solve various problems relating to the treatment 
of all types of tumour. 

13. Turning to the environmental problems of the 
nuclear industry, he said that the industry throughout 
the world had since its inception been conscious 
of the possibilities of environmental pollution and 
that various preventive measures had been taken. 
14. The merits of nuclear power generation over 
thermal power generation in so far as environmental 
pollution was concerned had come to be appreciated 
particularly in Japan and constituted a further incentive 
to the development of nuclear power generation. 
The treatment of radioactive wastes and their disposal 
into the environment would continue to present a 
formidable problem the solution of which required 
international co-operation. In particular the disposal 
of such waste into the sea called for urgent concerted 
action. His delegation endorsed the suggestions 
made by the Director General at the opening of the 
session and hoped that the Agency would intensify 
its efforts to establish technical standards for the disposal 
of radioactive wastes into the sea in close 
co-operation with the international community. 
15. Turning to the safeguards question he said 
that the Safeguards Committee (1970) had recommended 
important principles and basic guidelines for 
the Agency's safeguards. Those principles had been 
accepted and endorsed by the Board of Governors 
as a basis for negotiations with the States Parties 
to NPT. 
16. Singling out some of the important principles 
that had emerged from the discussions he was 
pleased to note the explicit confirmation of the 
principle that the Agency safeguards should be applied 
in such a manner as to enable the Agency to verify 
findings of the State's system of materials control. 
It was primarily the State which assumed the 
responsibility of fulfilling obligations under NPT. 
It had also been agreed that the Agency's verification 
should include independent measurements and observations. 
But how could the Agency safeguards 
be effectively applied to the flow of nuclear materials 
in a great number of States without the co-operation 
of the States concerned and without making the 
best possible use of their own control systems? 
17. He noted further that it had been agreed to 
ensure the optimum cost-effectiveness in safeguards. 
The adoption of that principle was of great importance 
in developing rational, simplified and effective 
safeguards. Japan had been the first country to 
volunteer to accept the Agency's safeguards in 1959 
and at present the number of facilities in Japan 
subject to safeguards represented almost one-third 
of the total number of facilities under the Agency's 
safeguards throughout the world. His delegation 
hoped that the Safeguards Committee at its next 
-3



GC(XIV)/OR.138 

meetings would not indulge in rhetoric but try to 
work out practicably and rationally safeguards applicable 
to all States. 

18. He also appreciated the agreed principle that 
information pertaining to facilities should be the 
minimum necessary for safeguarding nuclear materials 
subject to safeguards. 
19. The technical and procedural parts of safeguards 
should fully embody and be truly consistent with 
principles and guidelines recommended by the Safeguards 
Committee and endorsed by the Board of 
Governors. The whole set of safeguards — principles 
and technical implications — would have vital impact 
upon Japan's position vis-a-vis the ratification of 
NPT, as his Government had made clear in its statement 
at the signing of NPT. 
20. With regard to the problem of the financing 
of safeguards he considered that the cost of safeguards 
should be shared by the world community 
and that no unfair burden should be imposed on 
non-nuclear-weapon-States to which safeguards were 
applied. 
21. He recalled that the Agency's basic purpose 
was to promote the peaceful applications of atomic 
energy. The safeguards could not alter the fundamental 
character of the organization; they were meant 
to ensure the peaceful uses of nuclear materials. 
Otherwise, the purpose of NPT and of the Agency 
would be defeated. 
22. Mr. HIRSCH (France) stressed that the rapid 
acceleration of technological development had been 
specially evident in the sphere of nuclear power 
generation, the need for which would be increasingly 
felt in the years to come with the continuing rise 
in the price of fuel-oil and coal. 
23. The drawbacks of that development includes 
lengthening construction times, a rise in the cost 
of reactors and also technical hitches in the manufacture 
and starting up of units. Thus, in 1969 a 
human error caused the melting of a fuel element 
and led to the Saint-Laurent-des-Eaux power station 
being out of action for a year, a measure made 
necessary by the complex decontamination operations 
in the power station to remove molten and even 
volatilized uranium. It would be desirable for the 
Agency to collect all available information on such 
incidents and on the solutions adopted, so that the 
experience of one country could be of use to others. 
24. He emphasized, however, that the various incidents 
which had occurred in existing power stations 
had never had any serious effects on the environment. 
In general, in spite of the denigration 
campaigns, nuclear power was a technology tiiat was 
developing with an awareness of the limits of pollution 
which gave it a certain advantage over conventional 
power stations, in particular in the case of 
atmospheric pollution. 

25. The Agency should play a growing role in 
radiation protection and radioactive waste management, 
and also in the co-ordination of the available 
data on nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes. 
In die last-named sphere the Agency had taken the 
welcome initiative of convening the first international 
meeting ever to be held, in the course of which 
French experts had given details of the original 
results obtained during underground explosions in 
hard rock. He hoped that at the right time the 
French experience could be used for industrial purposes. 
Mention should also be made of the importance 
of the symposium organized by the Agency 
in New York, in collaboration with the United States 
Atomic Energy Commission, on the environmental 
effects of nuclear power stations. The papers submitted 
had once again led to the unanimous conclusion 
that no industry had from its very beginning 
shown as much concern for the control of pollution 
as had the nuclear industry. 
26. The Agency must also play an important role 
in the sphere of controlled fusion. France approved 
of the conclusions of a study group which had met 
under the Agency's auspices at Trieste in June 1970, 
when it had been suggested that an international 
fusion research council should be established under 
the Agency's sponsorship, having the aim of coordinating 
programmes on the basis of the systematic 
exchange of information on projects and experiences 
and not only on scientific results. That first stage, 
which had been reached several years ago by the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), 
could be followed by an effective concentration programme 
effort which might reach the ultimate objective 
— the implementation of joint international 
projects. 
27. Turning to the more specific achievements of 
the Agency, he welcomed the fact that in 1969 
the latter had provided more technical assistance 
than in any other year. It was not unreasonable 
that a third of that technical assistance concerned 
the application of isotopes and radiation in medicine 
and agriculture, because that was a sphere in which 
the benefits to countries were obtained immediately 
and which did not require financial resources beyond 
the budgets available. 
28. Unfortunately, the funds devoted to technical 
assistance and to all the Agency's other scientific 
activities were threatened on the one hand by the 
increase in the financial resources devoted to staff 
salaries and general costs and on the other by the 
inevitable rise in the cost of safeguards. In I960 
staff salaries and general costs had represented 58% 
of the total budget. In 1971 they would represent 
-4



GC(XIV)/OR.138 

74%, which meant that the part devoted to substantive 
activities had decreased from 42% to 26% 
in ten years. If that problem was not solved there 
was the danger that in a few years' time the Agency 
would find itself at a dead end, the budget being 
almost completely swallowed up by the salaries of a 
staff that would no longer have any resources with 
which to work. The solution was to give greater 
freedom to the Director General to transfer staff 
from one division to another and at the same time 
to authorize him not to fill certain less important 
posts when they fell vacant, the budget of course 
remaining the same so that the reduction in staff 
costs would benefit the Agency's activities proper. 

29. He also hoped that there would be a ceiling 
to the number of staff with permanent contracts, 
which should in any case not exceed the present 
25%. 
30. At Geneva, the Director General had recently 
been alone among the executive heads of the international 
organizations belonging to the United 
Nations family in opposing a general increase in the 
salaries paid by those organizations and the United 
Nations. 
31. In general, the rigidity of the Agency's administrative 
regulations or practices should never 
stand in the way of economies. For example, it had 
become customary to hold a short session of the 
Board of Governors before the General Conference; 
that session had often been useful. But it was totally 
unreasonable to incur Secretariat expenditure and to 
bring national representatives to a session with an 
agenda consisting of two or three routine items, 
as had just been the case at the lightning meeting 
on 18 September 1970. The Director General should 
be in a position to cancel widi the necessary advance 
notice such a meeting if it seemed clear to him that 
it would not deal with any useful item of substance 
before the General Conference. 
32. The other threat which hung over the Agency's 
budget was linked with the inevitable increase in the 
funds devoted to safeguards. Control activities were 
bound to play an increasingly important part in the 
Agency's work, but in the interest of its general 
programme it was vital that that increase should 
not take place at the expense of scientific activities. 
33. His delegation had followed with interest the 
meetings of the Safeguards Committee set up by the 
Board of Governors with a view to the negotiations 
to be concluded between the Agency and the nonnuclear 
States Parties to NPT. Attention was rightly 
focused on "light" control operations the purpose of 
which was to verify the exactness of the accounting 
procedures adopted by each country or possibly by 
groups of countries, such as EURATOM. The fundamental 
principles established by the Safeguards 
Committee would permit the Director General to 
start negotiations within the time limits laid down 
by the Treaty. 

34. His delegation hoped that the question of 
financing safeguards could be solved satisfactorily. 
The coming into force of NPT and the considerable 
increase in control activities resulting therefrom indeed 
strengthened the reservations which his delegation 
had been expressing for several years with 
regard to the present practice. Controls could not 
continue to be financed out of the Agency's Regular 
Budget. From 1972 onwards there must be two 
different budgets: the first would cover all preliminary 
work and general expenditure incurred by the Agency 
in the course of developing control techniques and 
controlling all nuclear installations of a noncommercial 
nature, such as research reactors. That 
budget would be financed by all Members of the 
Agency on the normal scale of assessed contributions. 
The second budget would cover all expenses relating 
to installations of a commercial nature, refineries, 
fuel fabrication and reprocessing plants, nuclear power 
stations etc.; that budget should essentially be the 
responsibility of the countries parties to the bilateral 
or multilateral agreements under which the controls 
were being exercised. 
35. Equally, if certain countries with nuclear 
weapons wished to put their civilian installations under 
the Agency's control it would be the natural thing 
if they themselves assumed the total cost of that 
control. The effect would no doubt be to restrict 
to a reasonable limit the number of installations 
being controlled, because if those countries placed 
the whole of their enormous civilian installations 
under control the result would be an expenditure 
that was both substantial and unnecessary. 
36. The routine character of the inspection operations 
was such that it would be difficult to keep 
inspectors interested in them for a long period if, 
as at present, they continued to be qualified 
engineers. It seemed desirable that the operations 
should in the future be undertaken by competent 
technicians instead of engineers, a change that would 
result in some financial saving without risking in 
any way the effectiveness of inspection. 
37. The question of safeguards was not the only 
political problem that had occupied the Board of 
Governors in the course of the past year. No less 
important was the question of its composition, bearing 
in mind the increase in the number of Members of 
the Agency and the development of nuclear energy 
in the world. In view of those trends, France had 
for the last two years supported the Italian move 
to bring about reform of the Agency's governing 
body. Although an increase from 25 to 34 Members 
was somewhat larger than that which his delegation 
— 5

GC(XIV)/OR.138 

had envisaged, the Italian proposal 2) of which his 
country was a co-sponsor was the one that came 
closest to an equitable solution acceptable to all and 
should be adopted by the General Conference at its 
present session. 

38. Conscious of the limits of its financial effort 
in the sphere of voluntary contributions, the French 
Government had decided to present to the Agency 
electronic or other research equipment for the 
Seibersdorf and Monaco Laboratories to a value of 
approximately 100 000 francs. 
39- It also renewed the offer of 10 fellowships 
intended for research workers who already had some 
experience and who wished to undergo advanced 
training in their basic discipline. During 1970, of 
the 11 candidates proposed by the Agency eight had 
been accepted and their training had just begun or 
was about to begin in October. A further dozen 
or so French experts had helped the Agency in its 
task of'providing technical assistance. A number of 
the expert missions had been of long duration. 

40. Further, various French nuclear research centres 
had opened their doors to some 30 Agency fellowship 
holders for basic or advanced training courses. 
41. At the beginning of September 1970 anAgency 
symposium had been held at Aix-en-Provence on 
development in the management of low and intermediate-
level radioactive wastes. Participants in the 
symposium had been able to visit the Cadarache 
nuclear centre and in particular had been able to 
inspect the experimental fast neutron reactor, 
Rapsodie, which continued to operate satisfactorily. 
42. The interest aroused by French work on fastneutron 
reactors continued to show itself in international 
collaboration with India, Italy and Japan 
in particular. 
43. With regard to the generation of electricity 
from nuclear sources, no decision for new power 
stations had been taken in. 1970 nor was it intended 
to build any of the natural-uranium, gas-graphite 
type in the near future. On the other hand his 
Government had decided to diversify its effort during 
the next few years by starting up several enricheduranium, 
light-water power stations at the same 
time as completing, in co-operation with Atomic 
Energy of Canada Limited, a preliminary project 
study by French industry for a nuclear district heating 
plant employing the Canadian pressurized heavywater 
type reactor. 
44. Another sphere in which the result of French 
activities had had international repercussions was 
that of prospecting for uranium, particularly in Niger, 
2) GC(XIV)/437, section A.5. 

where the Commissariat a PEnergie Atomique (CEA) 
had been carrying out exploration for over ten years. 
In February 1970 Niger, which was participating in 
the work, had permitted two companies, one German 
and the other Italian, to join the Franco-Niger production 
group which would begin operations shortly. 
A syndicate for uranium mining research and development 
had also been established on 1 June 1970 by 
the Republic of Niger, the CEA and a Japanese 
industrial consortium. The role played by large 
Japanese firms once more showed the interest aroused 
by the earlier discoveries of CEA in that region of 
Africa. 

45. Turning to another stage of the nuclear fuel 
cycle, he said that France was devoting great efforts 
to isotopic separation by gaseous diffusion, with 
the long-term objective of setting up a multi-national 
factory which by the end of the decade would satisfy 
enriched uranium requirements beyond the present 
output, which would no longer suffice, and would 
also provide a new source of supply. France had 
offered to collaborate with its partners inEURATOM 
and was ready to compare on the technical and 
economic levels the characteristics of the process 
which it had developed with those of new processes 
studied in recent years by other countries. 
46. He hoped that the forthcoming United Nations 
Conference at Geneva on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy would lead the great Powers concerned 
to lift the veil which covered isotopic separation 
processes, the last bastion of an out-dated policy 
of secrecy, and thus to permit the technical and 
economic comparisons that were desirable from the 
point of view of the cheaper production of enriched 
uranium in the world. 
47. Mr. REITBAUER (Austria) said that the most 
welcome news in the annual report of the Board 
of Governors was the increase — from 26.4% in 
1969 to 36.8% in 1970 — in the percentage of 
technical assistance requests for experts and equipment 
met in the current year 3). Even though the 
increase was in part due to a new division of cash 
resources and in part to a slight decrease in the 
value of the requests received, his delegation welcomed 
the apparent reversal of a most unsatisfactory 
trend and hoped that the volume of such assistance 
would continue to increase. 
48. In that connection he noted that the report 
on another problem which was of direct concern 
to the developing countries — the financing of 
nuclear projects'*) — had been studied by his delegation 
with great interest. The report drew attention 
to one of the tremendous tasks with which the 
Agency and the international community in general 
would shordy be confronted. 
3) GC(XIV)/430, para. 12. 
4) GC(XIV)/436. 


-6



49. His delegation had noted with satisfaction the 
expansion in the Agency's day-to-day work in the 
field of basic and applied research. Successful research 
projects, symposia and panel discussions had helped 
to foster international scientific co-operation. Nuclear 
techniques which were sometimes viewed as a danger 
to the human environment might yet prove useful 
in environmental control, thus helping to improve 
over-all living conditions. 
50. There was reason to hope that 1971, with 
the Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy, would see a further increase, 
both in the volume and the intensity of international 
scientific collaboration. 
51. Although the Austrian delegation attached great 
importance to the "traditional" tasks of the Agency, 
the coming into force of NPT was of crucial importance 
both in the annals of international relations 
and in the history of the Agency. Austria had been 
among the first countries to sign the Treaty and had 
ratified it at an early date. Although sincerely interested 
in its early implementation the Austrian 
delegation was fully aware of the difficulties inherent 
in the task that was facing the Agency and Member 
States in connection with NPT. For the States 
Parties to the Treaty the time limit imposed by it 
required speedy action, but it would be difficult to 
disregard the need to proceed carefully with the implementation 
so as to ensure the widest possible 
application of an efficient and sufficiently adaptable 
international safeguards system. 
52. The Austrian delegation therefore welcomed 
the establishment of the Safeguards Committee 
(1970). The time to review its work had not yet 
come but he believed that substantial progress had 
already been made. He fully shared the concern 
of the developing countries that a disproportionate 
increase in safeguards activities might lead to a 
curtailment of the Agency's work in other fields. 
In planning the future, the Agency must exercise 
the utmost care so as to maintain a properly 
balanced programme of activities. 
53. As to the method of financing safeguards, he 
had no wish to anticipate the forthcoming discussions 
of the Safeguards Committee. In principle, the 
Austrian delegation believed that when it came to 
safeguards under NPT there should be no attempt 
to apply purely financial or even purely economic 
yardsticks. 
54. With regard to the budget for 19715) he noted 
with concern that a substantial share of the increases 
envisaged would be absorbed by staff costs. However, 
he had not overlooked the fact that the development 
appeared, at least in part, justified by the increased 
5) See document GC( XIV) /4 3 3. 

GC(XIV)/OR.138 

volume of activity in certain sectors. He realized 
that the increase in the voluntary fund target from 
$2 million to $2.5 million did not fully meet the 
expectations of certain Member States but regarded 
the figure as a reasonable one. Subject to parliamentary 
approval, the Austrian authorities envisaged a 
corresponding increase in Austria's contribution to 
the voluntary fund. 

55. With regard to Article VI of the Statute, his 
delegation remained of the opinion that a revision 
of the Article appeared justified, in view of the 
increased number of Member States, the role of the 
developing countries and the technological progress 
achieved by certain States. 
56. Baron van BOETZELAER (Netherlands) considered 
that the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute of the Agency was an important item on the 
agenda of the General Conference. That item had 
been brought forward from the agenda of the 
thirteenth Conference but the point had now been 
reached where, in his view, a decision could be 
taken. During the past year his Government had 
decided to co-sponsor the proposal now before the 
General Assembly in document GC(XIV)/437, 
section A. 5. That proposal had been several times 
modified to suit the interests of the maximum number 
of Members while keeping within the limits of 
the criteria on which a revision of Article VI of the 
Statute had to be based. In the opinion of his delegation 
the proposal in question created a reasonable 
and workable balance between the criteria of technical 
advance, effectiveness of the Board and equitable 
geographical representation and he therefore recommended 
its adoption by the Conference. 
57. He commended the spirit of co-operation in 
which meetings of the Safeguards Committee (1970) 
had been held. Referring to the general subject of 
safeguards, he emphasized that adherence to NPT 
implied a country's willingness to accept a limitation 
of its sovereignty in the form of safeguards. It would 
be unrealistic at the present stage to expect Governments 
to relinquish parts of their sovereignty which 
they considered vital to their national dignity and 
security or to part with the secrets of industrial 
techniques which the skill of their scientists had 
devised. Nevertheless, if the discussions of the Committee 
in October 1970 were continued in the same 
spirit of wisdom and realism he was certain that 
the aims of NPT could be reconciled with national 
aspirations. 
58. He believed that the governing factor in the 
financing of safeguards should be their importance 
in the strengthening of world peace and that the 
costs should therefore be found from the Regular 
Budget to which all Members contributed on a scale 
related to their capacity to do so. He was nevertheless 
prepared to accept alternative solutions and 
— 7 — 


GC(XIV)/OR.138 

felt that the most satisfactory solution might be one 
about which all parties were equally dissatisfied. 

59. He recalled that his Government had recently 
informed the Director General of its preparations 
for participation in the International Nuclear Information 
Service (INIS) by the establishment of a 
national editorial centre. He would be grateful at 
the same time for information on the progress made 
in this field in other countries and in the Secretariat. 
His Government believed that INIS should, after a 
certain initial period, be handed over to a nonprofit-
making body which would have to aim at 
self-sufficiency. That proposal was prompted by the 
fear that IAEA activities in the field of documentation 
and information might increase at the expense 
of the other tasks of the Agency. 
60. Announcing his Government's support for the 
proposed establishment of an International Fusion 
Research Council, he said that national co-ordination 
of technological research on fusion reactors should 
be undertaken even before a self-sustaining fusion 
reaction had been realized in the laboratory. 
61. In view of the disturbing imbalance between 
the number of requests for technical assistance and 
the inadequate and static financial resources available, 
to which he had referred in 1969, he welcomed the 
raising of the target for voluntary contributions from 
the $2 million level to the level of $2.5 million. 
His Government had decided, subject to parliamentary 
approval, to nearly double its voluntary contribution 
(a rise of well over 90%). 
62. He paid tribute to the efficiency of the Secretariat 
in the transaction of business with Dutch 
organizations, in the administration of fellowships 
and in the organization of courses and symposia 
in the Netherlands and pledged his Government's 
full support to the Director General in the accomplishment 
of his most important task. 
63. Mr. STRAUB (Hungary) said that the 
Hungarian People's Republic had always paid great 
attention to the Agency's activities and noted with 
satisfaction the results achieved. Hungary was, that 
year, celebrating the 25th anniversary of its liberation, 
a fact to which he made reference because 
the revolutionary changes which had begun 25 years 
ago had allowed his country to contribute, albeit 
in a modest way, to the realization of the Agency's 
goals. 
64. The coming into force of NPT was one of 
the most important events in the history of the 
Agency and a milestone on the road towards controlling 
the arms race. The widest acceptance of 
NPT and strict observance of the principles laid 
down in the Treaty decreased the hazards of nuclear 
war. 
65. He noted with satisfaction that the idea of 
general and complete disarmament was enjoying 
increasing popular support. His country, which had 
been among the first to ratify NPT, was convinced 
that many more and possibly all States which had 
so far reserved their stand would become convinced 
of the Treaty's historical importance and sign and 
ratify it. 
66. The administration of NPT safeguards required 
a somewhat different type of activity and constituted 
an additional work load on the Agency. His country 
appreciated the knowledgeable and dedicated efforts 
of the Director General and the Secretariat in assisting 
the Board of Governors in the initiation of 
bilateral talks on safeguards agreements. He hoped 
that the Agency would be able to satisfy the request 
of Member States and other States Parties to NPT; 
requests which on the basis of the Treaty the Agency 
was asked to meet. 
67. Undeniably the tasks devolving from NPT 
would result in changes in the activities of the 
Agency but he was convinced that the organization 
could proceed with, and even improve, its programme 
and the help which it gave to the developing 
countries. To do so it was necessary for the discussions 
in the Safeguards Committee (1970) to 
come urgently to a satisfactory conclusion. 
68. While realizing that the budget and its structure 
would be influenced by the changes in the Agency's 
activities, he thought that strict economy together 
with a rational redeployment of the Agency's resources 
should provide the necessary funds for all its 
activities. The Hungarian Government had decided 
to increase its contribution to the voluntary fund in 
line with die new target. 
69. The Agency's programme for 1971-76 
(GC(XIV)/433) was the result of a thorough study 
and constituted a reasonably well-balanced programme. 
He was pleased to note that a number 
of former programmes were being phased out and 
replaced by new ideas. The INIS was a good example 
of the type of activity that the Agency was 
developing satisfactorily. Those were activities of 
great importance to the developing countries and all 
Member States ought to benefit from such programmes. 
He expressed his country's willingness 
to co-operate with the Agency in every possible way. 
70. He noted with satisfaction that all programmes 
bore in mind the complexity of problems under 
consideration and avoided the pitfall of using radiation 
or tracer methods for their own sake. He 
agreed that the Agency should not do all the work 
within its own laboratories. An international laboratory 
should work on standardization, intercomparison 
and control problems, or, where national efforts 
were insufficient, such a laboratory should be esta

blished. He thought that some of the work presently 
planned in the Seibersdorf or Monaco Laboratories 
should be handed over to national laboratories in 
Member states. 

71. With regard to the revision of Article VI of 
the Statute his delegation understood and sympathized 
with the request of Asian, African and Latin 
American countries to obtain better representation 
on the Board of Governors. His country had made 
it clear in the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole and 
the Board that it could only accept an increase in 
the number of Governors if such a step did not 
jeopardize the Board's efficiency. An increase in the 
number of seats on the Board should not damage 
either the interests of the socialist countries or those 
of others. Those considerations were reflected in the 
amendment to Article VI of which his country was 
a co-sponsor 6). 
72. As an international organization with universal 
representation the IAEA should not, in die opinion 
of his delegation, exclude on the ground of political 
considerations States which had achieved considerable 
results in the peaceful application of atomic energy 
and in addition had ratified NPT. His delegation 
would welcome a solution of those problems and was 
willing to co-operate with other States in furthering 
the goals of the Agency. 
73. Mr. N'GUEMA N'DONG (Gabon) said that 
Gabon was still the second largest producer of uranium 
in Africa. His Government was certain that 
the demands of the nuclear power industry would 
exceed current production and that the time would 
come when the uranium production capacity anticipated 
for the following five or seven years would 
perhaps have to be rapidly increased. 
74. Gabon was therefore interested in the problems 
connected with the prospecting for, the demand for 
and the production of uranium. A prospecting plan 
had been prepared with a view to discovering other 
possible deposits capable of being worked in the 
following years. 
75- His country had always kept the Agency informed 
of its prospecting activities, discoveries of 
ore deposits, and methods of extraction and processing 
uranium, and hoped that all Members of the 
Agency would do the same. It had the best and 
most important hydroelectric sites in Africa and was 
unremitting in its efforts, in collaboration with 
friendly countries, to explore uranium deposits and 
thus ultimately to help solve the serious problem 
of atmospheric pollution. Nuclear industry had indeed 
taken many precautions against pollution. Nevertheless, 
it was desirable for the Agency to continue 
implementing its important health, safety and waste 

6) GC(XIV)/437, section A. 1. 

GC(XIV)/OR.138 

management programme in connection with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

76. Gabon accordingly commended the decision to 
convene the Fourth International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy at Geneva in 1971. 
It was to be hoped that at the Conference the 
political, economic and technical authorities would 
have the opportunity to study, with benefit to all 
concerned, the various problems of the atom for 
peace in the world. 
77. It would be desirable for the Agency to carry 
out studies on low-cost nuclear power plants capable 
of providing the means of development needed by 
the emerging countries, It should also make available 
to those countries more substantial assistance for the 
exploration and exploitation of uranium deposits. 
78. For two years the representatives of various 
States Members of the Agency had been pressing for 
amendment of Article VI of the Statute. Proposals 
had been submitted with a view to amending that 
Article in a way that would promote a more efficient 
functioning of the Board of Governors while ensuring 
an equitable representation of all the continents. The 
question must be examined on the basis of the proposals 
submitted7^, particular consideration being 
given to the one which enjoyed die support of the 
largest number of States. His country was sure that 
a solution could now be found for the problem of 
amendment. 
79. Mr. LUNDE (Norway) foresaw that the 
Agency's activities in relation to its obligations under 
NPT would add a new dimension to its work in 
the coming year and hoped that as a result interest 
would be stimulated in other Agency activities. His 
Government had noted the increase in the target 
for voluntary cash contributions from $2 million to 
$2.5 million to cover technical assistance and had 
decided to increase its voluntary contribution 
accordingly. 
80. One of the most important Agency tasks was 
to co-ordinate and standardize recommendations, 
rules and regulations in all fields of nuclear safety. 
His Government had noted with satisfaction that in 
general the safety recommendations issued by the 
IAEA were now well co-ordinated with other relevant 
international organizations and felt that continued 
emphasis should be placed on that work. There 
was, furthermore, an increasing need for international 
co-ordination of rules and practices with respect to 
radioactive wastes. He hoped that the Agency would 
consider possible further steps towards international 
agreement in the field of waste disposal, in particular 
waste disposal into the sea and radioactive pollution 
of the atmosphere. 
7) See document GC(XIV)/437. 

-9



GC(XIV)/OR.138 

81. Regarding the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute, he said that important nuclear developments 
had taken place within various member countries 
since the present text of Article VI was formulated 
and he hoped that serious efforts would be made 
to see that some of those changes were reflected in 
the amended text. 
82. Recalling that his country was one of those 
which had ratified NPT before it entered into force, 
he stressed the continuing importance attached by 
his Government to the Treaty. The guiding principle 
should be that the safeguards arrangements, while 
not being unduly cumbersome or costly to apply, 
would give the basic assurance that the Treaty's 
obligations were not being circumvented. He felt 
that international financing of the safeguards costs 
was the only equitable solution and he believed that 
it was possible to arrive at generally acceptable 
arrangements. 
83. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) said that the Agency's 
work during the past year had included not only 
the traditional tasks; it had perforce been much 
affected by NPT, in view of the role assigned to 
the Agency by the drafters of the Treaty in regard 
to the obligation assumed by non-nuclear-weapon 
States not to acquire or seek to possess nuclear 
weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. 
84. His delegation welcomed the establishment of 
the Safeguards Committee (1970) to advise the 
Board and the Director General and to make recommendations 
on the content of the agreements 
to be concluded between the Agency and States 
Parties to NPT. 
85. The broad discussions that had already taken 
place in the Safeguards Committee during its first 
two sessions showed, if the need still existed, how 
well-founded was the concern for specifying the 
principles to govern future safeguards agreements 
that had been repeatedly expressed in the past. 
86. The first outcome of that work was positive, 
greatly to his delegation's gratification. It saw there 
a happy augury for the future conclusion of safeguards 
agreements with signatory States, either singly 
or in groups as was the case with non-nuclearweapon 
States members of EURATOM. 
87. Of course many questions were left in abeyance; 
and a solution to at least one of those — namely 
the problem of financing — would be of prime 
importance for the Agency's success in applying 
safeguards. 
88. As the Belgian delegation in the Safeguards 
Committee had already pointed out, that problem 
was all the more important as some Member States 
were not parties to NPT and would probably not 
always be prepared to bear costs relating to an 
agreement to which they had deliberately decided 
not to adhere. Furthermore, several States Parties 
to NPT were not Members of the Agency; under 
present arrangements, those States would be 
privileged by comparison with other Parties to NPT 
in the sense that they would not have to pay their 
share of the cost of control operations. Some 
Members might even be prompted to withdraw from 
the Agency in order to avoid the over-heavy financial 
burden those new activities would represent for them. 
But that was certainly not the intention of Belgium. 

89. The problem of financing was at present the 
subject of controversy in the Safeguards Committee 
and that Committee would have to take the matter 
up again when resuming its work the following 
month. 
90. Up till now, the expenditure entailed by the 
application of Agency safeguards under bilateral agreements 
had always been charged to the Regular 
Budget. 
91- But it would be recalled that that practice 
had always been regarded as a provisional one, 
pending the accumulating of further experience by 
the Agency which would enable it to give effect, in 
particular, to the provisions of Article XIV.C of the 
Statute. 

92. In the past few years, the problem of reimbursing 
the Agency for all or part of its expenses 
for the application of safeguards under bilateral or 
multilateral agreements had been discussed but had 
so far remained unsolved. Now, the problem was 
taking on greater proportions. In 1980, the cost 
of safeguards might be of the order of $12.5 million, 
and that excluding the cost of the applying of safeguards 
to the peaceful nuclear activities of nuclearweapon 
States submitted voluntarily to Agency 
control; the latter would in fact double the total. 
Those were merely estimates, but judging by how 
the safeguards chapter of the budget had evolved, 
one might reasonably wonder whether those estimates 
would not in fact be exceeded by 1980. The 1971 
safeguards budget itself8) showed an increase of 
48.13% over the figure for 1970 (which had shown 
an increase of 38% as compared with 1969), reaching 
a total of $1 885 000, excluding supporting services 
the cost of which would also be significant. 
For 1972, the provisional estimates showed a further 
increase of 40%, bringing allocations for safeguards 
up to $2 644 000. In fact, it was a true geometrical 
progression, even before the controls required for 
NPT had got started. 
93. It was to be regretted that the drafters of NPT 
had not laid down the method of financing for the 
8) GC(XIV)/4}}, section V.13. 

-10



controls envisaged under Article III. That gap had 
now to be filled, taking account on the one hand 
of the legitimate concern of the developing countries 
for a fair balance between control and promotional 
(technical assistance) activities, and on the other of 
the desire to see the nuclear-weapon States take on 
a relatively substantial share of control costs in view 
of the privileges conferred on them by the Treaty. 
With no pretension to providing a miracle answer, 
his delegation would suggest as an additional working 
hypothesis for the future work of the Safeguards 
Committee that the problem of financing NPT safeguards 
might be resolved, without unduly encumbering 
the Agency's Regular Budget, by setting up a 
special fund. The fund could be established by a 
conference of States interested in NPT, and would 
be constituted by contributions from States Parties 
to die Treaty, for the purpose of financing safeguards 
and related activities; from that fund the Agency 
could be reimbursed for expenditure incurred by it 
in carrying out its duties under NPT. Such an 
arrangement would entail no change in the Statute. 
Furthermore, provision for the special fund would 
take the form not of voluntary contributions but of 
compulsory contributions at fixed rates to be determined 
on the basis (for example) of the following 
principles: 

(1) A substantial share of the financing (e.g. 
50% larger than their present share of contributions 
to the Agency's Regular Budget) 
would be taken upon themselves by the nuclearweapon 
States alone, in compensation for the 
privileges accorded to them by NPT; 
(2) A second portion, to be determined, 
would be covered by all States Parties to 
NPT, according to the principles adopted by 
the United Nations to govern the contributions 
of Member States to the United Nations regular 
budget. The portion in question would represent 
the world community's agreed effort 
to ensure that there should be no proliferation 
of nuclear-weapon States; lastly, 
(3) The remainder of the costs incurred in 
administering safeguards would be distributed 
among the non-nuclear-weapon States in proportion 
to the degree of development of their 
nuclear activities. 
94. His delegation was greatly concerned about 
the problem of financing safeguards because of the 
resultant inflation of the Agency's budget. An increase 
of 10.1% in the Agency's budget for 1971 
was being proposed 9), and that already exceeded a 
normal growth rate; that figure had resulted, moreover, 
from a drastic cut in the Agency's original 
proposals, which would have meant an increase of 
9) GC(XIV)/433,para.I.2. 

GC(XIV)/OR.138 

some 16% in the 1971 budget. With regard to the 
increase in staff salaries, his delegation, while 
recognizing the value of creating a nucleus of competent 
international officials, had already advocated 
a well-balanced rotation system for one section of 
the staff to enable young officers to be recruited at 
necessarily lower rates. The draft programme and 
budget for the year 1971 showed that a fairly large 
part of the increased expenditure resulted from the 
upgrading of posts to higher categories. 

95. As to the new presentation of the Agency's 
future activities in the "programme budget" form, 
the document would be even clearer if the financial 
participation of supporting services were shown in 
each programme; along with the safeguards programme, 
for example, one could show the legal 
support provided to it by the Legal Division, whose 
main function in the years to come would be to 
develop the legal instruments made necessary by 
the entry into force of NPT. 
96. With regard to the extension of the Agency's 
Laboratory at Seibersdorf and Headquarters, his delegation 
still considered that a large part of the work 
carried out by the Laboratory was not justified. For 
instance, the preparation of labelled fertilizers and 
the radiation sterilization of male insects should 
be entrusted to FAO or WHO. He saw no advantage, 
either, in a further extension of the 
Laboratory buildings. However important work concerning 
safeguards might be in the future, there 
were already enough superbly equipped laboratories 
throughout the world that were ready to co-operate 
with the Agency. Certain tasks that were no longer 
of interest should be discontinued, without seeking 
substitute work to take their place in order that the 
staff might be kept on. The number of staff must 
be based on the work to be done and not the other 
way round. The Agency should lay down as a 
principle that any activity undertaken by it at the 
request of other United Nations bodies must be 
fully reimbursed. 
97. His country welcomed the fruitful co-operation 
instituted between the Agency and EURATOM in 
connection widi the starting up and operation of 
INIS and would contribute to INIS through 
EURATOM's CID. 
98. In common widi other Agency Members, his 
country attached great importance to the question 
of the composition of the Board of Governors. It 
had therefore suggested a way of allowing for natural 
evolution without having to come back to the matter 
at more or less frequent intervals. However, that 
proposal had not been supported, and Belgium preferred 
to reserve its position at the present stage 
on the other arrangements advocated, none of which 
in its opinion would preclude the necessity of reconsidering 
the matter sooner or later. 
— 11 — 


GC(XIV)/OR.138 

99. In conclusion, he made it plain that his critical 
attitude to some of the Agency's activities was no 
expression of animosity; the contrary was the case. 
His country wanted to see the Agency continue to 
be held up as a model to other institutions, both 
for its administrative organization and for the reasonable, 
reasoned and selective choice of its activities. 
100. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) noted with 
pleasure that the international role of the Agency 
had been reinforced since the last General Conference. 
It was reasonable to envisage for the Agency an 
even more important role in the field of safeguards 
under NPT and an expansion of international cooperation 
in the peaceful utilization of the applications 
of nuclear energy. Those complementary aspects 
of the Agency's activities would undoubtedly be 
maintained in the future since they represented concepts 
of permanent importance. 
101. The NPT having come into force in March 
1970, the tasks associated with the Treaty were in 
the process of implementation and the Agency had 
setup the Safeguards Committee (1970). The Agency 
had become an important centre of international 
activities aimed at the limitation of nuclear armaments. 
That role was of particular importance since the 
Agency was charged with devising a universal system 
of control. 
102. Poland, which had suffered so heavily in two 
world wars, attached the greatest importance to that 
aspect of the Agency activities. It had therefore 
been one of the first States to ratify NPT and had 
declared itself ready to start negotiations with a 
view to concluding with the Agency an agreement 
in accordance with Article III of the Treaty. Those 
negotiations would be started on 30 September 1970. 
103. Poland very much hoped that those nuclear 
Powers which had not yet signed NPT would do so 
as soon as possible. The ratification of NPT by all 
countries in the world was essential to the activity 
of the Agency and for the full utilization of nuclear 
energy in the service of peace and of mankind. At 
the same time that activity was closely related to 
the provisions of the Treaty both in regard to the 
control of fissionable materials (and the installations 
in which they were contained) and in the field of 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear explosives. Poland 
approved in full the activities undertaken by the 
Secretariat in that field up to now and would support 
the proposed budgetary allocations. 
104. Poland approved the future development ofthe 
Agency activities in the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy and noted with satisfaction an expansion in 
the technical assistance and co-operation programmes 
implemented by the Agency and in particular the 
progress made in the sphere of the applications of 
nuclear explosives for peaceful purposes under international 
control. 
105. Poland also approved the development of INIS 
and the activities connected with nuclear physics, a 
domain in which a common project was being undertaken 
by Norway, Poland and Yugoslavia. 
106. The Agency programme for the coming years 
was very extensive and it was to be hoped that the 
Director General would make a judicious choice 
between the various vital alternatives. 
107. Poland attached great imp ortance to the activity 
of the Agency in the field of regulations and recommendations 
governing radiological safety and 
radioactive waste management. 
108. The world-wide action which had now begun 
to protect the environment would find nuclear industry 
well prepared, thanks to the efforts of the Agency. 
109. Pollution due to radioactive waste was negligible. 
The Agency regulations covering all phases 
of work with radioactive materials, including transport, 
had become the basis of the rules applied in 
various States Members of the Agency and in numerous 
international organizations. 
110. The future development of the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy required a continuous improvement 
of planned co-operation. It was essential 
to find new methods of financing such co-operation, 
but it was also important to ensure that funds at 
present available should be used in the most effective 
way. His delegation was convinced that the underlying 
principles of the Agency programmes were 
sound. 
111. It did appear, however, that fairly large reserves 
were available in the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP), in both the Technical Assistance 
and the Special Fund sectors and also in the 
Agency's General Fund, to which Poland had 
announced for 1970 a contribution 65% higher than 
for 1969. 
112. The utilization of the potential reserves available 
in UNDP and in the General Fund depended 
as much on Member States as on the Agency. The 
Board of Governors and the Secretariat should take 
that possibility into consideration. 
113. According to paragraph 1.2 of document 
GC(XIV)/433, there was a proposed increase of 
10.1% in the Regular Budget of the Agency for 
1971 by comparison with 1970. His delegation 
found it necessary to emphasize once again that 
the increase in the Regular Budget should not exceed 
the increase in the national incomes of Member 
States. It hoped that the programme would be 
implemented in an economic and efficient manner 
and that the desk-to-desk survey of Agency staff 
would enable economies to be made. 
— 12

GC(XIV)/OR.138 

114. The increase in the activities of the Agency 
during the past year had been due not only to the 
coming into force of NPT and the expansion of the 
Agency's co-operation programmes but also to the 
discussions on the problem of the composition of 
the Board of Governors. The solution of that 
question would have repercussions on future cooperation 
within the Agency. His delegation therefore 
attached considerable importance to that question 
and was co-sponsor, together with five other socialist 
countries, of one of the five proposals for amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute that were before the 
General Conference in document GC(XIV)/437. 
A great effort should be made to ensure that one 
of those proposals received the approval of all the 
regional groups. 
115. To impose a majority decision would modify 
the political balance in the Board, with a consequent 
adverse effect on the work of the Agency. Inspired 
by the spirit of compromise, Poland and the five 
other socialist countries were not pressing for the 
maintenance of paragraph A.2 of the Article which 
provided for the designation of Poland for membership 
on the Board one year in two. That spirit 
of compromise could well be imitated by other 
The meeting n 

delegations, particularly in regard to the creation of 
new permanent seats on the Board. The proposal 
co-sponsored by 25 States would tend to create a 
privileged position for certain Western European 
countries. Poland was opposed to any such solution. 

116. The role of the Agency demanded that the 
principle of universality should be fully respected. 
The failure to admit certain States as a result of 
political discrimination was incompatible with the 
international character of the Agency and would 
prevent co-operation between the Agency and those 
countries. 
117. A further effect of that discrimination was to 
deprive the Agency of substantial resources in the 
field of technical assistance and co-operation. His 
delegation wished to re-state its position regarding 
the need to admit the German Democratic Republic 
to the Agency. That country was one of the most 
highly developed in the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy. It was furthermore one of the first 
States to have ratified NPT. The absence of the 
German Democratic Republic caused great harm 
to the programmes and activities of the Agency and 
was not at all in the interest of Member States. 
e at 1.10 p.m. 

-13



International Atomic Energy Agency 

General Conference 

GC(XIV)/OR.139 
25 February 1971 * 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1970, at 10.30 a.m. 
President: Mr. V. A. SARABHAI (India) 
later: Mr. O. A. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) 
Item of the 
agenda** 
CONTENTS 
Address by H.E. Mr. N. Ceaus.escu, President of the State Council of the 
Socialist Republic of Romania 
General debate and report of the Board of Governors for 1969—70 (continued) 
Paragraphs 
1—16 
17—99 

Statements by the delegates of: 
United Kingdom 
Jamaica 
India 
Holy See 
Pakistan 
Ireland 
Yugoslavia 
*
** 
A provisional version of this document was issued on 
GC(XIV)/442. 

17—23 
24—40 
41—59 
60—64 
65—73 
74—87 
88—99 

 1 October 1970. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 


GC(XIV)/OR.139 

ADDRESS BY H.E. MR. N. CEAUSJESCU, 
PRESIDENT OF THE STATE COUNCIL OF 
THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF ROMANIA 

1. The PRESIDENT, after expressing his appreciation 
of the honour which H.E. Mr. Nicolae 
Ceausescu was according the Agency by his visit, 
invited him to address the Conference. 
2. Mr. CEAU§ESCU, President of the State 
Council of the Socialist Republic of Romania, said 
it was a special pleasure for him to be able to take 
advantage of his presence in Austria on an official 
visit to greet participants at the General Conference 
of the IAEA. 
3. The annual session of the General Conference 
was an important event in international life, as problems 
relating to an essential sphere of contemporary 
science, which had far-reaching implications for human 
society and for the peace and security of mankind, 
were debated at it. 
4. Nuclear physics had opened a way for great 
accomplishments in the development of productive 
forces, in the extension and refinement of material 
and spiritual creativity and in the raising of the 
standard of living and well-being of mankind. At 
the same time, it was nuclear physics that had contributed 
to the development of the most fearful 
means of destruction, the atom and hydrogen bombs. 
5. The basic mission of the Agency was to encourage 
and facilitate the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. Science could only develop and flourish 
under peaceful conditions, in a climate of confidence 
and collaboration. If the material and financial resources 
at present spent on the production of nuclear 
weapons and the research devoted to their improvement 
were to be diverted to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, a considerable step could be taken 
towards improving the standard of living of mankind. 
To prevent that great victory of the human mind 
from being transformed into an instrument which 
would spell disaster for the planet in which mankind 
lived, to bestow upon it the exclusive role of generating 
progress and prosperity, was one of the great 
ideals of the present age to which all men of good 
will were devoting their efforts and energy. 
6. Acting in that spirit, nuclear scientists and 
research workers could find a common language 
which, irrespective of their philosophies and political 
convictions or of the socio-political systems to which 
they belonged, would enable them to contribute 
jointly to promoting the noble aims of the Agency, 
which responded to the desires of all peace-loving 
people. 
7. Romania had always favoured and would always 
favour firm steps towards general disarmament, particularly 
nuclear disarmament, believing that the only 
way to free mankind from the nightmare of a nuclear 
war was the halting of the production of such arms, 
the destruction of existing stocks, and the total 
prohibition of the use of atomic energy for military 
purposes. 

8. As a result of the conclusion of the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT)1) the Agency was called upon to organize 
a safeguards system, so that proliferation of nuclear 
weapons would be prevented, and, at the same time, 
to see that all States were allowed free access to the 
full utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
9. The Agency could contribute, through its activities, 
to ensuring that the great benefits that were 
to be derived from the application of nuclear energy 
were distributed as widely as possible throughout 
the world to help eradicate underdevelopment and 
raise the standard of living of all people. 
10. In that connection, the Agency's work in 
developing co-operation in research and in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, in intensifying the exchange 
of information and experience, in supporting the 
efforts of those Member States which were trying 
to make up their backwardness in those fields, was 
of particular importance. In that way the Agency 
could make a full contribution to the relaxation of 
international tension, to understanding between 
people and to the cause of world peace. 
11. Romania recognized the decisive importance of 
nuclear physics in the contemporary context, and it 
was making considerable efforts to develop nuclear 
research and to use nuclear energy in different 
spheres of production and social life and to apply 
nuclear energy to the vast task it was undertaking, 
namely the building of a new society. 
12. It was for that reason that his country was 
most interested in developing collaboration and cooperation 
with all States and in intensifying its 
participation in activities and exchanges that took 
place within the framework of the Agency. 
13. As a founder member of the IAEA and aware 
of the importance of its functions and aims in respect 
of promoting nuclear research for peaceful purposes 
and disseminating the results throughout the world, 
Romania would continue to give all its support to 
the work of the Agency. 
14. He hoped that the Conference's work would 
open up new perspectives for fruitful collaboration 
and co-operation in research and in the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy for the benefit of all 
States, and for progress and international security. 
1) Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 


15. The PRESIDENT, speaking on behalf of all 
participants at the General Conference, expressed 
deep appreciation for the encouraging remarks just 
made and thanked His Excellency for his memorable 
visit. 
16. He would take the opportunity of saying how 
impressed the world had been by what the Romanian 
people had done, under the leadership of their 
President, in the face of the catastrophic floods 
that had struck their country earlier that year. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1969-70 
(GC(XIV)/430, 440) (continued) 

17. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) said that 
when the IAEA was set up in 1957, the world had 
little experience of the nuclear generation of electricity, 
whereas at the present time some 40 nuclear 
power stations were in operation in 11 countries, 
about 100 further stations under construction and a 
further 120 planned to be built by 1980. In the 
short period of two decades nuclear energy had 
moved from making no contribution to the world's 
energy requirements to providing nearly 20% of 
installed generating capacity. Advances had also 
been made in the use of isotopes, a particularly 
welcome example being the development of heart 
pace-makers powered by plutonium-238. Such pacemakers 
had been developed at Harwell and the first 
two devices had been installed in heart patients in 
recent months. 
18. The rapid development of nuclear energy and 
the establishment in many countries of important 
atomic programmes had helped to stimulate a demand 
for enlarging the Board of Governors and that 
question had been discussed during the past year 
by a special ad hoc committee. Many diverse 
suggestions had been put forward as to what should 
be done and the Board had not unfortunately been 
able to transmit an agreed recommendation to the 
General Conference. In the view of his delegation 
one of the proposals before the Conference, namely 
that which was now co-sponsored by more than a 
score of States2) , commanded more general support 
than any of the others. He hoped that the supporters 
of the other proposals would be willing to accept 
that proposal even if it did not give them all they 
wanted. 
19. He singled out two of the Agency's tasks 
for special mention, its activities in connection with 
safeguards and the possibility of dangerous pollution 
by nuclear plants. By virtue of NPT the Agency 
had a central and most important role to play in 
the application of safeguards and during the past 
2) See document GC(XIV)/437, section A.5. 

GC(XIV)/OR.139 

year the Safeguards Committee (1970) had been 
giving the question of NPT safeguards a thorough 
examination. He paid tribute to the progress made 
by the Committee and hoped that its further meetings 
in October would be marked by the same 
cordial and business-like atmosphere and that a 
satisfactory outcome of its deliberations would enable 
a number of important States to become full parties 
to the Treaty. 

20. Turning to the question of nuclear pollution, 
he said that no industry had shown so responsible 
an approach to pollution control as the nuclear 
industry. Modern nuclear facilities made so little 
impact on the environment that their effect could 
not reasonably be called pollution. He cited the 
New York Symposium on the Environmental Aspects 
of Nuclear Power Stations where many papers of a 
serious and non-propagandist nature had been submitted 
and concluded that the world needed more, 
not less, power to protect man's environment. 
21. At the same time he was glad to see that a 
correct balance was being maintained between the 
Agency's safeguards responsibilities and its positive 
promotional activities. He confirmed that the United 
Kingdom would implement in full its assessed contribution 
to the increased Operational Budget for 
1971 and would continue to support the Agency's 
technical assistance programme. 
22. In the international field he welcomed the 
signing in March 1970 by the Federal Republic of 
Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom 
of the Tripartite Centrifuge Agreement. Although the 
gas centrifuge process for the separation of uranium 
isotopes was a sensitive area in which all processing 
States regarded the technology as highly secret, there 
was a rapidly growing demand for enriched uranium 
as fuel for nuclear power stations and the project 
in question was directed to meeting that demand. 
In the United Kingdom view that type of industrial 
collaboration was essential if countries were to achieve 
a rational development of nuclear power and make it 
available widely and cheaply. He stressed furthermore 
that the terms of the Tripartite Centrifuge Agreement 
had been published and were available for all to 
see; it included binding undertakings with regard 
to the use of equipment and material and appropriate 
provisions for the application of safeguards. 
23. He concluded by paying tribute to Dr.Pretsch 
of the Federal Republic of Germany whose untimely 
death would be greatly regretted and wishing 
Mr. Henry D. Smyth of the United States of America 
every success in his retirement at Princeton. 
24. Mr. SCOTT (Jamaica) said that since 1970 
marked the 25th anniversary of the United Nations 
Organization it would be fitting for the General 
Conference to set some guidelines for future Agency 

GC(XIV)/OR.139 

action. It was important to try and make the Second 
United Nations Development Decade more effective 
than the First, and target dates should therefore 
be included for the implementation of agreed policy 
measures. In the context of the Development Decades 
there was a need for a more accurate definition of 
the least developed developing countries; for the 
Agency, of course it was the non-nuclear States 
which were relatively less developed, and in his 
opinion the Agency had so far not done enough 
to help those States to establish the appropriate 
infrastructure for an effective nuclear technology. 
Thinking particularly of the relatively less developed 
countries, he wanted to mention a few areas of vital 
concern where the Agency could prove more effective. 

One such area was the transfer of technology. 

25. The "spin-off" associated widi nuclear weapons 
technology had long been recognized as having an 
intimate connection with developments in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. In the area of power reactors 
one saw that clearly: gas-graphite reactors were an 
outcome of weapons-grade plutonium production 
facilities and light-water reactors were off-shoots of 
submarine propulsion reactors. 
26. The NPT had been designed to decrease the 
dangers of the "horizontal" proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, and a large measure of support had been 
given to NPT by the developing countries, because 
many subscribed to the view that "horizontal" as 
well as "vertical" proliferation of nuclear weapons 
could be a menace to the peace and prosperity of 
mankind. 
27. However, the Director General had stated that, 
despite Article VI of NPT, "vertical" proliferation was 
still continuing. If the developing countries, the 
non-nuclear weapon States, were called upon to 
forego their nuclear weapons options, there must 
be the necessary support and compromise at the 
international level. The least developed of the developing 
countries would not have the capability of 
joining the "nuclear club" even in the distant future. 
Those non-nuclear States must be able to count 
upon the United Nations family and particularly 
on the Agency to assist them — through nuclearpower 
feasibility studies, technical assistance and 
training opportunities — to make the best use of 
the peaceful applications of nuclear science and technology. 
It was pointless to spend 25 years of 
scientific effort developing nuclear reactors and then 
to hold up the transfer to developing countries 
because they were unable to pay. 
28. Still on the question of technology he wanted 
to comment briefly on environmental problems. The 
Director General was partly correct in pointing to 
the "information gap" concerning environmental 
factors related to nuclear technology, but he thought 
the problem was largely a result of unplanned 
development, characteristic of highly industrialized 
societies. The developing countries had great problems 
to overcome in providing the necessary social 
and economic infrastructure for the unemployed and 
the poor, and they would have to avoid the mistakes 
of others. Concern for environmental factors, however, 
should not obscure from view the urgent tasks 
of development that had to be tackled. 

29. The cost of the transfer of technology, in all 
its forms, posed a number of problems for developing 
countries. One of the items on the agenda of 
the annual meeting of the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD) being held 
in Copenhagen was the creation of additional development 
financing and the softening of the terms on 
which developing countries could borrow on international 
markets. 
30. He was pleased to hear of the positive step 
taken by the World Bank in setting up a Special 
Projects Division to search out nuclear projects that 
could be financed according to World Bank criteria. 
However, those criteria should be further examined, 
since the lending policies of the World Bank Group 
were repeatedly being called too restrictive. He was 
also happy to learn that the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) had given 
approval for multi-mineral surveys. 
31. The Director General had touched upon an 
alarming trend in alluding to the rising proportion 
of Agency funds earmarked for administrative expenses 
and to highly inflationary costs. Those trends 
were encountered not in the IAEA alone, but in 
the entire United Nations system and they were 
holding up the transfer of technology to developing 
countries. 
32. Every effort should be made to give developing 
countries the facilities to train their scientists and 
technologists so that they could carry out their own 
development projects. 
3 3. The primary responsibility for development was 
a country's own. The international organizations 
could only supplement and assist, but if they did 
not do so they were meaningless. 
34. The forthcoming Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy, to be held in September 
1971, would provide developing countries and the 
Agency with the opportunity for putting together 
concrete programmes to be implemented during the 
1970s. 
35. Referring to the question of Article VI of the 
Statute, he noted that neither the Ad Hoc Committee 
of the Whole nor the Board of Governors had been 
able to arrive at a unanimously agreed formula. 

GC(XIV)/OR.139 

36. Since his Government was of the view that 
the membership of the Board should certainly be 
enlarged, it would give its support if a consensus 
could be reached. 
37. Within the Agency there was another matter 
that called for careful analysis. The Director General 
had pointed to Article IV of NPT as providing 
developing countries with some kind of guarantee 
that restraint on the one hand would be matched 
by constructive initiatives on the other. His delegation 
stressed that the Agency's promotional and 
developmental projects must not be impaired in any 
way by its safeguards work. There were a number 
of good reasons for that view, not least of which 
was the fact that it was the non-nuclear States that 
would be affected most. 
38. The Second Development Decade would be 
just a misnomer were the Agency's developmental 
projects to be curtailed and brought to a standstill 
either through its safeguards activities, through inflation, 
or through disproportional increases in administrative 
costs. 
39. Finally, he agreed with the President that atomic 
energy was at a crossroad. There was a common 
obligation to establish a base for the future, with 
science and technology available to all in equal 
measure. 
40. He recalled that the Director General had asked 
whether the world needed more international organizations 
or the reorganization of those already existing. 
If the existing international institutions did not adequately 
reflect the opinions of its members, nor fulfil 
their needs, there would be demands for new 
organizations. New organizations, however, would 
not of necessity bring the required solutions and it 
would no doubt be better to try and improve the 
existing ones. 
41. Mr. TRIVEDI (India) said that India's nuclear 
energy effort was now 25 years old and that the 
anniversary had been fittingly celebrated in January 
1970 when the Indian Prime Minister had dedicated 
to the nation the 400-MW(e) nuclear power station 
at Tarapur, the first such plant in the developing 
world and die largest in Asia. In response to an 
approach made jointly with India's collaborator the 
United States, the Board of Governors had approved 
a trilateral agreement on safeguards in respect of 
Tarapur at its meeting in February 1970. 
42. The quarter-century of the history of nuclear 
energy development in India dated from 1945 with 
the establishment of the Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research in Bombay. The plans and the projections 
of Dr. Homi Bhabha, who first formulated die idea 
of that Institute, had since proved valid. India had 
already had some "notable firsts" to its credit. 
43. In addition to Tarapur, two other atomic power 
stations were presently under construction, the second 
of which, at Madras, would mark another milestone 
in India's technological development in that it was 
being built entirely by Indian engineers and scientists. 
44. The Indian Atomic Energy Commission had 
recently outlined a ten-year programme embracing 
co-ordinated and far-reaching plans for the development 
of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and space 
research. It included the commissioning by 1980 
of 2700 MW(e) of nuclear power, the design and 
construction of a large 5 00-MW prototype fast-breeder 
reactor and of advanced thermal reactors of approximately 
500 MW(e) unit size, and the increasingly 
widespread application of isotopes in industrial processing, 
food preservation, medicine and scientific 
research. 
45. Simultaneously with its own progress in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, India had been 
making special efforts to promote regional cooperation 
in order to share its own experience in 
that field with its neighbours. It had accordingly 
contributed the necessary equipment and experts for 
a programme on the utilization of research reactors, 
particularly in the field of solid-state physics (using 
a neutron crystal spectrometer), in order to establish 
in Manila, with the collaboration of the Philippines 
and the assistance of the Agency, the IPA project 
for South East Asia. The subsequent progress of 
that project during the five years of its existence 
had more than fulfilled the expectations of that 
modest beginning. 
46. As a result of the success of that co-operative 
venture, plans were now under way, with the 
assistance of the Agency, to formulate programmes of 
co-operative research and training in nuclear science 
and technology for the countries of Asia and the 
Pacific. 
47. Programmes for developing techniques for the 
radiation preservation of perishable foods were of 
great interest to many countries, including India, 
which had outlined a major programme in that field. 
At the same time, there was much work still to be 
done in relation to die harmful effects possibly resulting 
therefrom before public health authorities in 
various countries could safely permit the consumption 
of such food. The efforts made by the Agency to 
stimulate experimental work and discussion by 
specialists so as to evolve a sound basis for future 
development were therefore greatly appreciated. 
48. The present session of the General Conference 
marked a significant stage in the evolution of the 
ideals and aspirations which had inspired the Agency's 
creation and which had been embodied in its Statute. 
At the present crucial point in the Agency's history, 
therefore, it was necessary for Member States to 
-5



GC(XIV)/OR.139 

rededicate themselves to the aims and objectives of 
the Statute. 

49. There were two issues of vital importance in 
that context which would need special attention by 
the Conference. Those issues had an intimate bearing 
on the philosophy of the Agency as well as on a 
healthy development of its institutions and activities. 
50. The first issue was the amendment of 
Article VI of the Statute. By the time of the first 
General Conference, 58 States had become Members 
of the Agency. The present membership was 103, 
with most of the new Members belonging to the 
developing world. India had therefore consistently 
supported the proposal for an appropriate enlargement 
of the Agency's executive organ, its Board of 
Governors. 
51. It was clear that the right solution to that 
problem lay in maintaining and even strengthening 
the abiding validity of the philosophy of the Agency 
and the fundamental soundness of its structure. In 
stipulating the three criteria for examining the problem 
the General Conference had unanimously 
adopted that approach in 1968 in its resolution 
GC(XII)/RES/241. 
52. The mandate of the General Conference had 
been satisfactorily put into effect by the Board and 
the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole. In the course 
of their discussions, the Indian delegation had expressed 
its views in detail. It believed that the 
developing countries, for which the Agency had a 
special statutory responsibility, would find their 
interests effectively promoted by the draft amendment 
contained in document GC(XIV)/437, 
section A. 5. That amendment envisaged representation 
of the developing world among the proposed 
nine designated Members of the Board, besides 
giving additional elective seats to the developing 
countries. 
53. The second issue was the question of finances, 
which did not, however, relate primarily to money, 
since it went far beyond the problem of expenditures 
and contributions and affected the basic philosophy 
of the Agency. The expenditure on safeguards had 
risen in a few years from $200 000 to $2 million 
per annum, and a conservative estimate placed it 
at $25 million in the near future. Those figures 
were in themselves a matter of deep concern to 
developing countries, which had not been asking 
for a reduction in the activities in question, but 
for a just and equitable system of financing them, 
based on the letter and spirit of the Statute. 
54. The developing countries were even more concerned 
that the substantial increases in die safeguards 
component of the Budget had already led to a disruption 
of the balanced development of the Agency's 
manifold activities. The Agency had been established 
in order to enlarge the contribution of nuclear energy 
to peace, health and prosperity. Safeguards activities 
were, of course, as important as its other activities, 
but, as had been repeatedly pointed out by a large 
number of delegations from developing countries, 
the Agency's policing functions should not be allowed 
to override or overwhelm its vital promotional 
functions. 

55. It was therefore gratifying to see that the 
Safeguards Committee (1970) had been specifically 
directed by the Board to discuss the problem of 
financing safeguards. The Committee had already 
done useful work. The delegations of several developing 
countries, including that of India, had proposed 
in the Committee a system of safeguards financing, 
based strictly on the letter and the spirit of the 
Statute. 
56. The basic principles of the proposed system 
were that safeguards expenses which were related 
to the Agency's promotional work, i.e. research and 
development activities and safeguards services in 
respect of research and development facilities in 
Member States, should be shared by all Members 
according to their assessed contributions but that, 
broadly speaking, safeguards expenditures on commercial 
facilities, which could be determined on the 
basis of the volume of safeguards work that the 
Agency actually performed, should be met by the 
countries concerned entering into bilateral or multilateral 
agreements with the Agency. That was what 
Article XIV of the Statute provided for and what 
should now be systematized. 
57. In addition, direct technical assistance to 
Member States, which was met from voluntary 
contributions, was also in a sorry state and had 
been so for a much longer time. For many years, 
the target for voluntary contributions had remained 
stable at $2 million. Meanwhile, the cost of equipment 
and services had gone up considerably so that, 
according to calculations by United Nations experts, 
even if the same goods and services were provided 
for technical assistance to the same number of developing 
countries in 1970 as in 1962, one would need 
a target of $2.75 million. At the same time, the 
membership of the Agency had increased and most 
of the new Members were developing nations. 
58. The Board had now recommended that the 
target for voluntary contributions be raised to 
$2.5 million. The developing countries would have 
wished for a much higher target, but in any case 
it was to be hoped the General Conference would 
approve that modest increase. 
59. India was a developing country and its monetary 
resources were scarce. Nevertheless, India was 
conscious of its international responsibilities and 

the provision of assistance to other developing 
colleagues was an article of its faith. It had therefore 
provided fellowships to young scientists from many 
countries, particularly those from the regions of Asia 
and the Pacific, at various facilities in India, including 
the Tarapur Power Station, both under the Agency's 
assistance programme and under bilateral arrangements. 
Moreover, India had consistently contributed 
more than its assessed share to the common fund 
of voluntary contributions. For the coming year as 
well, India pledged a contribution of 300 000 rupees 

— equivalent to $40 000 — which was higher than 
its assessed share of the increased target. 
60. Monsignor MORETTI (Holy See) said that 
for the first time for many years two prominent 
figures were absent from the gathering, namely 
Dr. Frank Folsom, who had died on 12 January 
1970, and the Reverend Father Theodor Hesburgh, 
who had resigned following the death of his inseparable 
friend. In recalling the moving memory 
of the two departed personages, he read part of a 
personal letter from His Holiness The Pope to 
Father Hesburgh, in which the Holy Father expressed 
appreciation of his well-nigh 14 years service as 
representative of the Holy See and at the same time 
spoke of the high esteem in which he held the 
Agency, with its noble mission to place science and 
its technical discoveries at the service of mankind. 
61. The Holy See was a very willing party in frank 
exchanges and sincere agreement with the international 
organizations, the object being attainment of 
man's high hopes, of peace among the nations, 
and of internal tranquility and progress in every 
country. It had accordingly welcomed with keen 
interest and real satisfaction the news of the ratification 
and entry into force of NPT. It laid particular 
stress on the article providing for co-operation among 
the nations in the material, scientific and technological 
field for the application of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes "with due consideration for the needs of 
the developing areas of the world". 
62. As the Director General had recently pointed 
out, the main obstacle to that vast programme was 
one of finance. Pope Paul VI was greatly grieved 
by that impasse and he repeatedly called for part 
at least of the savings accruing from a reduction 
in armaments to be devoted to that noble objective. 
In the Encyclical "Populorum progressio", addressed 
to all statesmen, the Pope had added that it was 
their duty to mobilize their communities so as to 
obtain a more effective world solidarity, and above 
all to make acceptable to them the requisite levies 
on their luxury and waste. 
63. He would stress that the appeal was meant 
for all men of goodwill, all the citizens of the world. 
It was for that reason that the theme of the forthcoming 
World Peace Day would be: "Every man is 
my brother". 
GC(XIV)/OR.139 

64. The call to reflect on that problem was 
addressed to all mankind, but it was valid also for 
the General Conference which was responsible for 
attainment of the Agency's aims and objectives, 
namely, to speed up and increase the contribution 
of atomic energy to the peace, health and prosperity 
of the whole world. 
65. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan) said that, as the 
new decade began, the two most important goals 
before the civilized world remained the same as for 
the 1960s, namely the avoidance of nuclear war 
and the achievement of rapid economic growth in 
the developing countries, which accounted for nearly 
two-thirds of the world's population. 
66. As far as the first goal was concerned, it was 
a matter of deep satisfaction that, despite tensions, 
frustrations and suspicions, mankind had moved 
forward on the road to sanity and peaceful coexistence, 
two major milestones on the way being 
the Partial Test-Ban Treaty and NPT. As all were 
aware, NPT was not as yet out of the wood; some 
countries had not adhered to it on the ground that 
it discriminated between countries possessing nuclear 
weapons and those without such weapons. Then 
there were countries which had developed nuclear 
complexes enabling them to exercise the so-called 
"nuclear option" and which claimed that the development 
and testing of nuclear explosives for peaceful 
purposes was a perfectly legitimate activity. Obviously, 
there was no difference between a nuclear explosive 
device for peaceful purposes and a nuclear weapon. 
The country developing such devices in the guise 
of peaceful explosives would in fact be acquiring 
nuclear weapon capability, thus wrecking the spirit 
of NPT. Since during the 1970s nuclear technology 
was bound to develop to a point where the use of 
nuclear explosives for such peaceful purposes as 
canal digging or tunnel blasting would be economically 
feasible, it was of paramount importance 
that nuclear explosives in the territories of nonnuclear-
weapon States should be used only under 
strict international control and supervision. An international 
peaceful nuclear explosives service should 
therefore be organized under the Agency's auspices 
and for that purpose a separate unit should be 
formed immediately within the Secretariat to collect 
the data needed for study of the technological, financial 
and political implications of the use of nuclear 
explosives for peaceful purposes. Once a project 
was cleared by the Agency as economically feasible 
and justified, the requisite nuclear explosives should 
be provided through the service, being placed under 
the Agency's safeguards system in the same way as 
enriched uranium supplied for nuclear reactors. 
67. The Safeguards Committee (1970) was to be 
congratulated for its effective work on the principles 
to govern negotiations on safeguards agreements 
under NPT. It was to be hoped that the Agency 

GC(XIV)/OR.139 

would be successful in negotiating and concluding 
satisfactory safeguards agreements with countries 
Members of the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM), which agreements would serve as 
models for others to come. The European countries, 
which mostly were sufficiently advanced to be in a 
position to exercise the "nuclear option", held the 
key to the entire working of an effective and economical 
safeguards system. The Agency, for its part, 
could and should guarantee the secrecy of processes 
under inspection to prevent any leakage of proprietary, 
commercial or industrial information. In 
that connection, the voluntary placing by the United 
States and the United Kingdom of all their peaceful 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards should 
dispel doubts concerning industrial espionage. The 
sole problem arising out of that voluntary action 
related to the financing of safeguards on an ex-
panding scale. Estimates of cost differed, but it was 
no exaggeration to say that the cost of inspection 
of all those facilities, together with others in Europe, 
would easily double the Agency's Regular Budget. 
The question was whether that burden should be 
shared by all the Members in proportion to their 
regular contribution to the Agency or by each 
Member in proportion to the number of nuclear 
facilities inspected in its country. There was no 
reason why the poor countries of Africa, Asia and 
Latin America, with no nuclear plants, should have 
to pay large sums to cover inspection in the United 
States and the United Kingdom, while knowing 
full well that those inspections would not prevent 
proliferation. The Statute was clear on the point. 
Under Article XIV.B.l(b), the cost could be met 
by the Regular Budget only in the case of safeguards 
applied to an Agency-assisted project; otherwise, in 
the case of safeguards administered under bilateral 
or multilateral arrangements, the reimbursement provisions 
of Article XIV. C were applicable. Since most 
of the peaceful nuclear facilities in the United 
Kingdom and the United States were reactors, a 
system of rotation of inspection could perhaps be 
instituted and where in a particular year a facility 
was not inspected, the national operation record 
could be accepted by mutual agreement for safeguards 
purposes. In the same way, for EURATOM countries 
and countries in other areas where similar regional 
arrangements might develop regional records would 
suffice. If that system were adopted the rigours 
and frequency of inspections could be minimized, 
expenses reduced, and the atmosphere of common 
understanding created that was so vital to the success 
of safeguards and NPT. 

68. The second goal, that of economic development 
in the developing countries, could be achieved only 
if the richer countries came to realize, first, that 
their technical and financial assistance was not a 
gift but a form of insurance against adversity at 
home and, secondly, that aid was followed by trade. 
The larger the market, the richer everyone was likely 
to be, so that economic self-interest alone required 
that the industrialized societies should hasten forward 
the process of development in poorer countries. The 
earmarking of 1% of their gross national product 
by the richer countries for aid of that kind could 
be a decisive factor in the fight against poverty in 
the developing countries. And the insignificance of 
the amount in question would be clear when compared 
with the defence expenditure of the Soviet 
Union and the United States in 1970, which 
amounted to nearly $115 billion. It was to be hoped 
that the conscience of the rich would be pricked to 
the point of ungrudgingly sparing that moral charge 
on their wealth. The question then arose how that 
aid would be expended by the developing countries. 
It was recognized that no one formula for development 
and no one set of priorities would apply universally 
to all the developing countries. Each 
country had to live with its past and plan in the 
present for its future. The doctrine of a multivalued 
society would therefore have to be 
adopted so that the developing nations could be 
allowed to evolve in their own ways. And if the 
means that modern science and technology had placed 
at the world's disposal could cut short the road to 
prosperity, the developing countries should adopt 
them no matter how complex or sophisticated they 

might be. 

69. The Agency also had an important part to 
play in the attainment of the second goal. The one 
peaceful use of atomic energy that could have a 
perceptible impact on economic development was 
the generation of cheap and abundant electric power; 
yet it was precisely in that field that the Agency 
had failed to move vigorously enough. Year after 
year the Conference was told that small and mediumpower 
reactors were uneconomic except in very special 
circumstances. Yet all were aware that most of the 
developing countries could not at present integrate 
in their grids nuclear power plants of more than 
150-250 MW. The term "uneconomic" was relative. 
What was uneconomic in an advanced country might 
very well be economic in a developing country. 
The small production units in the developing 
countries could not compete with the giant-sized 
factories of the industrially advanced countries; but 
that did not rule out industrialization in the developing 
countries on the basis of small units. The same 
was true in agriculture. Indeed, the argument of 
economists against small-size production could be 
stretched to the limit of absurdity. And his delegation 
did not share the view of the World Bank and 
other financing agencies in regard to financing of 
small and medium-sized nuclear power reactors in 
developing countries. If their verdict were taken as 
unassailable, there would be no nuclear power today 
in the Tennessee Valley in the United States or in 
the United Kingdom. Agency estimates showed 
that the developing countries would require nearly 
$3-$4 billion in foreign exchange to install about 

20 000-25 000 MW of nuclear power over the coming 
ten years. Viewed in isolation those figures might 
be frightening; in practice, however, the difference 
between the capital cost of nuclear power stations 
and the capital cost of conventional power stations 
required to attain the same target entered the picture; 
and the extra capital investment in nuclear plants 
could be wiped out in a few years by savings in fuel 
costs. Estimates made in Pakistan showed that, if 
an additional $100 million in foreign exchange per 
year was made available, the modest target under 
the Agency's estimates could be achieved. That 
amount, incidentally, was a fraction of the total 
foreign exchange loans advanced each year by the 
World Bank for power projects in the developing 
countries. If NPT required that the developing 
countries should renounce for all time to come their 
sovereign right to manufacture, acquire or possess 
nuclear weapons, surely justice and fair play demanded 
that the nuclear-weapon States should honour their 
moral obligation, under Article IV of the Treaty, 
to ensure that funds were forthcoming to finance 
nuclear projects in the developing countries. The 
money to be raised for the promoting of peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in developing countries, including 
nuclear power, should be equal to the money 
to be raised each year, nearly $25-40 million, for 
implementing safeguards under NPT. The Agency 
should give serious consideration to the setting up 
of a special nuclear fund for financing its promotional 
activities and programmes for the benefit of 
developing countries. 

70. He welcomed the reference made by the 
President, in his opening address, to the prospects 
of establishing big energy centres, employing nuclear 
power reactors3). The Agency should keep its 
Members fully informed on developments in that 
area and particularly as to the economic viability 
of nuclear desalination. 
71. With regard to the proposals before the Conference 
for amendment of Article VI of the Statute4), 
his delegation believed that the 21-nation proposal 
co-sponsored by Italy and others could gain the 
necessary two-thirds majority. However, the Soviet 
Union and other Members were unable to accept 
that proposal mainly on the ground that expansion 
of the permanent members of the Board from five 
to nine would distort the political balance on which 
the Statute was based. Irrespective of the merits 
of that objection the Soviet Union and the United 
States would have to be willing parties to any 
amendment of the Article in question; for it would 
be an exercise in futility unless the Soviet Union 
was prepared to co-operate whole-heartedly in the 
work of the expanded Board. No proposal, whatever 
backing it had, should be formally adopted if likely 
3) See document GC(XIV)/OR.135, para. 13. 
4) Reproduced in document GC(XIV)/437. 

GC(XIV)/OR.139 

to disrupt the existing harmony in the Board and 
the Agency. It was gratifying that the framework 
of the Pakistan proposal for amendment to Article VI 
was acceptable, not only to the Soviet Union and 
the other socialist countries but also to a growing 
number of important countries in the West and 
elsewhere. The compromise advocated was therefore 
a possible one and the various proposals before 
the Conference could undoubtedly be amalgamated 
to give a happy outcome. If that should not prove 
possible, however, his delegation would suggest that 
consideration of the various proposals be postponed 
for a limited period of time, in order that the major 
groups might reach an understanding and be able 
jointly to sponsor an agreed text for submission to 

the fifteenth General Conference with an assurance 
of near unanimity and speedy ratification. 

72. Lastly, the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission 
was grateful to the Director General and his 
colleagues for the willing assistance extended to it; 
help had been given with fellowships, experts and 
equipment within the limits of the resources at their 
disposal. The advice given on technical matters had 
been most valuable to the Commission, particularly 
that coming from the special mission of Agency experts 
on the evaluation of the feasibility of the 
Rooppur nuclear power project. The scientific seminars 
and meetings and the excellent scheme of 
associateship sponsored by the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics, Trieste, had helped young 
Pakistan scientists to make their contribution to die 
international pool of knowledge. 
73. The Agency was agreat international workshop, 
bringing together people from all corners of the 
world to design the instruments of peace and 
prosperity. Let it have faith in its destiny and refrain, 
whatever the temptation, from sacrificing principles 
to expediency. 
74. Mr. BIGGAR (Ireland) said that his country 
had already expressed on frequent occasions, particularly 
in the United Nations, its firm support for the 
IAEA in its present area of operations; in addition 
it had made known its hope that the Agency, as the 
organization most suited to provide the necessary 
services on a world basis, would take on new roles 
and new responsibilities in the co-ordination and 
control of the applications of atomic energy for 
peaceful uses in the future. 
75. In the past year Ireland had made progress 
towards the establishment of a Nuclear Energy Board 
and his Government hoped in the near future to 
introduce legislation for that purpose in Parliament. 
The main functions of the Board would be to offer 
expert advice to the Government on the significance 
for Ireland of developments in the field of nuclear 
science and to be a focal point for the collection 
and dissemination of information on that subject. 
-9



GC(XIV)/OR.139 

Although as yet Ireland had no nuclear power industry, 
it was, as part of the programme to meet 
its future electricity needs, considering the establishment 
of a nuclear power station. 

76. The most important event for the Agency during 
the past year had been the entry into force of NPT. 
He recalled that over a decade ago Ireland had been 
the first country to introduce a resolution in the 
United Nations urging the negotiation of an international 
agreement on that subject. The fact that to 
date a large number of States had signed and ratified 
NPT was a source of great satisfaction to his country 
which had lent constant support over the years to 
the idea of nuclear non-proliferation, subject to international 
inspection and control. He felt that the 
greatest effort should be made so that the practical 
provisions of the Treaty could come fully into effect. 
NPT was not a perfect instrument, but it was the 
most practical framework for attaining the desirable 
equilibrium between the mutual obligations and 
responsibilities of the nuclear and the non-nuclear 
weapon States and die best instrument likely to be 
available at the present time for preventing the 
furdier spread of nuclear weapons, as well as providing 
a strong stimulus for further disarmament 
measures. 

77. His country had followed carefully theprogress 
of the Safeguards Committee (1970) and was satisfied 
with the results to date. The Board in endorsing 
the Committee's First report5) authorized the Director 
General to use that report as a basis for negotiations, 
and his Government had indicated that they 
were prepared to enter into such negotiations with 
the Agency pursuant to Article III.4 of the Treaty. 
78. His Government was anxious that the Safeguards 
Committee, when it resumed its discussions, 
should reach early agreement on the outstanding 
matters such as the important question of the 
financing of safeguards. His Government would 
naturally support any equitable system of financing 
which could be agreed on. Its prime concern was 
that the legal, technical and financial obstacles should 
be overcome as speedily as possible so that detailed 
negotiations on a widely agreed common basis could 
be pursued without delay. 
79. On the question of the Agency's safeguards 
system his Government had noted carefully the work 
being done by the Agency in the improvement of 
the necessary techniques and methods, a task which 
had become all the more urgent on account of the 
Agency's new responsibilities under NPT and because 
of the continuing expansion of nuclear power reactors 
and the growing sophistication of the nuclear power 
industry throughout the world. The streamlining of 
the safeguards system should help considerably in 
reducing costs. 
5) GOV/1420. 

80. With reference to Articles IV and V of NPT, 
his Government had always held that, concurrently 
with the question of safeguards, the provisions in 
those Articles should without delay and on a progressive 
basis be translated into concrete proposals 
through the establishment of suitable international 
machinery. His Government had noted the report 
to die Secretary-General of the United Nations on 
the further action taken by the Agency in connection 
with the recommendations contained in resolutions 
adopted by the Conference of Non-Nuclear Weapon 
States^), which provided a useful summary of the 
Agency's activities in that whole field. 
81. He welcomed the coming into operation of the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS) 
and the Agency's studies on the financing of nuclear 
projects. The Fourth International Conference on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy would provide 
a useful occasion for a discussion of that question. 
82. With reference to peaceful nuclear explosions, 
his delegation had noted the special report to the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations on the 
subject7) and the important contribution made by 
the Panel of Experts meeting in Vienna in March 
1970. His Government regarded the Agency's work 
to date as a useful preliminary contribution on the 
question of the provision of the international service 
for peaceful purposes under Article V of NPT in 
accordance with the evolving technology of die subject. 
83. His delegation welcomed the increase in the 
Agency's technical assistance programme; it was an 
indication of the growing need for such assistance 
and was particularly appropriate at the beginning of 
the Second United Nations Development Decade. 
He announced that his Government had pledged a 
contribution to the General Fund in accordance with 
the recommended target. 
84. In view of the growing world concern on the 
question of environmental pollution, his Government 
had taken a keen interest in the work of the Agency 
in die handling and disposal of radiological wastes. 
As a coastal state, Ireland was naturally concerned 
at the great and urgent problem of marine pollution. 
His Government had already made known its view 
that consideration should be given to die desirability 
of preparing an international instrument establishing 
rules relating to the extent and mode of dumping 
waste including radioactive waste into the sea. The 
joint group of experts on the scientific aspects of 
marine pollution (GESAMP) had made important 
recommendations earlier that year and the United 
Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the 
Sea-bed had expressed concern at the practice of 
using the sea-bed for dumping toxic, radioactive and 
6) GC(XIV)/INF/120. 
7) GC(XIV)/INF/121. 


— 10

GC(XIV)/OR.139 

other dangerous materials and had appealed to all 
Governments to refrain from using the ocean floor 
as a dumping ground for materials which caused 
serious danger to the marine environment. 

85. His delegation welcomed the Director 
General's proposal to set up under the auspices of 
the Agency an international register of disposal of 
radioactive waste into the sea. That was a timely 
and eminently practical suggestion which could set 
an example for similar measures in other fields of 
environmental pollution control. To establish on an 
international basis the machinery for the collation 
of reliable information regarding the time, place and 
location of radiological waste discharges into die sea 
would represent a small but significant step forward. 
He hoped that the Director General's proposal would 
be supported and felt that the Agency, in close cooperation 
with the United Nations and other bodies 
concerned, was the most suitable organization to 
take on die overall technical responsibilities involved. 
86. He complimented the Agency on the work 
which it had in hand in studying the ecological and 
other effects of radiological pollution of the seas. 
The forthcoming panel to advise on procedures for 
establishing limits for radionuclides in the sea was 
another step in that direction. Studies on which 
limits could be determined for the discharge of 
wastes into the sea were of the highest importance 
in view of the great need for accurate knowledge 
on the subject. 
87. As nuclear power was increasingly becoming 
a prime fuel source in an ever larger number of 
States, the need for adequate international control 
over the many possible applications of atomic energy 
would, if supported by States, be of vital importance 
for the peace, security and prosperity of mankind. 
His country looked forward to close co-operation 
with die Agency in its important work. 
Mr. Quihillalt {Argentina), Vice-President, took the Chair. 

88. Mr. GUZINA (Yugoslavia) said that the entry 
into force of NPT was an important event for the 
Agency, since it increased the Agency's safeguards 
responsibilities and gave a new force to international 
co-operation, through the Agency, in peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. 
89. Yugoslavia had ratified the Treaty, because it 
would contribute to the cessation of the nuclear 
arms race, initiate nuclear disarmament and promote 
a universal system of international security conducive 
to development. 
90. His Government had expressed its readiness, 
in conformity with its obligations under Article III 
of the Treaty, to enter into negotiations with the 
Agency with a view to concluding a safeguards agreement. 
It hoped that the Safeguards Committee (1970) 
would be able to find appropriate solutions to the 
problems involved in such agreements, such as export 
and transport of nuclear material, financing of safeguards, 
etc., without detriment to the economic 
interests of the countries concerned. 

91. The application of safeguards should be based 
mainly on direct inspections of nuclear plants (direct 
auditing of records kept by such plants), due precautions 
being taken against die violation oftechnical 
and commercial secrets, rather than on examination 
of the reports submitted by the countries. 
92. With reference to the most difficult question 
of financing safeguards, his delegation supported the 
view expressed by a number of small as well as 
developing countries diat an excessive burden should 
not be placed on such countries and that the Agency 
should have a separate safeguards budget apportioning 
safeguards costs to nuclear and non-nuclear 
countries on an equitable basis. The share of the 
latter countries should, in his view, be proportional 
to the quantity of nuclear fissionable material subject 
to control. 
93. Although the application of safeguards would 
certainly mean an expansion in the Agency's activities 
and lead, consequently, to greater expenditure, the 
Agency's other activities must in no way suffer on 
that account. 
94. His delegation was concerned about the fact 
that the Agency's financial situation did not enable 
it fully to meet the growing needs of the developing 
countries, as was evident from the annual report 
of the Board of Governors (GC(XIV)/430, Table 2). 
Aldiough die approved allocation for expert services 
and equipment had increased from $977 000 in 1969 
to $1.25 million in 1970, only about a third of the 
requests for such assistance could be met in 1970. 
It was essential to strike a balance between the 
various activities of the Agency. The Agency should 
continue to play an important role in die planning 
and effective implementation of the programmes of 
technical assistance to developing countries in order 
to meet the provisions of Articles IV and V of the 
Treaty. If nuclear powers wished that the Agency 
should assume greater responsibilities, they should 
also show a fuller understanding of the needs of 
non-nuclear and developing countries. 
95. In regard to the question of the review of 
Article VI of the Statute, his delegation did not 
consider any of die proposals contained in document 
GC(XIV)/437, part A, to be satisfactory, although 
they all had some merits, and felt that further efforts 
must be made in order to find a solution providing 
for a fair representation of Member States on the 
Board. 
— 11 — 


GC(XIV)/OR.139 

96. Although the Agency, in the years of its existence, 
had proved itself to be a useful international 
organization, its achievements must be reviewed continuously 
in the light of new developments in the 
nuclear field and, in particular, in the context of 
international events. His delegation appreciated the 
Director General's efforts in that direction and supported 
the proposal to raise the level of voluntary 
contributions. 
97. In regard to the proposed programme for 197119768), 
attention should be drawn to the usefulness 
of providing for integrated individual projects and 
to administering them in such a way that additional 
resources for their implementation could be mobilized 
to the maximum. 
98. He felt that under technical assistance programmes 
continued emphasis should be placed on 
the organization of courses and schools at the regional 
and interregional levels, on the training of 
technical staff in the practical uses of atomic energy 
and on the implementation of integral technical 
assistance projects. 
99. Lastly, he commended the work done in giving 
effect to resolution GC(XIII)/RES/256 calling for 
a study of the financing of nuclear projects and 
urged that the work should be continued so that 
the most appropriate and optimum recommendations 
could be prepared. 
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m. 

8) See document GC(XIV)/433. 

12



GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XIV)/OR.140 
25 February 1971 * 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 

ONE HUNDRED AND FORTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 25 September 1970, at 3.15 p.m. 

President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
a gem/a** 
10 Closing date of the session 
9 General debate and report of the Board of Governors 
for 1969-70 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Indonesia 
Iraq 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Korea 
Czechoslovakia 
Turkey 
Italy 
Bolivia 
Philippines 
Switzerland 
Thailand 
Brazil 
Nigeria 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 12 October 1970. 
** GC(XIV)/442. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 

Paragraphs 

1— 3 

-140 

4— 22 

23— 26 

27— 43 

44— 49 

50— 58 

59— 66 

67— 76 

77— 96 

97—102 
103—108 
109—H3 
114—126 
127—140 


GC(XIV)/OR.140 

CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

1. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure, the General Conference 
had to fix a closing date for the session, oh the 
recommendation of the General Committee. 
2. The General Committee had considered the 
question and had authorized him to recommend on 
its behalf that Tuesday, 29 September 1970, be 
fixed as the closing date, subject to all business 
having been disposed of by then. 
3. The General Committee's recommendation was accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1969-70 
(GC(XIV)/430, 440) (continued) 

4. Mr. SIWABESSY (Indonesia) said that he 
had listened with great interest to the Director 
General's report on the Agency's achievements and 
future programmeJ). 
5. In the past three years there had also been 
significant achievements in all kinds of fields in 
Indonesia. Political stability had been achieved for 
the first time since independence, the scourge of 
inflation had been eliminated and the confidence 
of foreign investors had been regained, as evidenced 
by die numerous companies undertaking mining 
and manufacturing prujects. The first five-year plan 
had been launched, and very satisfactory results had 
been obtained during its first year of implementation. 
Even the modest nuclear programme had shown some 
useful results, as reported in document GC(XIV)/ 
INF/124/Add.l. 
6. The results had brought increased hope for 
the future; they had been achieved through hard 
work by the Indonesian people, who were conscious 
of the need for economic development, and also 
as a result of cordial relations with friendly countries 
who understood Indonesia's needs. 
7. For several years, the countries comprising the 
Inter-Governmental Group of Creditors for Indonesia 
had extended substantial economic aid. Very recently, 
negotiations had been conducted with the USSR, 
and agreements had been reached on future economic 
relations and technical assistance. Nevertheless, some 
problems remained. Indonesia's infrastructure remained 
far from satisfactory, and increased financial 
obligations had been incurred. The problems inherent 
in the growth of population were a matter of concern, 
as in other developing countries, and were 
regarded by the Indonesian Government as being of 
paramount importance. 
1) GC(XIV)/OR.135, paras 25-57. 

8. Indonesia was well aware of the benefits atomic 
energy could bring for the welfare of its people 
and for economic development. It had endeavoured 
to utilize nuclear techniques in a modest way to 
solve some problems related to the economy. As 
the first five-year plan was based on agriculture, 
research had been undertaken in such areas as food 
production increase, which was one of the most 
important problems facing the country. Some work 
had also been carried out in radiography and che 
applications of isotopes and radiation in hydrology 
and in medicine. The construction of nuclear power 
plants and desalination plants, although perhaps not 
an immediate task, was one that was nevertheless 
being borne in mind for die future. 
9. In all those applications of nuclear energy, 
future developments would depend on die determination 
of the Indonesian people, their capabilities 
and the means available to them. In the latter 
respect Indonesia considered co-operation with other 
countries, and in particular with neighbouring 
countries, to be very important. Such co-operation 
would enable the countries concerned to avoid duplication 
of effort and thereby to save funds and to 
make more effective use of locally available resources. 
10. Several co-operative projects in non-nuclear 
fields were being implemented in his region by 
members of the Association of South-East-Asian 
Nations. Indonesia looked forward to co-operation 
with those countries in nuclear energy projects, and 
hoped that the Agency, with its initiatives for 
regional co-operation in that region, would succeed 
in promoting specific co-operative projects in the 
future. 
11. Indonesia had also benefited from co-operation 
with the advanced nations. Its first reactor had 
been built with the assistance of the United States 
of America, and the reactor's capacity was now being 
increased to 1000 kW, again with assistance from 
the United States. The amendment to the co-operative 
agreement between the two countries, providing for 
an extension of the agreement, had been signed in 
June 1970. Under a co-operative agreement with 
France, a programme of uranium exploration had 
been under way since November 1969. A cooperative 
agreement widi the Soviet Union provided 
for the construction of a reactor and the Soviet 
Union had shown willingness to continue assistance. 
12. While bilateral assistance could help to reduce 
the need for technical assistance, the Agency and 
the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) would continue to remain the main source 
of such help, and hence to provide the main stimulus 
in the promotion of the peaceful applications of 
atomic energy. Indonesia had noted with great 
satisfaction diat in 1969 disbursements for technical 
assistance by the Agency had reached the highest 
— 2 — 


level so far. The Member States which had increased 
their contributions for that work were to be commended. 
Nevertheless it was his delegations's belief 
that the increase remained insufficient in view of the 
increase in the number of countries requesting assistance 
and of the very wide scope of atomic energy 
applications. Additional funds must still be sought. 
In the past, the practice of the General Conference 
had been to hold a special session in which Member 
States announced their pledges for the following 
year. Perhaps that practice could be resumed. He 
understood that a special Pledging Conference held 
by UNDP had succeeded in obtaining greater financial 
support from its members; the suggestion therefore 
merited serious consideration. 

13. Despite the increase in the funds made available 
for technical assistance projects in 1969, the 
total amount was only $500 000 more than the 
previous highest figure, attained in 1965, and that 
increase was smaller in amount than the envisaged 
increase in expenditure for safeguards in 1971, i.e. 
$613 000. That situation was not in the immediate 
interest of the developing countries. For one thing, 
the increase for safeguards was more or less assured, 
since it was part of the Regular Budget, whereas 
funds for technical assistance came from voluntary 
contributions. Moreover, undue stress on safeguards 
activities would convey a misleading impression of 
the Agency's functions. 
14. His delegation did not wish to give the impression 
that it regarded the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)2) as unimportant. 
On the contrary, the entry into force 
of NPT was one of the most important factors for 
world peace. Nevertheless, Indonesia was apprehensive 
about the increasing cost of the new burden 
on the Agency, a burden which would become 
heavier in the course of time. In the very near future 
a solution must be found for the financing of the 
Agency's safeguards activities under NPT. The 
solution must be equitable in the sense that, while 
performing the tasks required by NPT, the Agency 
should continue to carry out the functions for which 
it had been formed, namely, promotion and acceleration 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
15. Concern about the Agency's increasing burdens 
was shared by many developing countries and their 
opinions must be considered by the Agency. For 
that reason, greater representation of those countries 
on the Board of Governors must soon be brought 
about. 
16. It was already two years since the General 
Conference had adopted a resolution requesting the 
Board to revise Article VI of the Statute3), and 
2) Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
3) GC(XII)/RES/241. 

GC(XIV)/OR.140 

no consensus had as yet been reached. The lively 
debate and diverse opinions expressed on Article VI 
was evidence of the great importance that Member 
States attached to the question. The composition 
of the Board of Governors was of special importance 
to developing countries, which did not like to be 
mere spectators in the formulation of the Agency's 
policy, since not only technical matters but also 
political issues of the greatest magnitude closely 
related to world peace and the prosperity of mankind 
were involved. 

17. In that connection mention should be made 
of NPT and safeguards, respecting which a special 
committee had been established to permit exhaustive 
discussion. In that context it had become more 
than obvious that developing countries should have 
an equitable participation in formulating the policy 
of the Agency through adequate representation on 
the Board of Governors. 
18. His Government had therefore supported 
resolutions GC(XII)/RES/241 and GC(XIII)/ 
RES/ 261, aimed at enlarging the membership of the 
Board, with the proviso that there should be 
equitable geographical representation of the regions. 
19. His delegation had moreover supported every 
idea which would accelerate the implementation of 
those resolutions. During the debate on the matter 
there had been very considerable dissension among 
the Member States. It had even been suggested 
that some countries would withhold ratification if 
a certain proposed amendment to Article VI were 
approved during the present session of the General 
Conference. 
20. In Indonesia a system ofmusjawarah (deliberations) 
and mufakat (consensus) was employed in 
finding solutions to matters of great importance. 
21. He saw no advantage in imposing the will 
of the majority on the minority and considered a 
consensus to be a more beneficial way of settling 
problems, as that procedure, although requiring more 
patience and forbearance, would preserve the smooth 
functioning of the Agency and dissipate dissension 
on a crucial issue. 
22. His delegation sincerely hoped that during the 
current session of the General Conference a decision 
could be reached that would not cripple the operation 
of the Agency. 
23. Mr. AL-KARBOULI (Iraq) said that the 
Republic of Iraq was grateful to the Agency for its 
continued assistance and guidance while hopefully 
expecting more aid. 

GC(XIV)/OR.140 

24. Turning to the most important recent achievements 
of the Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission, he 
said that: 
(1) A 2-MW Soviet-built swimming-pooltype 
nuclear reactor had been constructed and put 
into operation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
in the fields of medicine, agriculture, industry and 
basic research; 
( 2) Laboratory facilities had been completed 
to make the best possible use of the reactor, in 
particular a radioisotope production laboratory with 
a capacity of 300 curies per annum; 
(3) The scientific departments of the 
Baghdad Nuclear Research Institute were in the 
process of being completed. Efforts were being made 
to provide them with essential scientific material 
and facilities and to recruit efficient personnel to 
implement an atomic programme which included the 
following projects: 
(a) A study of radiation effects on 
insects causing damage to agriculture; 
(b) Application of the neutron activation 
analysis technique to problems concerning 
the sulphur content of Iraqi crude oil, the 
composition of tobacco, and the analysis of 
geological survey samples; 
(c) A study designed to achieve a 
better understanding of the process of mixing 
raw materials in the cement industry; 
(d) Basic research in the field of 
nuclear and solid-state physics; 
(e) Assistance with the completion of 
medical and radiological projects in Baghdad 
and with the establishment of a similar centre 
in Mosul, generously donated by the Soviet 
Union through the Agency's technical assistance 
programme; 
(f) Providing help for physics services 
to hospitals, medical colleges, etc.; 
(g) Initiating the establishment of an 
electronic computer centre capable of meeting 
the needs of the Nuclear Research Institute; 
and 
(h) Research studies designed to improve 
the preservation of food by radiation. 
25. The achievements of the Iraqi Atomic Energy 
Commission in the regional and international spheres 
included the following: 
(a) Co-operation with Arab States with 
similar interests to Iraq in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy; 
(b) Active participation in the Middle East 
Regional Radioisotope Centre in Cairo; 
(c) Participation in the preliminary committee 
to establish a centre for nuclear documentation 
and information services in the Arab world to be 
affiliated to the Agency; 
(d) Active participation in most Arab and 
international conferences, seminars, etc. 
26. The scientific ties between Iraq and the Soviet 
Union had been strengthened by plans for cooperation 
in the following spheres: 
(a) Technical and scientific plans for joint 
research projects and reciprocal scientific visits; 
(b) Plans for the establishment of a medical 
radiological centre under the supervision of the University 
of Mosul. 
27. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) congratulated the President on his election 
and expressed confidence that he would discharge 
the duties of his office with outstanding success. 
28. He noted that the work of the Agency was 
proceeding against a background of striking developments 
in science and technology, at a time when 
scientific achievements were having a steadily increasing 
influence on the welfare of the peoples of 
the world. 
29. His delegation was most interested in the 
Agency's programme for 1971-76 as a whole4), and 
in particular with that part of it which concerned 
scientific and technical activities. He considered one 
of the most important questions in that field to 
be nuclear power and reactors. 
30. His delegation rated very highly the role of 
the Agency in the successful development of such 
work. The regular holding of symposia and panels 
of experts and the issue of reports and manuals 
would greatly assist all countries in harnessing the 
best achievements of world science and technology 
for their own use within a short space of time. 
31. He noted further that matters such as the 
exchange of experience in the operation of nuclear 
power stations, and the preparation of recommendations 
on nuclear data had received their due place 
in the Agency's programme. He was certain that 
the Agency's activities in relation to the exchange 
4) See document GC(XIV)/433. 

4



of experience and technical information would continue 
to be useful and fruitful in the future. 

32. Describing the successful development of 
science and technology in Byelorussia, he said that 
preparations had been completed for the reconstruction 
of the IRT-2000 nuclear reactor with 
a view to increasing the rated power to 40005000 
kW. 
33. The power of the universal gamma irradiation 
facility had been increased from 200 000 geq radium 
to 400 000 geq radium and the range of research 
that could be performed had thereby been considerably 
broadened. Radioisotope research in medicine, 
industry and agriculture had also been considerably 
expanded. The linear accelerator, betatron and 
gamma sources were being used extensively for therapeutic 
purposes. The protective action of a number 
of physical and chemical factors in connection with 
neutron irradiation of biological materials was being 
studied. Investigations of chlorophyll metabolism 
using radioactive carbon (14C) were being continued. 
Methods, instruments and equipment were being 
developed using isotopes, nuclear radiations and activation 
analysis for the study of processes occurring 
in soils and plants. 
34. In 1970 many countries of the world had 
observed the one hundredth anniversary of the birth 
of V.I. Lenin. While on the subject of the current 
development of large power stations, one could 
not but do honour to the astonishing foresight 
shown by V.I. Lenin in regard to the importance 
of electrification for the cultural development and 
welfare of the peoples of the world. 
35. In the near future, nuclear power stations 
would play a fundamental part in the Byelorussian 
SSR in the further development of electric power 
generation. Scientific research in the next few years 
should reveal even better ways of developing nuclear 
power, leading to further reductions in the cost of 
the electricity produced. Byelorrusia's scientists hoped 
to make their contribution to that technical future, 
and even now scientific and technical results were 
available which made it possible to speak of new 
technical achievements. One important development 
that came to mind was nuclear power stations using 
fast reactors with a new type of coolant dissociative 
gases. A second was the creation of power generation 
and chemical manufacturing combines which 
made possible a multiple utilization of nuclear energy 
for the production of electricity and the simultaneous 
manufacture of chemical products and modified materials 
resulting from the interaction of radiation 
with raw materials. 
36. His delegation approved the Agency's programme 
for 1971-76 as a whole and felt certain 
that it would do much to further the development 
GC(XIV)/OR.140 

of science and technology throughout the world. 
He was likewise confident that Byelorussian scientists 
would have a large part to play in solving the 
scientific problems which were to be dealt with 
under the Agency's programme. 

37. His delegation had heard with great satisfaction 
the announcement of the dates for the Fourth International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy (6-16 September 1971) at Geneva. The 
programme of that Conference was extremely interesting 
and his delegation wished the Secretariat 
all success in the difficult preparatory work. 
38. His delegation was certain that the entry into 
force of NPT, on 5 March 1970, would have a 
favourable effect on co-operation among signatory 
nations in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
The Agency had been given an extremely responsible 
task in connection with the Treaty: that of applying 
controls and safeguards; and his delegation would 
give it every possible assistance in discharging those 
duties. 
39. One of the most important questions examined 
at the current session of the General Conference 
was the proposed amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute. That was not a simple question. It had 
to be decided in such a way as not to upset the 
political equilibrium prevailing at present in the 
Board of Governors. 
40. So far five proposals had been put forward 
for amendment of the Statute. In the view of his 
delegation the proposal put forward in the name of 
the seven socialist countries (GC(XIV)/437, 
section A.l) represented a serious basis for agreement 
on a revision of Article VI. It was aimed at 
ensuring a fair representation for all Members of the 
Agency without unduly increasing the size of the 
Board. With their proposal, the socialist countries 
were not seeking any special privileges for themselves; 
on the contrary, the proposal was designed to satisfy 
the legitimate claims of all countries, in particular 
the developing countries. 
41. As a co-sponsor of the socialist proposal, his 
delegation wished to announce that it was prepared 
to agree to a compromise and would, in the interests 
of obtaining a mutually acceptable solution, support 
the proposal put forward by Pakistan (GC(XIV)/ 
437, section A.2). 
42. His delegation had repeatedly expressed the 
view that the universality of the Agency was a 
principle that should be respected in relation to all 
States. An entirely consistent step in that direction 
would be to accept the German Democratic Republic 
as a Member of the Agency. He would reaffirm 
his view that the German Democratic Republic should 
be allowed to join the Agency. 
_5_ 


GC(XIV)/OR.140 

43. In conclusion he expressed the conviction that 
the work of the Agency and broad co-operation 
between nations in the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy would grow steadily, moving from strength 
to strength; and that the Agency would successfully 
play its part in co-ordinating all efforts, so that 
modern science might provide the basis for prosperity 
and cultural development among all peoples of the 
world. 
44. Mr. YOO (Republic of Korea) said that the 
Agency deserved praise for its work in establishing 
NPT; his Government expected to ratify the Treaty 
in the near future. 
45. He wanted, first, to outline current nuclear 
projects in Korea. The Korea Electric Company 
had concluded a contract for the construction of a 
PWR nuclear power plant with a capacity of 564 MW. 
That project would play an important part not only 
in industrial development but also in the overall 
improvement of nuclear science and technology. The 
power plant consisted of a reactor and steam generating 
system from the United States of America, a 
turbine generator made in England, and a reactor 
containment vessel fabricated in France. The project 
was a demonstration of international technological 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
The installation of the nuclear power plant would 
inevitably involve safety analysis work. Since the 
Office of Atomic Energy was not yet experienced 
in that field, Agency assistance was required, and 
two experts had therefore been requested under 
the Agency's 1971 technical assistance programme. 
46. Work on the installation of a 2-MW TRIGA 
Mark-Ill reactor had begun in April 1969 and was 
almost completed. Criticality was expected to be 
reached by the end of 1971. The reactor would 
make it possible to meet the increasing domestic 
demand for radioisotopes and would provide a high 
neutron flux for research. 
47. His country had planned another important 
project which deserved mention: as a result of feasibility 
studies conducted by the Agency, the Government 
had applied to UNDP for the establishment 
of a radiation processing pilot plant; the plant would 
greatly enhance the development of new techniques 
in the timber and plywood industries, and would 
also be utilized in the petro-chemical and synthetic 
resin industries. In the same context, his Government 
would shortly be acting as host to an international 
meeting on Radiation Processing Techniques 
of Special Interest to Developing Countries, to be 
held under the sponsorship of IAEA. 
48. Korea also had a number of nuclear medicine 
programmes. Under the Office of Atomic Energy,, 
the Radiological Research Institute had continued 
to apply nuclear diagnosis and therapy in cases of 
malignant tumour and cancer. Among other activities, 
the Institute, in close co-operation with local university 
hospitals, had started a programme for the 
early diagnosis and treatment of female cancer. 

49. The Radiation Research Institute in Agriculture, 
also headed by the Office of Atomic Energy, 
had been concentrating on the improvement of 
agricultural productivity, especially the introduction 
of high-yielding seed varieties. New methods of 
fertilization and insect control were also being introduced. 
In food-irradiation research, the Institute 
had concluded an agreement with the United States 
Atomic Energy Commission to operate a 25 OOO-curie 
cobalt-60 irradiator for two years in Korea, mainly 
for food irradiation research and training in irradiation 
techniques. 
50. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) congratulating 
the President on his election, expressed confidence 
that under his guidance the Conference would 
accomplish productive work which would increase 
both the importance and the effectiveness of the 
Agency. 
51. 1970 had been a notable year for the Agency, 
for NPT had entered into force on 5 March. The 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic had been one of 
the first States to sign and ratify the Treaty. Since 
his Government regarded nuclear disarmament as 
one of the cornerstones of its foreign policy, it had, 
on 5 June 1970, indicated its readiness to begin 
negotiations with the Agency with a view to concluding 
a safeguards agreement. In its opinion, 
the Treaty should be implemented as soon as 
possible so that the Agency's safeguards system 
could be put into effect. Such a system, based on 
the Agency's great experience, would be able to 
ensure effective international control. Of particular 
significance in that connection was the deliberations 
of the Safeguards Committee (1970) which had 
accepted a great responsibility for the future life of 
the Agency. He was confident that the results of 
the Committee's work would,strengthen unity within 
the Agency and enable the safeguards system to be 
applied in good time. 
52. His delegation realized that the Agency would 
be helped considerably in discharging its safeguards 
responsibilities if the revision of Article VI of the 
Statute were discussed in a business-like and 
constructive manner. Its views, together with those 
of other delegations, had been reproduced in document 
GC(XIV)/437, but it was still prepared to help 
find a solution which would strengthen unity within 
the Agency and improve the organization's 
effectiveness. 
5 3. In that regard the efforts of his delegation 
had not yet been successful, but he was sure that 
no useful purpose would be served if a unilateral, 

formal decision were taken on a proposal to which 
a considerable number of delegations objected in 
principle. On the contrary, such a decision would 
complicate matters still further and would have an 
unfavourable effect on the work of the Agency. He 
urged a patient approach, believing that more time 
should be devoted to the review of Article VI. 

54. His delegation considered it essential to emphasize 
once more that the Agency's activities would 
stand to gain if all States that wished to take part in 
them — the German Democratic Republic was a 
case in point — were given the opportunity to do 
so as regular Members. Such countries had demonstrated 
by their own work that they were able 
and willing to contribute to the peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy. 
5 5 • The whole Secretariat was to be congratulated 
on the way in which it had prepared the Agency's 
programme for 1971-76 and the budget for 1971. 
The Czechoslovak delegation considered that the 
proposals set out in the programme were interesting, 
but extremely broad in scope, and that they would 
make such heavy demands on the budget that it 
would be very difficult to accommodate them 
financially. That being so, it would be wise to 
assign priorities to the proposals, with the assistance, 
in particular, of the Scientific Advisory Committee, 
panels of experts and other bodies. 

56. Within the framework of its own traditional, 
close co-operation with the Agency, Czechoslovakia 
considered that certain elements of the programme 
deserved special emphasis: he had in mind, first 
and foremost, the integrated long-term safeguards 
programme, nuclear power, scientific and technical 
information, nuclear safety and the problem of the 
effect of nuclear power plants on the environment. 
57. With respect to the Agency's 1971 budget, 
the Czechoslovak delegation again warned that, in 
its view, it would be necessary to bring about a 
degree of stabilization. On the other hand, it recognized 
that the budget must inevitably support 
certain additional burdens in connection with the 
safeguards programme. Expenditure on safeguards 
under NPT should be charged to the Regular 
Budget, and should be borne by the whole organization 
as all States would benefit from the Treaty. 
Of course, the introduction of the safeguards system 
should not lead to a curtailment of other important 
programmes; in particular, technical assistance should 
continue to receive full support. 
58. Within the framework of an appropriate technical 
assistance programme, the Czechoslovak 
Government proposed in 1971 to supply Czechoslovak 
equipment to the value of 150 000 Crowns for 
developing countries; it was also offering five longterm 
fellowships for studies at Czechoslovak instituGC(
XIV)/OR.140 

tions of higher education, and four one-year fellowships 
for training and work at research establishments 
and institutes of the Czechoslovak Academy 
of Sciences. Lastly, the Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic was again offering to organize a special 
course or an IAEA study trip in Czechoslovakia. 

59. Mr. ISTINYELI (Turkey) said that he had 
listened attentively to the statements made by the 
Director General and the delegates of Member States; 
one and all had stressed the importance of the role 
the Agency had hitherto played and the responsibilities 
devolving upon it with the entry into force 
of NPT on 5 March 1970. As a signatory, Turkey 
was following the situation in that area with keen 
interest. Since it regarded universal application of 
NPT and an effective safeguards system as two elements 
essential for the success of the Treaty, it had 
taken an active part in the deliberations of the Safeguards 
Committee and intended to carry on 
doing so. 
60. As stated at previous sessions, his delegation 
attached particular importance to balance among the 
Agency's various statutory activities; it would wish 
to see that balance maintained or slanted even more 
towards technical assistance, for in its opinion the 
Agency could do more in contributing to progress 
and development in Member States, and thus help 
to close the technological gap among the international 
community. 
61. Turkey had therefore welcomed with satisfaction 
the raising of contributions to the General Fund 
for 1971. It hoped the Agency would continue 
to promote on an ever-growing scale the application 
of nuclear techniques in hydrology, agriculture, medicine 
and industry, fields in which his country had 
made substantial progress, in large part thanks to 
assistance given by the Agency. 
62. In view of the fact that conventional resources 
for electric power production were inadequate and 
that the demand for electric power was rapidly increasing, 
Turkey had undertaken feasibility studies 
with respect to nuclear power stations and hoped 
to put a 400-MW nuclear station into service in the 
national grid towards the end of 1976. 
63. The financing of nuclear projects was, in 
Turkey's opinion, a matter of vital importance for 
countries whose investment resources were limited, 
and it was equally of interest for countries and 
organizations having investment funds available: undoubtedly 
the Agency would be continuing its studies 
on the matter in greater depth. 
64. The Fourth International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy would constitute 
an important step towards the application of nuclear 
science for the benefit of more and more Member 
States. 

GC(XIV)/OR.140 

65- The conference on the environment, to be 
held at Prague in 1971 in preparation for the 
Stockholm conference in 1972, was another important 
meeting, to which the Agency could contribute substantially 
through work on radiation pollution of 
air and water. 

66. With regard to the revision of Article VI of 
the Statute, Turkey had consistently advocated a 
solution which would ensure an equitable distribution 
of seats on the Board of Governors while at the 
same time allowing the Board to work efficiently. 
It had accordingly joined in sponsoring the proposal 
for amendment of Article VI submitted by Italy 
and several other countries. 
67. Mr. SALVETTI (Italy) said that the essential 
task confronting the Agency was to accelerate the 
exploitation of new sources of energy, thereby furthering 
the efforts of the industrialized countries to assist 
the developing countries. It was also necessary 
to adjust the structure of die Agency to the changed 
conditions of the world. The problems which the 
Agency faced were essentially of a political nature. 
Likewise the action diat needed to be taken was also 
political in its nature. 
68. As in the past, Italy had continued to cooperate 
actively in die Agency's principal programmes. 
He recalled the fruitful activity of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste and 
mentioned Italian participation in the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS) project, an 
initiative which his Government regarded as one of 
the most interesting recently undertaken by the 
Agency, aimed at the development of a sector in 
which there was need for broad international cooperation. 
In other fields too — such as agriculture, 
food, biology and radioactivity — Italy continued 
to be actively associated with the Agency's research 
programmes. 
69. As to professional training, Italy had made 
available in 1970 to the Agency a number of fellowships 
adding up to a total of 160 mondis of training 
for the benefit of experts from developing countries. 
Italy had also participated in panels, conferences 
and study groups organized by the Agency during 
the past year. 
70. As in previous years electro-nuclear energy 
in Italy made a considerable contribution to the 
overall national production of energy. The 18.6 
billion kWh produced up to the end of June by 
the three power stations in operation put Italy in 
third place among the electro-nuclear power producing 
countries of the world. ENEL, the Italian 
national electric energy agency, had decided to build 
a fourth nuclear power station. The new plant, 
which was of the boiling-water type with a capacity 
of 783 MW(e), would be installed near Piacenza 
and become operational in 1975. The total cost 
would amount to nearly $224 million and Italian 
industry would supply about 80% of the plant 
components. 

71. He emphasized his country's deep interest 
in the further development of the Agency as an 
organization charged with promoting international 
co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. New relevant tasks had already 
been undertaken by the Agency in connection widi 
the provisions of NPT relating to safeguards. The 
question of the Agency's responsibilities for the 
implementation of NPT was a complex one. The 
thorough debates which had taken place in the 
Committee of the Whole, set up by the Board to 
investigate the implications arising from the Agency's 
safeguards activities under NPT, had produced results 
which his delegation regarded as satisfactory. He 
stressed that a great number of Member States had 
participated in the work of the Committee in a spirit 
of co-operation. He gave special praise to the preliminary 
work carried out in that connection by 
the Secretariat. 
72. Together with other Member States of the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
which had signed NPT, Italy would be a party to 
the verification agreement to be completed between 
the Agency and EURATOM. He hoped that 
negotiations would begin shordy. 
73. He hoped that the Safeguards Committee 
(1970) in its forthcoming deliberations would take 
into account the viewpoints of die parties concerned 
and reach constructive and realistic conclusions. 
Special consideration must be devoted by the Committee 
to the financing of the Agency's safeguards 
activities under NPT. A great number of suggestions 
had been put forward and at the present stage the 
Italian delegation did not wish to offer any solution. 
It only wanted to draw the Conference's attention 
to the importance of that difficult matter. 
74. Technological and political developments and 
the new problems facing the Agency had made it 
increasingly urgent for the organization to adjust 
its structures to the tasks that it was called upon 
to undertake. The urgency of diat issue had been 
clearly recognized at the twelfth General Conference. 
Following an initiative taken by several countries 
including Italy, a resolution (GC(XII)/RES/24l) 
had been adopted calling for study of the most 
effective way of adjusting the composition of the 
Board of Governors. At the thirteenth General 
Conference, the Board had been called upon, as a 
matter of urgency, to continue the study of the 
problem and to submit to the General Conference 
a draft. amendment to Article VI of the Statute 
(GC(XII)/RES/26l). The outcome of the exhaustive 
talks which had taken place in the last 
— 8 — 


two years were summarized in the report submitted 
by die Board to die General Conference (GC(XIV)/ 
437). The report showed clearly that the draft 
amendment co-sponsored by Argentina and 20 other 
countries, including his own, was the one that had 
won the largest support from Member States. 

75. In his view that draft amendment complied 
exactly with the three criteria laid down by the 
twelfth General Conference whilst at the same time 
satisfying the fundamental interests of the Agency 
whose future activities would greatly benefit from a 
modernization of its executive body. 
76. The revision of Article VI was urgent: the 
countries whose areas were not adequately represented 
on the Board and also the countries whose 
political tasks and responsibilities would be much 
increased by their adherence to NPT had the right 
to expect such a revision. His delegation considered 
that a vote should be taken without further delay 
on die draft amendment so that the Agency, 
strengthened by diat decisive vote, could embark 
with renewed energy on the tasks ahead. 
77. Mr. ONTIVEROS (Bolivia) said that Bolivia's 
position as a developing country, which was aggravated 
by die fact that it was land-locked and was 
a mining country dependent basically on a single 
commodity, had obliged it to think of the contribution 
the peaceful uses of nuclear techniques could 
make to the national development and growth effort. 
Basic aspects such as health, natural resources, the 
preparation of an adequate basis or infrastructure 
for subsequent industrialization, because of their farreaching 
political, social and economic significance, 
had been studied from die point of view of making 
the best use of the enormous investment of knowledge, 
financial resources and effort that the present 
state of nuclear disciplines demanded. With uncertain 
means, a limited number of adequately 
qualified personnel and lack of economic support, 
a modest programme which would bring increasing 
benefits had been undertaken. The assistance IAEA 
had given during those first stages through its programme 
of technical assistance and other services 
had made it possible to improve those plans and 
to overcome the first uncertainties. 
78. Bolivia's initial efforts in the nuclear sphere 
had related to nuclear physics research, in particular 
the study of cosmic rays, through the establishment 
of a high altitude research centre at Chacaltaya. 
That work had reached a promising level and would 
enable important nuclear research to be carried out. 
79. In the health sphere, three centres had been 
constructed which were becoming increasingly important 
both in the contribution they were making 
to die study of national problems, such as the 
reaction of the human body to altitude and endemic 
GC(XIV)/OR.140 

diseases, and in the application of the results in 
treatment, diagnosis and other aspects of highly 
specialized medicine. 

80. Because of his country's mining tradition, 
natural resources, including nuclear minerals and, in 
particular, uranium-bearing ores, merited priority 
attention, and a large part of the national effort 
was being devoted to them. 
81. A special effort in terms of human and 
financial resources had been made in that direction, 
and the national atomic energy programme would 
depend to a large extent on its results. 
82. That important project went beyond the mere 
field of nuclear minerals, since it was also being 
used to undertake infrastructure studies. 
83. Another aspect being given urgent attention 
related to the need for improving dietary conditions. 
The role that the different applications of atomic 
energy could play might be decisive in the effort 
the Government was making in that connection. 
Basic research on soils and fertilizers to bring about 
the "green revolution" and the development of research 
on insect pest eradication and control were 
being followed with great interest. 
84. Bolivia was also interested in the development 
of techniques, in particular in connection with die 
use of radiation to promote chemical catalysis, which 
would bring the greatest benefit to its embryonic 
industry in the near future. 
85. The recommendations contained in the IAEA 
studies on radiological protection and safety were 
being taken into account in the implementation of 
the programmes he had mentioned. 
86. It had been possible to undertake those projects 
thanks to the national effort and, to a great extent, 
thanks to IAEA technical assistance. 
87. Bolivia considered that the role IAEA could 
play in encouraging programmes for uranium 
prospecting and mining would not only enable 
national, but also interregional and international 
energy programmes to be undertaken; his country 
was in favour of such an activity. 
88. It was of paramount importance that studies 
of small reactors for supplying electrical power in 
newly developed or developing areas should be 
pursued. 
89. Although those small nuclear electric power 
stations were not strictly competitive, new advances 
and indirect benefits were compensating for the first 
unfavourable impression that such projects might 
give. 
-9



GC(XIV)/OR.140 

90. Nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes were 
giving rise to very interesting speculations as to their 
utilization, and his country was following progress 
in that respect with interest. 
91. The Agency's technical assistance for promoting 
nuclear techniques in the developing countries was 
of the greatest importance, and Bolivia was concerned 
that shortages of funds might restrict or diminish 
the possibility of giving such assistance. 
9 2. Bolivia would agree with the greatest of pleasure 
to IAEA urging international financing bodies and 
countries receiving aid to pay more attention to and 
to facilitate nuclear development programmes. 
93. It would also like the nuclear Powers to collaborate 
more decisively and more generously in meeting 
requests for co-operation or for financial assistance 
from the less advanced countries and countries with 
small financial resources. 
94. The renunciation of sovereign rights in nuclear 
matters by the developing countries should be considered 
as placing a moral obligation on the industrialized 
States to assist the less developed ones. 
95. Bolivia persisted in its pacifist attitude and 
urged other countries to make the maximum effort 
to re-establish peace in a framework of mutual 
respect and consideration. 
96. Finally, Bolivia reiterated its faith in IAEA. 
It would give every possible support to the Agency's 
activities in the cause of peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
97. Mr. BRILLANTES (Philippines), while welcoming 
the increase to $2.5 million of the target 
figure for voluntary contributions, was concerned 
that even that increase would be insufficient to offset 
in the long term the eroding effect of inflation on 
the real value of the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. He had noted with alarm the growing 
tendency to increase safeguards functions at the 
expense of promotional and technical assistance 
activities and stressed the importance of an equitable 
balance being maintained. He recalled at the same 
time the other provisions of NPT such as the fullest 
exchange of equipment, materials and technological 
information on the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy and hoped that the Agency would pursue 
those latter aims with the same sense of urgency 
as the safeguards programme. 
98. Turning to the question of safeguards costs, 
he drew attention to a Brazilian, Chilean, Indian 
and Philippine proposal submitted to the Safeguards 
Committee in July 1970, the essentials of which 
were that the promotional aspects of safeguards 
should continue to be funded from the Regular 
Budget of the Agency and assessed in accordance 
with the normal practice of the United Nations, 
that expenses for safeguards applied by the Agency 
at the request of States parties to bilateral or multilateral 
arrangements should be reimbursed fully to 
the Agency in accordance with Article XIV.C of the 
Statute, and that, where safeguards were applied 
at the request of a State to any of the State's 
activities in the field of nuclear energy, the expenses 
incurred on such safeguards work should be fully 
reimbursed by the State concerned. He drew attention 
also to some observations by the Philippine delegation 
on the financing of safeguards contained in 
document GOV/COM.22/54 dated 6 July 1970, 
in which a comparison was made of a Member 
State's assessment ratio in per cent and under a 
financing system using volume of nuclear installed 
capacity as the criterion for assessment. 

99- Regarding the amendment of Article VI, he 
believed firmly that a representative Board of 
Governors was of great importance for the effective 
functioning of the Agency and hoped that a decision 
would now be taken on that question by the General 
Conference. 

100. His delegation reiterated its support for regional 
undertakings, along the lines of the India-Philippines-
Agency project on neutron spectrometry. That and 
other similar projects would lead to a better and 
more economical use of human and material resources 
and avoid duplication of effort. He drew 
attention in that connection to the Agency meeting 
at Bangkok in July 1970 to discuss the basis of 
various research and training projects related to 
nuclear science and technology in Asia and the 
Pacific and hoped that a formal agreement would 
soon be finalized. 
101. In view of the increasing volume of activity 
involving the use of radioisotope materials in the 
Asian region he felt that some serious thought 
should be given to the establishment of health and 
safety measures against radiation accidents. In regard 
to the topical problem of pollution, he felt that 
the Agency's nuclear techniques should be used in 
investigating and ultimately reducing the pollution 
caused by industrial operations, in a universal effort 
to combat environmental pollution. Further, the 
Agency should from time to time review its health 
and safety standards covering every type of activity 
in which nuclear energy was used for peaceful purposes, 
in particular its regulations for safe transport 
of radioactive materials, to ensure that the use of 
nuclear energy should not further aggravate the already 
serious problem of environmental contamination. 
102. He announced that his Government would 
continue to meet its assessed and voluntary contribution 
to the Agency's General Fund for 1971. 
10



GC(XIV)/OR.140 

103. Mr. HOCHSTRASSER (Switzerland) said that 
in the past year the Agency had begun to prepare 
for the central role which it would play in the implementation 
of NPT. While establishing an effective 
and simple safeguards system which did not interfere 
with the rapidly increasing use of nuclear energy, 
the Agency was also called upon to go on helping 
countries with the practical applications of nuclear 
energy. He welcomed the co-operative spirit that 
prevailed in the Safeguards Committee (1970). His 
delegation was appreciative of the efforts that were 
being made by the Agency and the Safeguards Committee 
to simplify and rationalize the control system 
so that it would be acceptable to the private sector 
while remaining efficient. 
104. Before his Government could hope to obtain 
the necessary parliamentary approval for the ratification 
of NPT, it was necessary to inform parliament 
and the public in general of how the Agency's safeguards 
system would function. A fair method of 
financing the considerable controlling expenditure 
must be found, reflecting the fact that safeguarding 
represented a service of interest to all countries, 
the costs of which needed to be borne equitably. 
105. In view of the shift in the proportional allocation 
of funds to different items of the Agency's 
Regular Budget, it became even more necessary for 
Member States to contribute voluntarily to the joint 
fund which financed important projects of interest 
to the developing countries. His Government had 
decided to increase its voluntary contribution in 
accordance with the higher target set for 1971. 
Furthermore, his Government had recently approved 
of Swiss participation in the new International Food 
Irradiation Project sponsored jointly by the European 
Nuclear Energy Agency, FAO and IAEA. 
106. Although recognizing the need to curtail the 
Agency's less essential activities, he would urge that 
its programme of symposia and technical meetings, 
which were of a high standard and for which the 
Agency was the most suitable convener, should be 
maintained. 
107. He welcomed the programme for 1971-76 as 
a useful exercise which would enable the Agency, 
in close collaboration with other public and private 
organizations, to make adjustments as necessary in 
accordance with the rapid development expected 
in the years to come. 
108. The Fourth Conference on the Peaceful Uses 
of Atomic Energy would provide an occasion for a 
review of past achievements and future possibilities. 
His Government looked forward to acting as host 
to that important conference. 
109. Mr. ISARANGKUN (Thailand) said his 
Government was greatly impressed by the programmes 
outlined in the Conference documents. 
110. Thailand had always supported the Agency's 
safeguards system and would continue to do so in 
the future, but he sincerely hoped that the cost of 
making safeguards effective would not be a burden 
on countries which were not directly concerned with 
safeguards application. 
111. His delegation had studied the various proposals 
for the amendment of Article VI of the Statute 
and felt that the matter needed no further discussion, 
given a reasonable spirit of compromise. 
112. His delegation welcomed the Agency's proposal 
to increase its target for voluntary contributions 
the result would be an expansion of technical assistance 
activity. 
113. His Government also endorsed the Agency's 
attitude to regional activities. His country had had 
the honour to act as host country for many Agency 
meetings in the region of South East Asia and would 
continue to help in that way. It had also offered 
to serve the Agency's regional co-operative programme 
and hoped to be able to make an offer of Type II 
fellowships. 
114. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) recalled that in 
its 13 years in Vienna the Agency had performed 
a unique role in the development of the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy all over the world. 
In achieving such important tasks the Agency, as 
a living organism, had to go through certain changes 
in order to adapt itself to new situations and responsibilities 
which were invariably linked with 
development and progress. Member States were 
now confronted with the need for such a change. 
115- Since the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States in 1968, it had been the conviction of the 
Brazilian Government that the Board of Governors 
should be enlarged and its composition changed, 
to reflect conditions which had not existed at the 
Agency's inception. Brazil had therefore co-sponsored 
several versions of the original draft amendment 
that was now before the General Conference 
(GC(XIV)/437, section A.5). His delegation believed 
that that draft amendment, which was 
co-sponsored by more than 20 countries, fulfilled 
all the conditions of viability and should be approved 
by a majority higher than the two thirds required 
by the Statute. It had been reassuring to note that 
at one stage or another since its introduction, 
13 Latin American countries had either co-sponsored 
or supported the draft amendment in question. 

116. With respect to the prospects of applying nuclear 
energy for the development of electrical power, the 
Director General had pointed out in his statement 
that 95% of the low-cost uranium reserves at present 
being exploited were in the industrialized countries 
and that such reserves were only adequate to meet 

GC(XIV)/OR.140 

the requirements of power programmes up to 19855K 
It was therefore gratifying to know that the United 
Nations had recommended that more assistance be 
given to the developing countries in the field of 
geological surveying and prospection for nuclear 
materials. That would contribute to the industrialization 
of natural resources in developing countries 
and would also change the rather pessimistic prospects 
of limitation of the steady growth of nuclear power 
throughout the world. 

117. Concurring with die suggestion that developing 
countries could contribute to the alleviation of that 
situation, Brazil was making a very considerable 
uranium prospection effort. The National Nuclear 
Energy Commission and the newly organized 
Company for Prospection for Mineral Resources were 
jointly engaged in searching for new mineral-bearing 
areas and in checking known occurrences. The work 
involved about 65 000 metres of drillings, more than 
had been accomplished during the preceding 18 years. 
118. It was with great concern that his delegation 
had noted that the percentage of the Agency's budget 
reserved for technical assistance had steadily decreased 
throughout die years. That trend might be justified 
by the limitations of the budget, together with the 
increase in personnel, salaries and safeguards activities, 
but it was undeniable that it constituted a 
continuous reduction in the capability of the Agency 
to achieve its foremost objective. In that connection 
his delegation wished to bring to the attention of 
the General Conference the Brazilian Government's 
increasing concern about the cost of the Agency's 
safeguards system. Brazil had always supported the 
application of safeguards, but it must be realized 
that the development of the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy would impose a rapidly increasing 
burden on die Agency's budget. Moreover, the 
entry into force of NPT had brought about additional 
safeguards requirements which, under the sole 
financial responsibility of the Agency, would unfavourably 
reflect upon its various other very important 
activities. 
119. The Brazilian delegation to the Safeguards 
Committee (1970) had been following the matter 
with the closest attention, and it was his hope that 
a solution would be found that would be sensible, 
fair and acceptable to all parties concerned. 
120. His delegation had always given its enthusiastic 
support to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, which it rightly regarded as fulfilling 
one of the Agency's most important functions. Brazil 
had noted the Director General's statement that the 
1971 technical assistance programme would lag 
behind that of 19626). A target of $2.7 million 
5) See document GC(XIV)/OR.l 35, para.47. 
6) See document GC(XIV)/OR.l 35, para.34. 

would be required in order to carry out exactly the 
same programme as the Agency had carried out in 
1962. In the light of that situation he wished to 
announce, on behalf of his Government, that Brazil 
would increase its voluntary contribution from 
$20 250 to $30 000. 

121. With respect to the programme for 1971, his 
delegation was particularly interested in die hydrology 
and dosimetry effort, in which the National Nuclear 
Energy Commission of Brazil had been participating 
to a certain extent. 
122. With reference to the technical assistance programme, 
Brazil was very grateful for the help which 
it had received from the Agency, especially assistance 
in the form of fellowships, scientific visits and technical 
assistance projects. The staff of the Agency 
had been very helpful in providing continuing support 
in connection with Brazil's first atomic power plant, 
to be installed in the central-southern region of 
the country. 
123. His country had been participating to the 
greatest extent possible in the scientific and technical 
meetings organized by the Agency and had been 
very glad that it had had the opportunity of serving 
as the host country for one seminar and one regional 
training course. 
124. His delegation, without pressing the matter, 
wished to bring to the attention of the Director 
General the convenience that would be afforded by 
the establishment of a regional office for Latin 
America, following the example already existing in 
other regions of the world. 
125. He welcomed the efforts made by the Director 
General and by the staff of the Agency to secure 
the financing of nuclear power plants by international 
credit organizations. 
126. The INIS project and the very impressive 
collection of books edited and published by the 
Agency had undoubtedly been one of the most 
effective aids to many developing countries. The 
total effort involved in the Agency's publications 
programme, covering all fields of nuclear activities, 
had clearly been enormous. 
127. Mr. HOLLIST (Nigeria) said that Nigeria, 
in spite of being one of the least developed among 
the developing countries and having no adequate 
infrastructure for nuclear technology, not only took 
a keen interest in the work of the Agency, but 
actively participated in its research support programmes. 
He was pleased to note in the annual 
report of the Board of Governors to the General 
Conference (GC(XIV)/430) that some of the research 
support programmes of the Agency had been 
allotted to his country. 

128. Furthermore, Nigerian specialists had participated 
in some of the symposia organized by the 
Agency, and Nigeria had, in co-operation with the 
Agency, been exploring the possibility of applying 
nuclear techniques in the control and eradication 
of agricultural pests. 
129. The political situation having returned to 
normal, Nigeria was now able to concentrate on the 
urgently needed reconstruction and development of 
its economy, and was eager to receive the Agency's 
assistance for its nuclear programme. 
130. Referring to the Agency's proposed programme 
for 1971-76, he said that it was closely associated 
with the Agency's responsibilities in connection with 
the entry into force of NPT. Although the Treaty 
was designed primarily to limit the dangers of 
nuclear warfare and promote nuclear disarmament, 
fields which were of no direct concern to it, the 
Agency would effectively carry out its activities relating 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy only 
under the conditions of world peace based on individual 
freedom and national self-determination. 
131. Nigeria, by signing and ratifying the Treaty, 
wished to demonstrate its interest in the maintenance 
of world peace, and would appeal to the States which 
had not acceded to or ratified the Treaty to do so, 
especially in view of the recent disquieting official 
confirmation that a country which was not noted 
for its goodwill to African countries and which had 
neither signed nor ratified NPT, had discovered a 
cheaper method of producing enriched uranium. 
Scientific research and innovation were certainly 
essential and welcome but in the context of NPT 
the international community as a whole had an 
obligation to ensure that scientific innovations which 
could have peaceful and military uses were not di-
verted to the latter use. 
132. His delegation recognized that the entry into 
force of NPT had placed greater safeguards responsibilities 
on the Agency and that importance 
should be attached to the discharge of those responsibilities. 
But it felt that a large proportion of 
the scarce resources of the Agency, as envisaged 
in the budget proposals, should not be devoted to 
the application of safeguards for three reasons. First, 
many countries, including developing ones, had joined 
the Agency before the signing of NPT, because they 
had realized the economic potentials of nuclear energy 
and approved the Agency's objectives. In the opinion 
of those countries, the Agency had well-established 
responsibilities, which were not connected with those 
under NPT, and which constituted the raison d'etre 
of their joining the Agency. Those should not, 
therefore, be relegated to the background, however 
important NPT might be. Second, regardless of 
whether the States Members of the Agency had any 
nuclear weapon potential or not, those of them which 
GC(XIV)/OR.140 

had signed the Treaty had voluntarily renounced any 
aspiration to acquire or produce nuclear weapons 
in the hope that the nuclear-weapon States would 
stop all nuclear explosions even though that would 
not deprive them of their military supremacy. Although 
the hope for a comprehensive test ban was yet to 
be fulfilled, the resources of the non-nuclear-weapon 
developing countries were now to be diverted to 
the implementation of that section of the Treaty 
which was designed to disarm the unarmed. Third, 
the majority of countries like Nigeria, which would 
have no need for a long time to utilize the Agency's 
safeguards services, were now being called upon, 
unjustly, to share the cost of such services to be 
assessed in accordance with the principle used for 
its Regular Budget. 

133. The nuclear-weapon States had a special responsibility 
in the matter, since they would retain 
all they had, whereas the developing countries would 
have to renounce even the economic and technological 
knowledge accruing from nuclear weaponry. In all 
fairness, nuclear-weapon States should, at least, pay 
a substantial part of the cost of implementing the 
safeguards responsibilities devolving on the Agency 
in connection with NPT. 
134. His delegation hoped that its views would be 
taken into consideration by the Safeguards Committee 
when it discussed the question of financing safeguards. 
135- In regard to die question of free flow of the 
potential benefits from any peaceful applications of 
nuclear explosives, it was encouraging that a nuclearweapon 
State had undertaken some pre-announced 
nuclear explosions with a view to exploring the 
possibilities of the peaceful application of such explosions, 
and that the super-Powers had, in fact, 
held a meeting in Vienna for a useful exchange 
of information that had previously not been available 
internationally on that subject. However, considering 
that many developing countries had waived the right 
under NPT to perform experiments themselves, they 
wished to be assured that, when the application of 
nuclear explosions became a reality, they would not 
be compelled to acquire at high cost the benefits 
arising from them through commercial organizations 
wishing to make high profits or even from governmental 
agencies wanting to recover fully, from external 
sources, the cost of the development of such benefits. 

136. His delegation wished to commend the Director 
General and the Secretariat for their efforts to utilize 
the Agency's scarce resources judiciously and, in 
particular, supported the stand taken by the Agency 
in not endorsing the general salary increases recommended 
by the International Civil Service Advisory 
Board. Although the Director General's 
concern for the developing countries was laudable, 
he felt that greater endeavour should be made to 
reduce the gap between the developing and the 
developed countries. 
-13



GC(XIV)/OR.140 

137. Referring to the need for broadening the 
Board's membership, he pointed out that since the 
founding of the Agency many developing countries 
had gained independence and joined the Agency 
but the Statute, and in particular its Article VI, 
did not take account of the present-day realities. 
His delegation regretted that the Board had not 
yet been able to reach an agreement on the revision 
of Article VI and hoped that a decision taking into 
consideration the views of the developing countries, 
particularly those in Africa, would soon be reached. 
138. In regard to the provision of technical assistance, 
the Agency'efforts should not be confirned to 
those developing countries which were able to submit 
the complicated and well-documented proposals normally 
required in applying for such assistance. The 
developing countries which were not technically placed 
to conform to the Agency's requirements should not 
be completely deprived of the assistance they were 
entitled to. 
139. Recalling that the least developed of the 
developing countries derived relatively less benefit 
The meeting 

from the Agency's normal technical assistance, since 
such assistance tended to flow where an infrastructure 
already existed, he warned that unless special measures 
were taken to close the gap between the 
nuclear and non-nuclear States, the world would be 
heading for a disaster. It was the responsibility 
of the Agency to assist the least developed of the 
developing countries in establishing the technical 
infrastructure needed to enable them to compete 
equally with the more developed ones for its normal 
facilities. 

140. In conclusion, he pointed out that the Agency's 
apparent tendency to imply that the developing 
countries should adopt, from the start, the average 
scale of individual nuclear plants existing in the 
developed countries was unrealistic and that the 
estimated high capital cost tended to discourage 
them from nuclear projects which were otherwise 
desirable. He hoped that the Agency's programme 
and budget for the following year would give due 
consideration to the interests of the least developed 
among the non-nuclear-weapon States. 
at X 55p.m. 


GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency GC(XIV)/OR.141 
25 February 1971* 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

Item of the 
agenda** 

11 
13 
14 
15 
19 
20 
21 
12 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 

ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 28 September 1970, at 11.30 a.m. 

President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 

CONTENTS 

General debate and report of the Board of Governors 
for 1969-70 (concluded) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Syrian Arab Republic 
Ghana 


Credentials of delegates to the fourteenth regular session 

(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 
Opening date of the fifteenth (1971) regular session 
The Agency's programme for 1971-76 and budget for 1971 
Scale of Members' contributions for 1971 
Financing of nuclear projects 
The Agency's annual reports to United Nations organs 
Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 
Voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 1971 
Election of Members to the Board of Governors 

Paragraph 

1—25 

1—16 
17—18 
19—25 

26—37 

38—39 
40—43 
44—45 
46—48 
49—50 
51—53 
54 
55—69 

A provisional version of this document was issued on 5 October 1970. 

GC(XIV)/442. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 


GC(XIV)/OR.141 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1969-70 
(GC(XIV)/430,440) (concluded) 

1. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) congratulated the President on his election. 
Having read the account of the Agency's programmes 
contained in the annual report of the Board of 
Governors (GC(XIV)/430), the Ukrainian delegation 
could state that it approved, on the whole, of 
the basic activities in which the Agency was engaged. 
From year to year the Agency was making definite 
progress in bringing about extensive international 
co-operation among its Member States in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
2. Progress towards full-scale co-operation was 
bein•g hindered, however, by the outstanding problems 
of disarmament, which meant that considerable 
scientific effort and enormous material wealth were 
being diverted to armaments. 

3. In the year under review all countries concerned 
had made some headway towards overcoming 
the obstacles which still stood in the way of attaining 
the noble aims set out in the Agency's Statute. The 
most significant event for the Agency had been the 
entry into force of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)D. That 
Treaty represented a further landmark in the efforts 
of mankind to avoid a nuclear catastrophe, for it 
created a barrier of sorts to stem the further spread 
of nuclear weapons. By itself, of course, it did not 
provide solutions to all existing problems of international 
politics, particularly those related to nuclear 
disarmament, but it did constitute a barrier to the 
emergence of new nuclear powers and might well 
represent a step towards the complete elimination 
and prohibition of nuclear weapons throughout the 
world. That was one of its most important aspects. 
4. Non-nuclear-weapon States Parties to NPT 
were required to conclude special agreements with 
the Agency, for by signing the Treaty they had 
undertaken to submit their peaceful activities in 
atomic energy to safeguards. His delegation noted 
with satisfaction that a number of States had already 
expressed their willingness to enter into negotiations 
with the Agency in respect of safeguards agreements, 
in fulfilment of the obligations they had assumed 
under the Treaty. It was also gratifying that the 
Secretariat, co-operating closely with Member States 
within the framework of the Safeguards Committee 
(1970), had done such good work in preparing the 
text of the agreement required. 
5. His delegation had noted with satisfaction 
the successful establishment by the Agency of the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
1) Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 

Beyond any doubt that system would further 
stimulate the development of nuclear science and 
technology in the developing countries, and it would 
also provide countries having a well-developed nuclear 
industry with the means for a rapid and full 
exchange of scientific and technical information on 
the basis of multilateral co-operation. 

6. Further, he attached great value to the 
Agency's work in organizing scientific conferences, 
symposia and seminars and in publishing their transactions. 
Particularly important had been the 
Symposium on Nuclear Energy Costs and Economic 
Development, held in Istanbul at the end of 1969. 
7. The Agency, as the Conference had heard, 
planned to keep a register of releases of radioactive 
waste into the sea. It was his delegation's view, 
however, that the Agency should make every effort 
to prevent the contamination of the world's seas 
by radioactive waste, and that it would be wrong for 
the Agency to limit itself to the mere registration 
of data on the contamination of the environment 
by dangerous waste. 
8. Scientists in the Ukrainian SSR, drawing on 
the achievements of international science and making 
use of the potential offered by the Socialist system, 
were pursuing their research on the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy and their practical use in 
various branches of the national economy. 
9. Nuclear energy was being used to an increasing 
extent in public health and various sectors of 
industry. 
10. In the medical institutions of the Ukrainian 
SSR a great many radioactive preparations were 
in use; large units were being extensively employed 
for radiation teletherapy and increased attention was 
being paid to radiation safety and the protection of 
personnel. For the past two years no case of radiation 
injury to workers had been reported by the 
medical authorities. Extensive use was being made 
of radioisotope devices and labelled molecules in 
the coal and metallurgical industries, for the control 
and automation of various processes. Regional 
isotope laboratories had been set up for the purpose 
of introducing radioisotope technology into industry. 
Development work was being carried out on various 
aspects of nuclear power engineering. For example, 
the Kharkov turbine works had undertaken mass 
production of new 220-MW turbines for nuclear 
power stations. A new, unique steam-turbine with 
an output of 500 MW was being produced for 
nuclear power stations and turbines with a still 
greater output were being designed. Many scientific 
investigations connected with the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy were being carried out by the various 
institutes of the Academy of Sciences and the institutions 
of higher education. That work was being 
— 2 — 


expanded from year to year, and the creation in 
1970 of the Institute of Nuclear Research within 
the framework of the Academy of Sciences was 
evidence of its importance and current value. The 
achievements of Ukrainian scientists in relation to 
the problems of controlled thermonuclear reactions 
were particularly deserving of mention. The institutes 
of the Academy of Sciences were maintaining 
scientific contacts with foreign research centres and 
international organizations. The Fifteenth International 
Conference on High-Energy Physics had 
been held at Kiev in August and September 1970. 

11. The atom offered varied and indeed inexhaustible 
possibilities for the welfare of mankind. 
In exploiting those possibilities, one could not but 
pay due tribute to the man who, when the whole 
scientific world, following century-old traditions, had 
thought that a complete picture of the universe 
would soon be obtained, had had the courage to 
say that the electron as well as the atom was inexhaustible, 
and that nature was infinite. Profound 
respect and recognition were due to the man whose 
ideas on the inexhaustibility of matter had become 
a general principle in the natural sciences. That 
man was the great thinker and scholar Vladimir 
Ilich Lenin, the centenary of whose birth had been 
celebrated in the current year by the entire civilized 
world. 
12. During the past year the Committee of the 
Whole to Review Article VI of the Statute and the 
Board itself had held discussions on the revision of 
that Article. With regard to the question of broadening 
the Board's composition, his delegation felt 
that any enlargement of the Board must take into 
account two essential points. First, consideration 
should be given to the views of all groups of 
countries, and in particular to those of the socialist 
group, which, for reasons well known to most of 
the delegations present, could not support the 
34-nation proposal2). Second, a large number of 
Member States had urged that consultations and 
negotiations should be continued with a view to 
finding an agreed solution concerning Article VI, 
so that the new version of the Article could 
command the support of the overwhelming majority 
of Member States. 
13. Although the Administrative and Legal Committee 
had approved the 34-nation amendment, he 
felt that, objectively speaking, the Agency had not 
yet matured to the point where it could take a 
decision in the matter. Before the amendment could 
come into effect, it would require ratification by 
at least 69 States, whereas it had been supported 
in Committee by only 46, i.e. less than a simple 
majority of all Members. Obviously the fruits of 
the decision were unlikely to ripen as quickly as 
2) GC(XIV)/COM.2/50 and Add. 1-4. 

GC(XIV)/OR.l41 

some of its proponents imagined. Furthermore, such 
unilateral action by a particular group of countries 
was fraught with dangerous consequences for the 
Agency, for it was bound to create a feverish atmosphere 
in the organization. An international 
organization derived its vitality and efficiency from 
mutual concessions and mutually agreed solutions. 

14. It would be remembered that at the fifth 
session of the General Conference, in 1961, Member 
States had unanimously adopted an amendment to 
Article VI.A.33). That unanimity had testified to 
a general willingness to take account of the views 
of all the States concerned, without exception, and 
it had enabled the Agency to carry out its statutory 
obligations with efficiency for a long time. He 
wished to point out that if the interests of 
all countries, and in particular the Socialist countries, 
were not taken into account, that spirit of 
co-operation which constituted the cornerstone of 
any programme relating to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy would suffer. 
15. His delegation regretted that for a number 
of years the Secretariat had had no staff member 
from his country. In that connection he drew 
attention to Article VII.D of the Statute, which laid 
down that in the recruitment and employment of 
staff and in the determination of the conditions of 
service, due regard should be paid not only to suitable 
qualifications but also "to the contributions 
of Members to the Agency and to the importance 
of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical 
basis as possible". He expressed the hope that 
the Agency would take the necessary steps to 
improve the current situation. 
16. He observed that the Agency had not yet 
become a universal organization; that was a serious 
defect which was bound to affect all its activities. 
A number of States still had no chance to participate, 
on an equal footing with others, in the affairs of 
an international organization like the Agency. The 
first such State to come to mind was the German 
Democratic Republic, which unfortunately was not 
represented at the General Conference despite the 
fact that it was a sovereign, independent State, which 
had been gaining steadily increasing international 
recognition with the passing years. His delegation 
was firmly convinced that strict observance of the 
principle of universality by the Agency would further 
increase its authority as an international centre for 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the welfare 
of mankind. 
17. Mr. ISMAIL (Syrian Arab Republic) said that 
the Agency was an outstanding example of inter-* 
national collaboration in the sensitive field of nuclear 
science and technology and its role had been further 
3) GC(V)/RES/42. 

-3



GC(XIV)/OR.l4l 

enhanced and its responsibilities greatly extended 
by NPT. The Agency would perhaps be judged 
by the extent of its success in maintaining the necessary 
balance between its two apparently different 
tasks: that of facilitating the harmonious co-operation 
of its more developed Member States and that of 
contributing to the widest possible dissemination of 
nuclear know-how. He wished to outline the 
expectations, and perhaps also express the 
apprehensions of his country, regarding the role 
of the Agency in the field of assistance to 
the developing countries. Whilst acknowledging the 
good work done in the past with severely limited 
resources, he hoped that the stimulating challenge 
to the Agency represented by the new responsibilities 
of inspection and safeguards would not lead 
to a further polarization of its activities, and to an 
additional imbalance detrimental to its role of 
assistance of the developing countries. He felt that 
every increase of expenditure on an activity benefiting 
mainly the developing countries should be 
accompanied by a corresponding strengthening of 
the Agency's programme of assistance. 

18. The International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics was an outstanding contribution by the 
Agency to the furthering of nuclear science in the 
developing countries; it was to be commended in 
particular as a focus of attraction for scientists from 
those countries, whom it had helped to escape the 
dilemma of having to choose between two renunciations; 
to renounce their countries for the sake of 
science or to renounce their science for the sake 
of their country. His delegation believed the kind 
of scientific work done at the Centre to be one of 
the surest ways of stimulating an international 
scientific community. He accordingly urged the 
Agency to adopt the recommendations of the committee 
of evaluation composed of eminent scientists 
under Professor Casimir, thus giving fresh impetus 
to the work of the Centre. He also wished to 
commend the efforts of the Agency in the establishment 
and support of the Middle East Centre for 
Radioisotopes, in the work of which his country 
had actively shared. He hoped that the Agency 
would keep in touch with the Centre and would 
examine with it new forms of collaboration and 
assistance. A fresh approach of great interest to 
his country was the Agency programme for the 
eradication of the Mediterranean fruit-fly through 
the application of the sterile-male technique. 
Scientists from his country hoped to be able to 
learn from the Agency's experience in this field 
and to receive its assistance in related Syrian 
ventures. 
19. Mr. QUARTEY (Ghana) said that the problem 
of amending Article VI of the Statute was of great 
importance to a number of developing countries. 
Following the coming into force of NPT, that 
Article had become of even greater significance to 
the Agency itself and, as the Director General had 
stressed in that connection, the Agency should not, 
and could not, remain static. 

20. Some Member States of the Agency, and 
especially a number of the developing countries, 
felt that they were at present grossly underrepresented 
on the Board of Governors, which was 
the ultimate authority of the Agency. Now that 
additional and very important responsibilities had 
been assigned to the Agency under NPT, it was 
natural that those countries should want even more 
to ensure that their voice was heard in the Agency's 
highest organs. 
21. His delegation had shared the hope expressed 
by the Director General at the beginning of the 
session that the discussions and consultations on 
the amendment of Article VI would bring closer 
an acceptable solution to the problem*). While still 
sharing that hope, it was fully aware from the discussions 
in the Administrative and Legal Committee 
that the solution that might emerge might not receive 
unanimous support. However, the problem had 
existed for a long time; considerable efforts had 
been devoted to its solution, particularly during 
the past year and at the current session, and his 
delegation thought that if a great measure of agreement 
could be reached on any of the solutions that 
had been so far proposed, it was unlikely that improvements 
could be achieved by further delay. 
22. It had been in a spirit of realism that Ghana 
had signed and also ratified NPT. It had done so 
with the conviction that entry into force of the Treaty 
would release resources which might be devoted 
to peaceful applications of nuclear energy, particularly 
through assistance to the developing countries. 
23. With regard to the operation of safeguards 
under NPT, his Government was satisfied with the 
progress made so far by the Agency, and it w'as 
giving serious consideration to opening negotiations 
as soon as possible with the Agency on the cardinal 
clauses of an agreement. The financial arrangements 
to meet the cost of implementing the safeguards 
system should take into account not only the collective 
responsibility of all Member States of the 
Agency, but also the special responsibilities of the 
more advanced countries, particularly the nuclear 
Powers. Furthermore, because of the very great 
importance his Government attached to the Agency's 
technical assistance, it hoped that the operation of 
safeguards would not be allowed to result in a 
diminution of the Agency's technical assistance and 
other scientific programmes. 
24. As a developing country, Ghana could not 
but express great satisfaction that the voluntary 
4) See document GC(XIV)/OR.135, para. 27. 


contributions required for the technical assistance 
programme in 1971 seemed very likely to be met. 

25. He assured the General Conference of his 
country's continued devotion to, and support for, 
the objectives of the Agency. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE 
FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 

(b) 
REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE (GC(XIV)/449 and Corr.l) 
26. The PRESIDENT announced that the 
Credentials Committee had examined the credentials 
of delegates in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules 
of Procedure; its report, containing two draft resolutions, 
was to be found in document GC(XIV)/449 
and Corr. 1. He had been informed that a formal 
document constituting credentials had been received 
from the United States of America, as well as a 
cable on the subject of its delegates' credentials 
from Kenya. 
27. Mr. TONA (Albania) said that as a result 
of imperialist machinations the rightful place in the 
Conference of the People's Republic of China had 
again been usurped by the Chiang Kai-shek clique, 
which represented no one. The only rightful representatives 
of the Chinese people in international 
relations and international organizations were the 
representatives appointed by the Government of 
the People's Republic. That Government had in 
a short time, through its revolutionary policy in all 
areas, achieved substantial success in strengthening 
the country's economic and defensive power, thus 
enhancing its role and authority throughout the 
world, so that no important international problem 
could be resolved without its participation. Also, 
the strides the Chinese people had made in nuclear 
science and space research constituted a heavy blow 
to the United States imperialists and the Soviet 
revisionists. Such successes constituted a general 
victory and gave great encouragement to the world 
struggle against the imperialist-revisionist 
dictatorship. 
28. His delegation wished once again to denounce 
the flagrant violation of accepted principles and international 
practice and demanded that its rightful 
place in the Agency be granted to the People's 
Republic of China. 
29. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) said that his Government 
did not recognize the credentials presented 
by the self-styled representatives of China in the 
Conference. It maintained that the Government 
of the People's Republic of China was the only 
authority entitled to represent the Chinese people 
in the United Nations and elsewhere in the world. 
GC(XIV)/OR.l4l 

His delegation therefore opposed the adoption of 
draft resolution I as recommended by the 
Credentials Committee. 

30. Mr. CHEN (China) said that, despite the 
unproductive attitude displayed by the previous 
speakers, his Government would not be diverted 
from its firm resolve to co-operate in the development 
and the practical application of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. The Conference was not die 
forum in which to debate world revolution and he 
would protest against the derogatory remarks made 
about the representation of his country at the Conference. 
Such statements disrupted the spirit of 
co-operation and courtesy which should prevail in 
all international organizations. 
31. The Credentials Committee had carried out 
its task impartially and had found the credentials 
of his delegation, among others, to be in good order. 
Controversial matters concerning the representation 
of a Member State could not be taken up in the 
Conference, as was made clear by the terms of draft 
resolution I submitted by the Credentials Committee. 
32. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania) said he regretted 
having to repeat at the current session his delegation's 
stand of principle on the need to introduce 
universality of membership into the Agency. The 
Agency's refusal to give the People's Republic of 
China its rightful place within die Agency showed 
how paradoxical the existing situation was. That 
situation was not only unjust but was contrary to 
the principle of universality on which the Agency 
was based. Accordingly, his delegation was in favour 
of re-establishing the rights of the People's Republic 
of China and of admitting the representatives of 
its Government as the sole legitimate representatives 
of China, which action would serve to strengthen the 
Agency's authority; it was against the Credentials 
Committee's proposal to recognize the credentials 
of the Chiang Kai-shek group. 
33. His Government also recognized the representatives 
of the Provisional Revolutionary 
Government of South Viet-Nam as the sole 
legitimate representatives of the South Viet-Namese 
people and could accept only credentials issued by 
that Government. 
34. His delegation reaffirmed the need for the 
participation of the German Democratic Republic 
in the work of the Agency. The German Democratic 
Republic was engaged in activities conforming with 
the objectives and principles of the Agency, to whose 
work towards spreading the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy it attached particular importance. Its 
admission to the Agency would substantially contribute 
to the achievement of the latter's aims and 
objectives. 
-5



GC(XIV)/OR.141 

35. Lastly, his delegation also reaffirmed its stand 
concerning the need for die participation of die 
People's Democratic Republic of Korea and the 
Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam in die work of 
the Agency. 
36. Mr. WALPITA (Ceylon) said that in his 
delegation's opinion die representatives of the 
People's Republic of China should be regarded as 
the rightful representatives of the Chinese people. 
It therefore opposed the adoption of draft 
resolution I. 
37. The draft resolutions in document GC(XIV)/449 
were adopted. 
OPENING DATE OF THE FIFTEENTH (1971) 
REGULAR SESSION 

38. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee 
had authorized him to put forward its 
recommendation that the opening date of the 
fifteenth regular session should be Tuesday, 
21 September 1971. It would be noted that the 
Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy was to be held at Geneva 
from 6 to 16 September 1971, and the opening date 
proposed would ensure that those wishing to attend 
both would have a gap of a few days in between. 
39. The recommendation of the General Committee was 
accepted. 
THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME FOR 1971-76 AND 
BUDGET FOR 1971 (GC(XIV)/446) 

40. Mr. QADIR (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report on the Agency's 
programme for 1971-76 and budget for 1971 
(GC(XIV)/446). 
41. The draft resolution in section A of document 
GC(XIV)j446 {Regular Budget appropriations for 1971) 
was adopted. 
42. The draft resolution in section B of that document 
{Operational Budget allocations for 1971) was adopted. 
43. The draft resolution in section C of that document 
(Use of the Working Capital Fund in 1971) was adopted. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 
1971 (GC(XIV)/447) 

44. Mr. QADIR (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report on the scale of 
Members' contributions for 1971 (GC(XIV)/447). 
45. The draft resolution in that document was adopted. 
FINANCING OF NUCLEAR PROJECTS 
(GC(XIV)/448/Rev.1) 

46. Mr. QADIR (Pakistan), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report on the financing of 
nuclear projects (GC(XIV)/448/Rev.1). 
47. The PRESIDENT assumed thatthe Conference 
would wish to take note of the report. 
48. It was so agreed. 
THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORTS TO 
UNITED NATIONS ORGANS (GC(XIV)/434) 

49. The PRESIDENT drew attention to document 
GC(XIV)/434, in which the Board of Governors 
recommended two draft resolutions for adoption by 
the Conference. The first concerned the Agency's 
report to the General Assembly of the United 
Nations for 1969-70, and the second, the Agency's 
report to the Economic and Social Council of the 
United Nations for 1969-70. Both were couched 
in exactly the same terms as similar resolutions 
approved by the Conference in the past. 
50. The draft resolutions in document GC(XIV)/434 
were adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF 
PENSION COMMITTEE 

51. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members and 
two alternates elected by the Conference. The 
members were at present Mr. Bittencourt of Brazil 
and Mr. Nejedly of the Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic, the alternates being Mr. Pahr of Austria 
and Mr. Tachibana of Japan. He had been informed, 
however, that Mr. Nejedly was no longer able to 
serve on the Committee, so that it was necessary 
to elect a new member to replace him. He (the 
President) suggested Mr. Tachibana of Japan as a 
member of the Committee, and Mr. Lamb of 
Australia as an alternate member to replace 
Mr. Tachibana. 
52. Mr. Tachibana(Japan) was elected as a member and 
Mr. Lamb (Australia) as an alternate member of the 
Agency's Staff Pension Committee. 
53. The PRESIDENT thanked Mr. Tachibana and 
Mr. Lamb for undertaking to serve on the 
Committee. He also conveyed to Mr. Nejedly the 
appreciation of the Conference for the services he 
-6



had rendered to the Agency by serving on the Staff 
Pension Committee for the previous two years. 

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 

GENERAL FUND FOR 1971 

(GC(XIV)/439/Rev.3) 

54. The PRESIDENT said that by 6 p.m. on 
25 September 1970, the Director General had received' 
pledges of voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund for 1971 from 50 Member States to 
a total amount of $ 1 087 876. Since then, two more 
Members — Australia and Italy —had pledged 
contributions of $30 000 and $73 250 respectively, 
bringing the interim total to $ 1 191 126. That sum 
represented about 47% of the target of $ 2.5 million 
set during the morning5) — roughly the same fraction 
as the percentage of the smaller target of 
$ 2 million for the current year which had been 
pledged by the end of the thirteenth session of the 
General Conference. At that time, however, 
57 Members of the Agency had pledged contributions, 
whereas only 52 Members had so far made 
pledges during the present session. That appeared 
to be an encouraging sign, particularly as several 
Members that had regularly made substantial contributions 
were not yet in a position to announce their 
pledges. He suggested that the General Conference 
could conclude its consideration of the item by 
recording its confidence that more funds would be 
available for the Agency's operational activities in 
1971 than in 1970, and its earnest hope that the 
Governments of all Member States would do their 
utmost to contribute to the General Fund in such 
measure as would enable the target of $ 2.5 million 
to be reached in full. 
The meeting was suspended at 12.15 p.m. and resumed at 

12.20 p.m. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XIV)/431, 443) 

55- The PRESIDENT drew attention to thereport 
of the General Committee (GC(XIV)/443), in paragraph 
1 of which the Committee notified the 
Conference that five Members had to be elected to 
die Board of Governors. In paragraph 2, the Committee 
specified the geographical areas in respect of 
which elections were required, and in the final 
paragraph drew attention to the fact that the elections 
had to be conducted with due regard to 
equitable representation on the Board as a whole 
of the Members in the geographical areas specified 
in Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. At the end 
of that paragraph the Committee had appended, for 
the Conference's guidance, a list of Members that 

5) GC(XIV)/RES/265. 

GC(XIV)/OR.141 

had already been elected by the General Conference 
or designated by the Board to serve on the Board 
after the end of the current session. Finally, Rule 79 
of the Rules of Procedure provided that elections 
to the Board should be by secret ballot and that 
there should be no nominations. 

56. At the invitation of the President, a member of the 
Danish delegation and a member of the Yugoslav delegation 
acted as tellers. 
57. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect two Members from the area of Latin America. 
58. 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 151 
Invalid votes: 5 
Abstentions: 13 
Valid votes: 133 
Required majority: 34 
Votes obtained: 

Chile 67 
Brazil 66 

59-Having obtained the required majority, Chile and 
Brazil were elected Members of the Board. 

60. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect one Member from the area of Africa and the 
Middle East. 
61. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 75 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 69 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Syria 62 
Israel 7 

62. Having obtained the required majority, the Syrian 
Arab Republic was elected a Member of the Board. 
63. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect one Member from the area of South East Asia 
and die Pacific. 
64. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 75 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 71 
Required majority: 36 
Votes obtained: 

Thailand 70 
Burma 1 

65. Having obtained the required majority, Thailand 
was elected a Member of the Board. 
— 7 — 


GC(XIV)/OR.141 

66. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 68. Having obtained the required majority, the Netherfill 
the remaining vacant seat on the Board. lands was elected a Member of the Board. 
67. 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 77 69. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Invalid votes: 0 Article VI.D of the Statute, the Members just elected 
Abstentions: 8 to the Board would hold office from the end of the 
Valid votes: 69 fourteenth regular session of the General Conference 
Required majority: 35 until the end of the sixteenth regular session. He 
Votes obtained: congratulated Brazil, Chile, the Netherlands, the 
Netherlands 68 Syrian Arab Republic and Thailand on dieir election 
Zambia 1 and thanked die tellers for their work. 

The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 

-8



GC 


International Atomic Energy Agency 
GC(XlV)/OR.142 
25 February 1971* 

GENERAL Distr. 

General Conference 

ENGLISH 

RECORDS OF THE FOURTEENTH REGULAR SESSION 
(22—28 SEPTEMBER 1970) 

ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 28 September 1970, at 3-15 p.m. 

President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraph 
agenda** 
16 The Agency's accounts for 1969 1— 2 
17 The Agency's relations with intergovernmental organizations 3— 4 
18 Amendment of Article VI of the Statute 5—29 
22 Closing of the session 30—35 

A provisional version of this document was issued on 1 3 October 1970. 
GC(XIV)/442. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIV)/INF/125/Rev.2. 


GC(XIV)/OR.l42 

THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1969 
(GC(XIV)/444) 

1. Mr. LAMB (Australia), Rapporteur of the Administrative 
and Legal Committee, presented the 
Committee's report on the Agency's accounts for 
1969(GC(XIV)/444). 
2. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XIV)/ 
444 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 
(GC(XIV)/445) 

3. Mr. LAMB (Australia), Rapporteur of the Administrative 
and Legal Committee, submitted the 
Committee's report on the Agency's relations with 
intergovernmental organizations (GC(XIV)/445). 
4. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XIV)j 
445 was adopted. 
AMENDMENT OF ARTICLE VI OF THE 
STATUTE (GC(XIV)/437 and Add.l and 2, 
450 and Corr.l, 451) 

5. Mr. LAMB (Australia), Rapporteur of the Administrative 
and Legal Committee, submitted the 
Committee's report on the question of amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute (GC(XIV)/450 and 
Corr.l). 
6. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) said that the 
review of Article VI of the Statute had brought 
to light very different points of view during the 
meetings of the Administrative and Legal Committee. 
It had not been possible to arrive at a consensus, 
although many delegations had urged the necessity 
of doing so when a question of such importance 
for the Agency was at issue. The Polish delegation 
still did not think it was too late to reach a broad 
consensus which, by making it easier for Members 
to ratify, would hasten the entry into force of an 
amended Article VI. That was why it was submitting, 
jointly with the Czechoslovak and Hungarian 
delegations, a compromise solution in the form of 
amendments (GC(XIV)/451) to the draft resolution 
annexed to the report of the Administrative and 
Legal Committee. 
7. The purpose of the amendments was, firstly, to 
ensure broader representation of the developing 
countries by limiting the number of permanent seats 
held on the Board of Governors by the advanced 
countries and by increasing the number of elective 
seats from 20 to 22. Secondly, they were designed 
to satisfy the claims of Western Europe by increasing 
the number of elective seats from four to six, thereby 
removing the imbalance between permanent and 
elective seats in that area and at the same time 
avoiding the difficulty that would inevitably arise 
if two additional permanent seats were assigned to 
Western Europe. Three States in that area could 
claim the right to occupy the two new seats to be 
held by designation. Finally, the amendments would 
allow the two European States which were so eager 
to become permanent Members of the Board to be 
elected and re-elected, which in fact amounted to 
the same thing. 

8. Hence the amendments, far from bearing prejudice 
to those States, actually put them in a privileged 
position because under the existing provisions 
of Article VI they could not be re-elected. Moreover, 
in submitting those amendments to the draft resolution 
the Polish delegation was taking one more step 
towards accommodating the standpoint of countries 
that wished to obtain permanent seats on the Board. 
9. The socialist countries had already made a 
number of concessions, as was clear from the text 
of section A.l of document GC(XIV)/437. They 
had abandoned paragraph A.2 of Article VI, which 
assigned a seat on the Board alternately to Poland 
and Czechoslovakia, and had accepted the compromise 
amendment proposed by Pakistan (GC(XIV)/ 
437, section A.2). They strongly urged other 
countries to show the same spirit of compromise 
in order to arrive at a consensus which would ensure 
that all geographical areas were fairly represented 
on the Board. The draft resolution as it stood 
would, on die other hand, have serious consequences 
for the good understanding which was essential in 
the various bodies of the Agency. 
10. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) recalled that the 
draft resolution before the Conference had been 
adopted by an overwhelming majority in the Administrative 
and Legal Committee; further discussion 
was therefore unnecessary and the draft resolution 
should be put to the vote immediately. 
11. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) said that 
his delegation had already explained its point of 
view on the draft resolution under consideration and 
had also pointed out why the socialist countries 
considered it unacceptable in its present form. It 
was regrettable that some delegations should attempt 
to force the adoption of a proposal which many 
countries could not accept. To proceed in such a 
manner was to invite a confrontation which might 
paralyse the Agency's activities. That would be all 
the more regrettable as the Agency was now called 
upon to assume extremely important responsibilities 
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT)1). The Czechoslovak delegation 
had decided to support the Polish proposals in the 
hope that a compromise acceptable to all groups 
could be reached. It urged all delegations to take 
account of the present situation and to put aside 
all considerations of prestige. 
12. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) reaffirmed the constant desire of the 
1) Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 


Soviet Union and the other socialist countries to 

arrive at an amendment of Article VI which all 
Member States could accept. The proposal submitted 
to the Administrative and Legal Committee 
by the Polish delegation (GC(XIV)/COM.2/54)was 
designed precisely to resolve that fundamental 
question in a realistic fashion; but, in view of the 
arbitrary manner in which the debate had been conducted 
in committee, a third of the delegations had 
not had time to obtain instructions from their 
Governments and had not been able to take part 
in the vote. The Polish proposal had been rejected 
in committee by 38 votes, scarcely more than one 
third of the total membership of the Agency. In 
view of that, the wisest course would be to postpone 
any decision for a reasonable period so that delegations 
might have the necessary time to study the 
socialist countries' proposals and to consult one 
another, in order to arrive at a solution acceptable 
to all. Such a formula would not only conform 
with Agency practice but would serve to expedite 
a solution of the question of Article VI, for there 
was unlikely to be any obstacle to ratification of a 
proposal that had been unanimously agreed upon 
in advance. 

13. The Soviet delegation saw a possible compromise 
in the amendments now submitted by Hungary, 
Poland and Czechoslovakia. The new suggestions, 
very similar to the Polish amendments proposed in 
committee, improved the draft resolution before the 
Conference considerably and made it acceptable. They 
aimed at making the Board of Governors more 
democratic by allowing both Western countries and 
the developing countries broader representation and 
by granting the major nuclear countries permanent 
representation through election — without affecting 
the position of the great Powers and without discriminating 
against anyone. The amendments complied 
with the wishes expressed by many developing 
countries, Madagascar in particular. 
14. However, the proponents of the proposal contained 
in the draft resolution — a proposal emanating 
initially from Italy — insisted on resolving the 
question of Article VI without further delay. But a 
setdement could not be hurried, nor could ratification 
be obtained promptly unless two essential conditions 
were fulfilled: the countries which were so insistently 
claiming permanent seats on the Board should ratify 
NPT as soon as possible and should show that, 
if they genuinely wished to help increase the 
Agency's effectiveness, they were prepared to promote 
its universality by putting an end to an iniquitous 
situation maintained artificially to the detriment of 
countries which had a full right to membership of 
the Agency. 
15. Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) said that the 
developing countries would also have liked to see 
the efforts of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole, 
which had devoted two years to its review of 
Article VI, crowned by a unanimous agreement. But 
as it was obviously impossible to arrive at a conGC(
XIV)/OR.l42 

sensus, they had felt that the best solution was after 
all to support the proposal which seemed likely to 
find favour with the greatest number of countries. 
They had been urged to support the amendments 
submitted by the three socialist countries, which 
were no more than a variation of formulas already 
examined at length by the Ad Hoc Committee of 
the Whole, on the grounds that die draft resolution 
before the Conference had received only 46 votes in 
committee; but it seemed to the developing countries 
more significant that the Polish proposal had obtained 
only 10 votes. The amendments introduced by the 
socialist countries therefore had little chance of rallying 
two thirds of the votes; on the other hand, it 
seemed likely that the proposal in the draft resolution 
would in fact be supported by an even larger 
majority. Consequently, he felt that there was no 
point in discussing the amendments of the three 
socialist countries further, and that they should be 
put to the vote without further delay. 

16. The PRESIDENT put. to the vote the amendments 
to the draft resolution annexed to document 
GC(XIV)/450, proposed by Hungary, Poland and 
Czechoslovakia in document GC(XIV)/451. 
17. There were 11 votes in favour and 41 against, 
with 25 abstentions. The amendments were rejected. 
18. The PRESIDENT put to the vote the draft 
resolution annexed to document GC(XIV)/450. 
19. There were 54 votes in favour and 9 against, with 
13 abstentions. The draft resolution was adopted. • 
20. Mr. WECKMANN-MUÑOZ (Mexico) said that 
he had abstained from voting because the draft resolution 
did not appear to have enough support to 
ensure prompt ratification. On the other hand, he 
had not been able to vote against a draft which 
counted many Latin American countries among its 
sponsors. However, Mexico would follow with the 
greatest interest the deposition of instruments of 
ratification of the revised Article, which henceforward 
represented the only possible way of changing the 
composition of the Board. The version now adopted 
had the advantage of granting quasi-permanent seats 
to countries very advanced in nuclear technology, 
and it also enabled a larger number of developing 
countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America to sit 
on the Board. 
21. Mr. AGUNG (Indonesia) said that he had 
voted in favour of the draft resolution, as it gave 
the area of South East Asia the most satisfactory 
representation on the Board. 
22. Mr. HOLLIST (Nigeria) recalled that the Ad 
Hoc Committee of the Whole had been set up at 
the instigation of the developing countries; their 
feeling had been that the amendment of the Statute 
should be carried out principally in the interests 
of those among them which had not yet attained independence 
at the time of the Agency's founding. 

GC(XIV)/OR.l42 

23. In supporting the proposal in the resolution 
just adopted, Nigeria's intention had not been to 
provide any European countries with permanent seats; 
nor had it been to contest their right to those seats. 
That was why the amendments proposed by Poland 
had not seemed unacceptable to Nigeria; unfortunately 
they had not been submitted in good time, and 
no one could say what their fate would have been 
had they been submitted earlier, but in any case 
the Nigerian delegation would have been in a position 
to support them. 
24. Thus, in all the circumstances, he hoped that 
those who had offered bitter oppositon to the 
present amendment would respect the rules of the 
game and bow gracefully to the will of the majority. 
25. In a world in constant evolution, Article VI 
might well be amended again if the need were felt; 
but in the meantime he appealed to all Member 
States of the Agency to ratify as quickly as possible 
the amendment which had just been adopted. 
26. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said that he wished to explain his vote 
and outline his delegation's position once more. 
27. The Soviet Union was in favour of enlarging 
the composition of the Board in view of the 
legitimate wish of the developing countries of Africa, 
Asia and Latin America to be more fairly represented. 
Any modification of the Statute should be such as 
to enable the Agency to accomplish its tasks most 
effectively, particularly those associated with NPT. 
It was important not to disrupt the political equilibrium 
among different groups of countries which, 
from the beginning, had enabled the Agency to 
conduct its business efficiently. 
28. The Agency should be truly universal, and for 
that reason the Soviet Union considered it vital to 
arrive at a consensus. The amendment of Article VI 
was causing a division in the Agency which would 
harm the spirit of understanding and co-operation 
without which it could not work satisfactorily. 
29. At a time when the Agency was about to 
shoulder new responsibilities as a result of the entry 
into force of NPT, it would be desirable for the 
Board to include more representatives of States 
Parties to the Treaty. The work of the Safeguards 
Committee (1970), which was formulating a model 
agreement, was of the utmost importance and he 
noted with satisfaction that positive results had already 
been obtained. The Secretariat was already in a 
position to open negotiations widi Parties to the 
Treaty so that the agreements might enter into force 
at the appointed time, and he was convinced that 
the Secretariat would deal creditably with that important 
task. 

CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

30. Mr. HILL (Jamaica) spoke on behalf of the 
General Conference in paying a tribute to the 
President. His task was all the easier as Jamaica 
had well-established ties widi India, ties of friendship 
based on the belief that the ultimate goal of all 
efforts should be the well-being of the individual. 
31. The President had never betrayed the confidence 
which the Conference had rightly placed in 
him; doubtless he would continue to put his considerable 
gifts at the service of the Agency, helping 
it to improve the circumstances of men who had 
not yet benefited from the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
32. Sir Philip BAXTER (Australia) thanked the 
President on behalf of his delegation for the way 
in which he had conducted the business of the 
Conference. Australia had close ties with India, 
in particular in the field of atomic energy; those 
ties had been formed at the outset, when Mr. Bhabha 
had presided over the first session of die General 
Conference, and had been growing stronger ever 
since. Thus he spoke for all Member States in 
heartily thanking the President. 
33. The PRESIDENT said that he was deeply 
moved by the words that had been addressed to 
him. To be sure, differences had arisen during the 
debates, but the General Conference had none the 
less successfully completed its work. He was convinced 
that in future the Agency's work would be 
marked by an even profounder spirit of co-operation 
than in the past. In accordance with Rule 48 of 
the Rules of Procedure, he invited delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
34. All present rose mid stood in silence for one minute. 
35. The PRESIDENT then declared the fourteenth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 5p.m. 

_4



