GC{XV)/OR. 143 

international Atomic tnergy Agency 
24 July 1972* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 21 September 1971, at 3, 15 p.m. 

Temporary President: Mr. SARABHAI (India) 
President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 

Item of 
the provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

1 
Opening of the session 1-3 

2 
Election of the President 4-1 1 

3(a) 
Appointment of the 12 - 13 
Credentials Committee 

4 
Election of the Vice-14 - 18 
Presidents 

5 
Appointment of the 19 - 22 
General Committee 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 24 September 1971. 
** GC(XV)/454 and Mod. 1. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 143 

THE RECORD 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared 
the fifteenth regular session of the General 
Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules 
of Procedure, he invited the delegates to 
observe one minute of silence dedicated to 
prayer or meditation. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. 
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
the delegates from Member States, the 
representatives of the United Nations and other 
intergovernmental organizations and of nongovernmental 
organizations who had come to 
take part in the work of the session, and also 
the State Secretary representing the Federal 
Chancellor of the Republic of Austria. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President. 
5. Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT (France) nominated 
Mr. Otero Navascues, the delegate of Spain 
and Chairman since 1958 of the Spanish 
Nuclear Energy Board. Mr. Otero Navascues, 
who had held the highest posts in various 
Spanish and international bodies, was 
especially qualified by reason of his experience 
and ability to guide the General Conference 
through its work. 
6. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) and 
Mr. TRIVEDI (India) supported the nomination. 
• 7. Mr. Otero Navascues (Spain) was 
elected President of the General Conference for 
its fifteenth regular session by acclamation. 
• Mr. Otero Navascues (Spain) took the 
chair. 
8. The PRESIDENT thanked the General 
Conference for the great honour it had done 
his country in electing him to the high office of 
President; he regarded his election as a 
tribute to the efforts being made by Spain to 
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
9. Since the time of the establishment of the 
Agency there had been a considerable evolution 
of such applications, particularly as a result 
of collaboration among men of science throughout 
the whole world. The Fourth International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy, which had just been held in Geneva, 
had enabled an exact assessment of the 
achievements and prospects to be made, 
particularly with regard to the production of 
nuclear electric power, the varied applications 
of radioisotopes, the "green revolution" and 
nuclear desalination. The Conference had 
moreover shown that one of the most valuable 
of the Agency's activities had been to act as a 
catalyst in the establishment of an international 
scientific community above and beyond 
divergencies of any kind. In so doing, the 
Agency had benefited from the co-operation of 
other institutions of the United Nations family, 
and he would express to them the Agency's 
gratitude. 

10. The increase in the number of nuclear 
installations and the entry into force of the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons[l] would bring new responsibilities 
for the Agency to assume as the safeguards 
agreements to be concluded in the next few years 
were brought into force. 
11. In conclusion, he stressed the need for 
an increase in the provision of technical 
assistance by the Agency, while at the same 
time recognizing the problems which that 
would entail. To provide technical assistance 
was in fact the Agency's most important task, 
though admittedly its ability to furnish it was 
limited by the inadequacy of the financial 
resources at its disposal. In any event, the 
Director General and the staff of the 
Secretariat were to be congratulated on the 
particularly effective way in which those 
resources were being utilized. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE 

12. The PRESIDENT proposed, in 
accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of 
Procedure, that a Credentials Committee 
should be appointed consisting of the following 
nine Members: Argentina, Brazil, Gabon, 
Japan, Poland, Spain, Thailand, the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States 
of America. 
• 13. The proposal was accepted. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

14. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under 
Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, the 
Conference was required to elect its 
Vice-Presidents after the election of the 
Chairmen of the two Main Committees. He 
therefore proposed to suspend the plenary 
meeting for a short time to enable the two 
Committees to elect their Chairmen. 
• The meeting was suspended at 3. 35 p. m. 
and resumed at 3. 45 p. m. 
15. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President. 
[1 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 

GC(XV)/OR. 143 

16. Mr. BEN MENA (Tunisia) nominated 
the delegates of Australia, Canada, the 
Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, Nigeria, 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the 
United States of America and Uruguay. 
17. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) seconded 
the nominations. 
• 18. The delegates of the Members 
nominated were declared elected to the eight 
Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL 
COMMITTEE 

19. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the 
General Conference was required to elect 
four additional members to the General Committee. 
He invited nominations. 

20. U VUM KO HAU (Burma) nominated the 
delegates of France, Hungary, India and 
Pakistan. 
21. Mr. APUNTE CABALLERO (Ecuador) 
seconded the nominations. 
• 22. The delegates of the Members 
nominated were declared elected to the General 
Committee, which was thus duly appointed in 
compliance with the provisions of Rule 40 of the 
Rules of Procedure. 
• The meeting rose at 4. 5 p.m. 
-3 



GC (XV)/OR. 144 

International Atomic Energy Agency 24 July 1972* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday, 22 September 1971, at 10. 30 a.m. 


President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 


Item of 
the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
8 Adoption of the agendaand allocation of items 
for initial discussion 
1 3 


Statement by the 4 
Representative of the 
Secretary-General of 
the United Nations 

Statement by the 5 -35 
Director General 

General debate and 36 -111 
report of the Board of 
Governors for 
1970-71 

Statements^ by the 
delegates of: 

United States of America 37 -63 
South Africa 64 -76 
Jamaica 77 -89 
Indonesia 90 -103 
Republic of Korea 104 -111 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 24 September 1971. 
** GC(XV)/469. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 144 
THE RECORD area of nuclear desalting, on planning 
for the financing of nuclear projects for 
developing countries and in fostering the 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND use of nuclear techniques in, for example, 
ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL hydrology, agriculture, medicine and 
DISCUSSION (GC(XV)/468) industry. It is increasingly involving 
itself in the problems of the human environ1. 
The PRESIDENT drew attention to the ment, where the use of nuclear energy 
report by the General Committee in 
document GC(XV)/468 on its consideration of 
the provisional agenda for the session. [1] 
without adequate precautions could have 
far-reaching ecological effects, while 
with such precautions it has already been 
demonstrated that nuclear energy can be 
2. In the absence of any comment, he 
proposed that the Conference approve the 
agenda as set forth in that document and also 
accept the Committee's recommendations 
regarding the allocation of items for initial 
discussion. 
a 'clean' source of energy. I believe, 
however, that the present decade will 
see the unfolding of even greater 
possibilities for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and a corresponding 
increase in the responsibilities of this 
Agency. Indeed, your organization 
• 3. It was so decided. is well placed to play a pivotal role in 
certain areas, in keeping with the 
growing trend to work through multi-
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE 
UNITED NATIONS 
lateral instruments. It is my earnest 
hope that in these developments the 
interest of the developing countries will 
remain very high in the priorities of 
4. Mr. WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI 
(Representative of the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations) said he had been charged 
the Agency and that your technical 
assistance activities will increase 
appropriately. 
to deliver the following message, which would 
be the last message of U Thant, as Secretary(
b) "I have been particularly gratified 
General of the United Nations, to a session of over the years by the close co-operation 
the General Conference: between the United Nations and the IAEA. 
This co-operation is based on the very 
(a) "During my tenure as Secretaryspecial 
relationship established in 
General I have watched with a great deal Article III of the Statute as well as in the 
of admiration the progress of this relationship agreement between the 
Agency, which for much of the last United Nations and the IAEA[2]. The 
decade has been administered so ably by most recent example of this was the 
your Director General, Dr. Eklund. organization of the Fourth International 
Many of you have just come from Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
attending the Fourth International Atomic Energy, but this co-operation 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of and co-ordination is a continuous 
Atomic Energy in Geneva, which was process, generally of a quiet and 
jointly sponsored by the United Nations unspectacular nature. In particular, the 
and the International Atomic Energy work we are doing together in such areas 
Agency, and will thus have participated as the economics of power, the 
in yet another meeting designed to make implementation of the results of the 
man turn away from self-destruction Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
towards the positive use of a force with States[3], and the effects of atomic 
tremendous potentialities for good. It radiation is especially worthy of note. 
is towards this objective that the IAEA In addition, the IAEA, through its 
is mainly dedicated and has indeed conparticipation 
in the Administrative 
tributed so significantly over the last Committee on Co-ordination and in other 
ten years. The entry into force of co-ordinating bodies, plays its full part 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in the development and implementation 
Treaty has caused the Agency to be of projects of interest to the United 
charged with important responsi-Nations system as a whole, such as the 
bilities, which it has prepared itself transfer of technology to developing 
to discharge. It has already made countries, the human environment and 
substantial progress in the field of the second development decade. As the 
safeguards. The Agency remains possibilities for the peaceful uses of 
actively engaged in work designed to nuclear energy continue to grow, this 
fulfil recommendations made by the 1968 
Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States. It is continuing its work in the 
[2 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/11, 
Part I. A. 
[3 ] Held at Geneva from 29 August to 
[1 ] GC(XV)/454 and Mod. 1. 28 September 1968. 
-2 



GC(XV)/OR. 144 


co-operation will become even more 
necessary, and I am confident it will 
be strengthened. 

(c) "On the eve of relinquishing my 
office I am optimistic about the development 
of international relations. The 
cold war has largely disappeared, 
giving way to the unmistakable beginning 
of detente. These beginnings could and, 
as I have repeatedly urged, should be 
given momentum by the reaching of 
agreement on a complete ban on nuclear 
tests. It is also to be hoped that by the 
end of the new decade the nuclear arms 
race will have become a mere curiosity 
in the pages of history. 
(d) "in conclusion, may I recall that 
much of the work of the IAEA, as well 
as the work of the other agencies, 
closely affects the activities of other 
members of the United Nations family. 
This is why we at the United Nations are 
concerned, just as you are, to promote 
effective co-operation, proper coordination 
and, whenever appropriate, 
concerted action. In the discharge of 
the tasks stemming from this concern, 
I, as Chairman of the Administrative 
Committee on Co-ordination, have 
greatly benefited from my association 
with my valued colleague, Dr. Eklund, 
to whom I take this opportunity of 
paying a warm tribute. I am much 
indebted to him, as to my other 
colleagues on the Committee, for his 
contribution to the mutual confidence 
and sense of partnership which have 
been built up over the years between the 
various arms of the United Nations 
system, and which, in an increasing 
measure, are exemplified in the 
relations between the IAEA and the 
United Nations. " 

STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

5. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that 
progress was usually a very slow process and 
particularly in the building of better relations 
between nations. 
6. On the occasion of the fifteenth regular 
session of the General Conference, he would 
look back and identify some of the progress 
made by the Agency since its inception. The 
origins of the Agency went back more than 
25 years, when the nations of the world first 
began striving for some kind of an international 
solution to the dilemma posed by the atom. 
After much discussion, a specific proposal 
to create an international atomic energy agency 
had been put before the General Assembly of 
the United Nations in 1953, but another four 
years had been needed to draft a Statute and 
bring it into force. 

7. In the early years the Board of Governors 
had held prolonged series of meetings, 
hammering out sets of rules and seeking 
appropriate programmes for the Agency. As 
a result, by 1961, the Agency had established 
the beginnings of a safeguards system, had 
set up laboratories at Headquarters, in 
Seibersdorf and in Monaco, had worked out a 
programme of technical assistance and had 
been very active in carrying out its regulatory 
tasks. Agency regulations for the safe 
transport of radioactive materials had been 
established. With commercial nuclear power 
still years ahead and bilateralism still 
dominant in regard to safeguards, the main 
subject of the Agency's work had been radioisotopes 
and radiation. As an example of 
slow progress, the Vienna Convention on 
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, adopted 
in 1963, had not yet entered into force or 
been ratified by any major nuclear trading 
country. 

8. In 1963, the Agency had initiated its 
first large-scale development projects - the 
Middle Eastern Radioisotope Centre for the 
Arab Countries in Cairo and the first Special 
Fund project relating to nuclear energy, in 
Yugoslavia, also concerned with radioisotope 
applications. That year, the membership of 
the Board had been increased from 23 to 25. 
In 1964, the Agency had taken full 
responsibility for the scientific programme of 
the Third Geneva Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy. It had become a wellestablished 
forum for the exchange of 
information and a major publisher of publications 
relating to nuclear energy. In the 
same year, 1964, the Agency had formalized 
its collaboration with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations by establishing 
a Joint Division of Atomic Energy in Food 
and Agriculture. In 1964 also, the Trieste 
Centre for Theoretical Physics had been 
established in collaboration with the Italian 
Government. 
9. Since 1964, the trend had been to seek 
greater efficiency in the scientific programmes 
and to revise them periodically to meet the 
actual needs of Member States. That had been 
done in the light of the developments in many 
large national atomic energy commissions, 
where important tasks had been diverted to 
bodies outside the commissions. Nuclear 
power, including desalination, had attracted 
more interest and the same was true of 
environmental questions. In 1967, the Agency 
had accepted the offer made by the Austrian 
authorities to build a permanent headquarters 
in the Donaupark. In 1968, the Agency had 
established the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) which, from a 
modest start, had gained considerable 
momentum. In the past few years, contributions 
to the Agency's own programme of 
technical assistance had increased. The 
number of Special Fund projects now under 
execution had risen to six. 
10. The Moscow Test Ban Treaty of 1963 
had marked an improvement in international 
-3 



GC(XV)/OR. 144 

relations and had had a beneficial effect on the 
overall work of the Agency, particularly on 
its safeguards activities. Member States 
soon afterwards had agreed to extend the 
earlier safeguards system to power reactors of 
all sizes and to reprocessing and fuel fabrication 
plants. Bilateral safeguards had begun to 
be steadily transferred to the Agency. In 1968, 
the General Assembly had commended the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT)[4] and in April 1971 the Agency 
had completed the preparatory work needed to 
apply safeguards to all nuclear material in the 
peaceful activities of non-nuclear-weapon 
States party to NPT; negotiations were now 
proceeding with 30 States. 

11. In the previous year, the General 
Conference had adopted a resolution which 
would have the effect of increasing the membership 
of the Board from 25 to 33. So far, there 
had been 13 ratifications of the relevant 
amendment to the Statute. 
12. Looking to the future, he said that 
nuclear energy, in almost all of its applications, 
was increasingly being used on a commercial 
scale, particularly in electric power production. 
However, the large-scale introduction of 
nuclear power in national economies also 
created certain problems of an international 
character. 
13. A dominant impression obtained at the 
Fourth International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy (the Fourth 
Geneva Conference) was that of confidence in 
the future of nuclear power. The sessions on 
environmental questions had also been very 
illuminating. Collaboration with the United 
Nations Office at Geneva and United Nations 
Headquarters had been excellent. 
14. Recent expressions of concern about the 
human environment, which had led to the 
convening of a United Nations conference on 
the subject to be held in Stockholm in 1972, had 
repercussions on nuclear power as well. To 
help the United Nations Secretariat prepare for 
the conference, the Agency had contributed 
papers which demonstrated that nuclear power 
plants were decisively better than fossilfuelled 
plants with respect to common 
atmospheric pollutants, but that the generation 
and release of radioactivity in various phases of 
the nuclear fuel cycle required continuing 
attention to ensure that the acceptably low 
levels of radiation were maintained. The 
techniques and concepts used in safety analysis 
and control of radioactive releases might 
usefully be adopted in the control of other 
pollutants. 
15. At the previous General Conference it 
had been proposed that the Agency should serve 
as a central repository for data on amounts of 
radioactivity released by the peaceful 
[4 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
applications of nuclear energy. In June the 
Board had discussed the establishment by the 
Agency of an international register of all 

substantial releases of radioactive wastes into 
the seas and oceans. In July, the Agency had 
convened a consultants' meeting to consider the 
technical problems associated with establishing 
a central repository. The consultants had 
suggested that a register be established now, 
in co-operation with the World Health 
Organization, for releases of radioactive 
materials to any sector of the environment 
which might go beyond national boundaries. 
Obviously such a register could only be 
established with the full co-operation of 
Member States. 

16. In further preparation for the Stockholm 
conference, a draft convention regulating the 
transportation and dumping of all materials 
in the ocean was being drawn up; the proposed 
IAEA/WHO register could be a component of 
such a comprehensive regulatory system. 
Care must be taken to avoid duplication of 
work in collecting and disseminating information 
for those registers. 
17. In that context, the Agency's programmes 
and the formulation of standards in environmental 
radiation biology took on a special 
significance. It relied heavily on the 
recommendations of the International 
Commission for Radiological Protection (ICRP) 
for the formulation of its standards, guidebooks 
and codes of practice. Both the 
International Commission on Radiation Units 
and Measurements and ICRP had appealed to 
the Agency for greater financial support and he 
felt that the valuable work of both organizations 
justified such an increase; that would be 
reflected in the 1973 budget. 
18. To meet present and future needs for 
rapid access to nuclear information, the 
programme of INIS would grow in scope. It 
was expected that, as a result of a recommendation 
of a panel of experts, the scope of 
coverage might almost double by January 1972. 
The entire INIS operations would, however, 
first be reviewed by the Board's own Advisory 
Committee on INIS, in November. 
19. The introduction of nuclear power in the 
developing countries raised special problems 
for those countries, which looked to the Agency 
for help and advice. The problems of 
financing nuclear power had been much 
discussed at the previous two sessions of the 
General Conference, and the Secretariat had 
been studying the matter, and in particular 
the technical and economic characteristics of 
nuclear reactors that could be used in the 
smaller electrical grids of developing 
countries. A market study was being initiated 
to determine the future demand for reactors 
with a capacity below 500 MW(e). At the 
Fourth Geneva Conference the matter had been 
dealt with both by a panel and in an informal 
meeting on the introduction of nuclear power in 

-4 



GC(XV)/OR. 144 


developing countries. It had been shown that 
by 1985, there might be a considerable market 
for nuclear power in the developing countries, 
part of which would be for small- and mediumsized 
reactors. A working group on the 
subject would meet in October. 

20. The introduction of nuclear power would 
not be the only matter in which the Agency 
would be called on to help its Members. 
Particularly for the "new" Members embarking 
upon nuclear energy programmes, the Agency's 
technical assistance was crucial. The backbone 
of that programme was the exchange and 
training of young scientists, so that the other 
components of the programme might be used 
effectively: i. e. so that the expert would have 
a counterpart and the equipment could be 
operated. There was also a need for the 
training of laboratory technicians, to which 
more attention would be given; in fact, the 
first training course in Africa for laboratory 
technicians had recently been organized in 
Ghana. The increase in funds for technical 
assistance suggested by the Board would 
allow the Agency to provide somewhat over 
50% of the aid requested, as compared to 
26% in 1969. However, the actual value of the 
assistance given, should the Conference decide 
to increase the target to $3 million, would 
attain only the 1962 level. 

21. For many developing countries, medical, 
agricultural and hydrological applications of 
nuclear techniques were still of primary 
interest, as good returns could be expected right 
from the beginning of a programme. 
22. There was a second group of developing 
countries which had already acquired experience 
in nuclear applications and whose interest lay 
more and more in larger projects of the 
Special Fund type. To tap the resources 
available in the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP), those countries, under 
the new UNDP procedures which would come 
into effect in January 19V2, must include 
requests for both small- and large-scale 
projects in a country plan covering a period of 
five years. It would be for the national atomic 
energy bodies, then, to ensure that their 
projects were included in the country's overall 
programme. 
23. On an official visit to some Latin 
American Member States in July, the Deputy 
Director General for Technical Assistance and 
Publications and he himself had had the 
opportunity of making on-the-spot checks of 
what the Agency was doing and what was 
expected of it in the next few years in those 
countries. In some of those countries the 
electrical utilities were already in a position 
to integrate substantial amounts of nuclear 
power in the grids, providing that the cost was 
reasonable. The intensive prospecting activity 
in some countries was also impressive and 
would certainly lead to an increase in the 
known uranium reserves. Fuel element 
fabrication was also the subject of considerable 
efforts in Latin America. In collaboration 
with the United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization, there would be scope for a 
substantial contribution from the Agency to the 
process of industrial development in some of 
those countries. 

24. The Agency's regulatory work had not 
been completed and quite a lot remained to be 
done. The Agency would accordingly continue 
to assist its Member States in establishing 
national nuclear laws which, if harmonized 
with each other, would facilitate the attainment 
of a world nuclear law system. The task 
became even more important with the 
commercialization of nuclear power and the 
increase in trade of nuclear materials. 
25. As to future extramural activities, an 
expansion of the Agency's laboratory facilities 
in support of the safeguards programme was 
being studied. The work of the International 
Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity at Monaco 
would be reviewed in the autumn by a group of 
experts, according to the provisions in the 
agreement between the Agency and the 
Monegasque authorities. Possible additional 
activities to be financed by UNESCO and other 
interested organizations, including for example 
the study of non-radio active pollutants in the 
sea, would be the subject of consultations. 
The Agency and UNESCO had started negotiations 
with the Italian Government on the extension 
of the agreement concerning the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste, in which, as a first basis for 
discussion, subject to the approval of the 
Agency's Board and UNESCO's Executive 
Council, it had been suggested that the two 
agencies' contributions should be increased 
to $200 000 each, on the assumption that the 
Italian Government would also increase its 
contribution. The Centre would thus be 
compensated for the effects of inflation since 
the Agency's contribution had been fixed in 
1968. The first meeting of the newlyestablished 
Fusion Research Council had taken 
place in June, followed by an informal 
discussion during the Fourth Geneva Conference. 

26. An activity of growing importance in the 
future would be the application of safeguards 
in connection with NPT, The Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America should also be mentioned. Negotiations 
between the Agency and non-nuclearweapon 
States party to NPT were now going 
ahead, based on the material for the structure 
and content of NPT agreements worked out by 
a safeguards committee of the Board during 
the past year and contained in document 
INFCIRC/153. Of the 65 States party to NPT. 
only 30 had formally begun negotiations with 
the Agency and in only four cases - Austria, 
Finland, Poland and Uruguay - had the 
negotiations been completed. In order to have 
an effective non-proliferation regime, the 
widest possible application of NPT agreements 

GC(XV)/OR. 144 

was necessary. The time-table laid down in 
NPT required that most safeguards agreements 
should come into force by the end of 
February 1972. In fact no less than 50 
countries should conclude agreements with the 
Agency before that date. However, the 
initiation of negotiations was up to the States 
concerned, the Agency not being a party to 
NPT. The Agency was prepared, and was 
ready to enter into negotiations with those 
States that wished to do so as parties to NPT 
regarding the application of safeguards. The 
Legal Division had established a branch office 
in the Congress Centre for the duration of the 
session. Delegates should use the opportunity 
to check on the status of negotiations and to 
hold preliminary discussions with the 
Secretariat on the matter. 

27. The material elaborated by the Board's 
safeguards committee, in which some 50 
Members had participated, had done much to 
answer the reservations of some countries 
about the acceptance of international safeguards. 
He hoped that that might encourage those 
States which had not yet signed or ratified NPT 
to do so. 
28. If questions of practical interpretation of 
the safeguards agreements arose in the course 
of further negotiations, he would follow the 
usual procedure and call upon a group of experts 
for advice. 
29. The size of the work load for analytical 
services to be expected in connection with NPT 
and how it might be distributed among a 
network of national laboratories, with the 
Agency acting as an umpire laboratory, was 
under study. Member States had been asked 
about their willingness to make their own 
analytical services available to the Agency on a 
contractual basis. A technical proposal and 
cost estimate for an Agency safeguards 
analytical laboratory as an integral part of a 
network of national contract laboratories would 
be presented to the Board in February 1972. 
30. The Agency's programme relating to 
peaceful nuclear explosions was expected to 
grow as the nuclear-weapon States continued 
to fulfil their obligations under Article V of 
NPT. Apart from the technical panels on the 
subject, the Agency had also convened a group 
of experts in 1970 to consider the question of 
appropriate international observation of 
peaceful nuclear explosions, as foreseen in 
NPT. A further technical panel on cratering 
explosions was planned for mid-1972. As a 
res ult of an enquiry to the Agency from 
Madagascar regarding the feasibility of a 
project involving the use of an explosive device, 
France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom 
and the United States had indicated their 
interest in participating in such a study. 
31. Turning to problems affecting the 
everyday functioning of the Agency, he said 
that the Regular Budget for 1972, which 
amounted to $16 561 000, [5] had been affected 
by the revaluation of the Austrian schilling and 
the difficulties experienced in the world's 
monetary markets. The 8% salary increase 
for Professional staff, anticipated last year, 
had been approved by the General Assembly 
and had come into effect on 1 July 1971. As 
the increase had not been budgeted for, it had 
necessitated a supplementary request for 
the 1971 budget, and was reflected in the 1972 
estimates. He had been concerned about the 
problem the previous year. The Agency had 
given its views on the matter to the Special 
Committee for the Review of the United 
Nations Salary System. The Agency had 
repeated its position against a salary increase 
unless it resulted from a review of the 
principles underlying the United Nations salary 
system, some of which went back to the time of 
the League of Nations. In order to make a 
positive contribution to the Committee's work, 
the Agency had suggested that United Nations 
remunerations be based on an average of the 
national civil service salary rates prevailing 
in five of the most developed countries, 
rather than on the rate in one country only, as 
now. The Agency had suggested that the 
adequacy of allowances such as the dependency 
allowance and the education grant should be 
examined. 

32. As the budget estimates showed, there had 
been virtually no room for programme 
increases other than for safeguards for which 
special financing arrangements had been 
suggested. A situation in which programmes 
were held static or even relatively decreased 
while common staff costs and thus the budget 
figures continued to rise was obviously not a 
healthy one. In order to make the best 
possible use of limited resources and staff, 
he had initiated a survey of the deployment and 
utilization of staff in the Secretariat, followed 
by a number of in-depth studies, as a result of 
which the redeployment of staff had enabled 
him to make some savings. For example, in 
spite of an increase in work load, it had been 
possible to decrease the number of staff 
dealing with technical assistance matters from 
32 in 1965 to 21 in 1971. In planning the next 
six-year programme, he had obtained the views 
of senior staff members before formulating 
the programme, and future meetings were 
planned. Efforts would be concentrated on 
programmes of greatest benefit to Member 
States, at the same time avoiding too much 
diversification. In that connection, the 
suggestions that would be made at the current 
session of the Conference, as well as the 
trends reflected at the Fourth Geneva 
Conference, would help. 

33. A day-to-day problem afflicting all 
international organizations was that of 
excessive documentation. A recent report 
prepared for the Secretary-General of the 
[5 ] GC(XV)/460, Table 2. 

,GC(XV/OR. 144 


United Nations showed that the point of saturation 
had now been reached and indeed overstepped, 
and that delegations could no longer 
absorb the content of the large number of pages 
of documentation being placed before them. 
While the problem in the Agency had not yet 
reached those dimensions, every opportunity 

should be taken to avoid wastage and reduce 
paper production to a minimum. He asked 
Members to co-operate fully in the matter. 
One step would be to produce one comprehensive 
report on the Agency's activities for the use of 
the General Conference, the General Assembly 
of the United Nations and the Economic and 
Social Council, instead of individual reports. 

34. He expressed appreciation for the 
continuing and generous support the Agency was 
receiving from its host Government. An 
architect had been chosen for the future 
headquarters and the Austrian authorities had 
established a governmental body to supervise 
the next steps. Work was expected to start in 
1972 and the building was expected to be ready 
for occupancy in 1976-77. In the meantime, 
the Austrian authorities had recognized the 
Agency's acute space problems and had provided 
rent-free, additional office space in a new 
building not far from the K'arntner Ring. 
35. He looked to the General Conference to 
give the Secretariat guidelines in regard to 
the future and, in particular, the next six-year 
programme. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1970-71 


(GC(XV)/455, 466) 


36. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
statements of financial contributions to the 
Agency in document GC(XV)/466, which were 
up to date as of 20 September 1971 and 
accordingly superseded those contained in 
Annex G to the Board's annual report for 
1970-71 (GC(XV)/455). He then invited 
delegates to participate in the general debate. 
37. Mr. SEABORG (United States of America) 
said he would first like to read the following 
message to the Conference from the President 
of the United States: 
(a) "My warmest greetings to all who 
are attending the Fifteenth General 
Conference of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. You have my very best 
wishes for a most productive meeting. 
(b) "During the past fifteen years, the 
IAEA has contributed a great deal to the 
development and international sharing of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It is 
especially encouraging to see that the 
Agency's programmes are continuing to 
grow in response to the needs of the 
Member States. 
(c) "I would like to emphasize my 
country's deep appreciation of the work the 
Agency is doing in carrying out the 
important new responsibilities under the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty. Already you 
have adopted basic guidelines for 
negotiating safeguards agreements 
and have entered into such negotiations 
with many governments. These efforts, 
like your other activities , represent a 
significant contribution to the progress 
of mankind. 

(d) "I believe that mankind has the 
capacity to build a future in which all men 
can live peaceful and fulfilling lives. But 
no single nation can achieve this goal alone. 
Man's capacity to build will depend, in the 
end, upon his capacity to share. The 
International Atomic Energy Agency has 
done much to foster this capacity and that 
is why its past contributions and its future 
potential are important to men everywhere. 
(e) "On behalf of the people of the 
United States , I congratulate you on your 
past achievements and wish you continuing 
success in the months and years 
ahead. " 
38. Like many of those present, he had been 
involved over the past two weeks in highly 
productive discussions on nuclear developments 
with colleagues from countries all over the 
world. The Fourth International Conference on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy (the Fourth 
Geneva Conference) had been held with 
considerable success. Special commendations 
were in order for Dr. Eklund and the Agency's 
staff, and for many others, in helping to make 
that Conference an outstanding scientific and 
technical contribution to nuclear progress. 
Due to the extensive advances that had been 
made over the years, it had been possible at 
the Fourth Geneva Conference to relate nuclear 
science more closely to the needs of the 
developing countries than at the three previous 
conferences. Thus the papers from both the 
advanced and the developing countries would be 
of increased usefulness to governmental 
administrators, planners and economists. 

39. Those who had attended the Fourth 
Geneva Conference would perhaps recall that 
the United States exhibit had included a section 
on the implantation of small needles of 
californium-252 in and around cancerous tissue 
to determine whether neutron irradiation was 
more effective than gamma rays in destroying 
cancer cells. There was a current research 
programme under way on that subject in the 
United States, and supplies of californium-252 
needles had recently been lent to participating 
hospitals in the United Kingdom. It was 
anticipated that some of the needles in the 
United Kingdom would have fulfilled their 
purpose in the research programme in another 
year or so, but would continue to have many 
potential uses as neutron sources for such areas 
-7 



GC(XV)/OR.144 

as dosimetry studies, reactor studies, some 
activation analysis and calibration work. 
Accordingly, as the needles became available, 
it was planned to turn them over to the Agency 
for distribution to universities in Member 
States, and the details of that transfer would 
soon be arranged. 

40. Shortly before the Fourth Geneva 
Conference, he had had the honour to visit the 
Soviet Union as a guest of the State Committee 
on the Utilization of Atomic Energy and the 
Academy of Sciences of the USSR, It had been 
an extensive and stimulating trip, during which 
he had met leading Soviet scientists and 
administrators and discussed many of their 
programmes, involving peaceful nuclear 
applications. He had also visited a number of 
national research centres and nuclear power 
reactors and had been greatly impressed by 
them. 
41. Referring to the second part of President 
Nixon's statement, he wished to express his 
high esteem for all those representatives of 
Member States and staff members of the Agency 
who had participated in the formulation of the 
principles which now guided the Agency in 
concluding safeguards agreements with parties 
to NPT. The Board's safeguards committee 
had met frequently over many months. It was 
encouraging to note that some 50 Member 
States had taken part in its work. Through 
constructive effort and the spirit of 
compromise, they had produced the detailed 
outline of a safeguards agreement that had the 
virtues of effectiveness and widespread 
acceptability. The right of the Agency's 
inspectorate to verify independently data 
reported to it had been recognized as basic to 
the formulation of an objective judgement, 
while at the same time national systems of 
accounting for and controlling nuclear material 
had been explicitly recognized as essential to 
the effective implementation of Agency safeguards. 
Consequently, the national systems had 
to be based on, and provide for, those measures 
relevant to international as well as domestic 
safeguards purposes. Protection of the 
commercial interests of the inspected State had 
been ensured by the provisions adopted to 
protect commercial secrets and to avoid undue 
interference with the country's peaceful nuclear 
activities. The proposed arrangements also 
provided for a focusing of the Agency's 
verification procedures on the nuclear materials 
having the most strategic significance, namely 
plutonium and uranium-235. With that solid 
foundation, he looked forward to adherence to 
NPT by as many additional nations as possible, 
and to prompt conclusion of the necessary 
safeguards agreements between the Agency and 
States parties to NPT. 

42. Some Governments had initially felt it 
desirable to postpone signing NPT, pending 
development of the guidelines which would be 
applicable to Agency safeguards arrangements 
pursuant to NPT. With the guidelines approved 
by the Board in June, those States should now 
find it possible to take steps towards adherence 
to NPT. 

43. Some years before, his Government had 
stated that when safeguards were applied in 
connection with NPT the United States would 
permit the Agency to apply its safeguards to all 
nuclear activities in the United States, excluding 
only those with direct national security 
significance. Discussions had been initiated 
between the Agency and the United States 
Government on implementation of that offer. 
44. There was a second development of major 
importance to the Agency's Members that had 
not attracted as much attention as the formulation 
of safeguards principles, perhaps because 
it was more in the nature of a trend that had 
been gaining momentum through a number of 
actions and statements by the Member States at 
Agency meetings and elsewhere. He was 
referring to the growth during the past two years 
of the Agency's technical assistance activities, 
both those carried out under its own programme 
and those representing part of UNDP. In 1969, 
President Nixon had announced that one aspect 
of his new foreign aid policy would be a strong 
emphasis on technical assistance, and also 
that it was his intention to increase the portion 
of foreign aid to be provided through support of 
the technical assistance programmes of 
international organizations. That same year, 
United States contributions in cash and in kind 
to the Agency's Operational Budget for 1970 
had been increased by about 40% over the 
amounts contributed in 1969. For the 1971 
Operational Budget his country was contributing 
a total of $1 550 000, or almost 11% over 1970, 
which meant an increase of about 51% in the 
past two years. United States contributions to 
the programme in 1972 would be continued at 
an equivalent rate, subject to appropriations 
by Congress. 

45. Furthermore, he was pleased to renew 
his pledge, for the thirteenth consecutive year, 
to donate up to $ 50 000 worth of special nuclear 
material for use in Agency projects in research 
and medical therapy. His Government would 
also continue to make available, on a cost-free 
basis, the services of experts and training 
opportunities in their institutions, and to 
contribute to the Agency's library. 
46. In so far as the Agency's total technical 
assistance programme was concerned, the 
report on the provision of technical assistance 
during 1970 indicated that the Agency had 
provided more technical assistance in 1970 
than in any previous year, and that the total 
value of the assistance had increased by 6% 
over 1969. [6] The target for voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund had been increased 
from $2 million for 1970 to $2. 5 million for 
1971, and the Board had recommended 
that it be increased again to $3 million for 

[6] GC(XV)/INF/131, para. 6. 

GC(XV)/OR. 144 


1972. [7] The proposed increase had his support. 
He drew attention to the fact that the contributions 
pledged for 1971 had increased by about 
27% over those for 1970. It was hoped that the 
trend in the pledges for 1972, especially in 
view of the increase in sound and worth-while 
requests for assistance and in costs of project 
implementation, would continue. 

47. Another significant feature of the report 
on the provision of technical assistance during 
1970 concerned the steps taken to evaluate the 
programme both as specifically reported and 
as implied from the various analyses of the 
activities. A systematic follow-up and 
evaluation of the results of technical assistance 
projects in specific countries was useful in 
planning the best use of the Agency's limited 
resources, and in assessing the benefits 
accruing to the recipient country. The Agency 
should continue to consider new approaches 
to assessing the benefits derived by countries 
receiving assistance. 

48. Many of the developing Member States 
needed more electric power and a number of 
them were considering the possibility of using 
nuclear energy, particularly those which did 
not have sufficient fossil fuels or hydroelectric 
resources. At the same time, however, there 
were three main problems in the introduction 
of nuclear electric generating stations. 
49. First, while a developing country normally 
required relatively small increments of electric 
power, nuclear plants of the small size range 
were at the present time frequently not 
economically competitive with equivalent-sized 
fossil fuel plants. The economies of scale 
operated in such a way that larger nuclear 
power stations provided lower-cost electricity 
than smaller reactors. Since the evolution to 
larger reactors had occurred, there had not 
been a demonstrable market for nuclear 
reactors in the 100-300 MW(e) range, and 
manufacturers were not producing them. 
50. The second problem was that while 
nuclear plants enjoyed lower fuel costs than 
equivalent-sized fossil fuel plants, their 
capital costs were greater. This meant that 
special financing arrangements might be 
needed to provide for the larger loans necessary 
to cover the capital cost of a nuclear plant. 
51. Third, specialized training was required 
for the operators of nuclear power stations. 
This should not prove to be as difficult a 
problem as the others, however, and both the 
Agency and the reactor manufacturers had 
adequate experience in providing such training, 
which carried with it the benefits of bringing 
additional technology to the country. 
52. It was a fact that, for more than ten 
years, the Agency had been studying those 
problems. Progress had been made through 
[7] GC(XV)/460, para. 1.11. 
the Agency's technical meetings and through 
Agency surveys of the nuclear power situation 
in developing countries. Agency staff members 
in the past years had visited the United States 
and followed the technical work being done in 
designing and constructing small power reactors 
and bringing them into operation. In addition, 
the Agency had financed research contracts with 
institutions in Member States for study of the 
technical and economic feasibility of nuclear 
power reactors suitable for developing 
countries; and 1970 had seen the initiation of a 
series of co-ordinated research agreements on 
technical and cost assessments for such plants. 
Beginning in 1969, the Agency had published an 
annual review of Operating Experience with 
Nuclear Power Stations in Member States and it 
was planned to continue and expand that 
valuable activity. 

53. It seemed, however, that the time had 
come for manufacturers to take another look 
at the feasibility of producing nuclear plants 
in the 100-300 MW(e) range. The Agency was 
planning a study of the probable market for 
such plants. The market study would have to 
be a very thorough one that would recommend 
itself to both manufacturers and financial 
institutions. The developing countries should 
assess their future requirements in terms of 
a limited number of sizes and models of 
reactors, which could then be ordered on a 
repeat basis, thereby allowing a material 
reduction in unit costs. He hoped that the 
results of the Agency's study would show a 
demand that would encourage manufacturers to 
design and market improved plants of smaller 
size, and that the funds required for their 
construction would be made available on 
attractive terms. 
54. His Government wished to reaffirm its 
policies on supplying enriched uranium, which 
had been the subject of recent announcements. 
Recognizing the continued growth of nuclear 
power both at home and abroad, a review had 
been made of the present and prospective 
capability of the United States to undertake 
additional commitments to provide enrichment 
services. Following the review, the United 
States Atomic Energy Commission would 
continue to enter into long-term uranium 
enrichment contracts to meet the fuel 
requirements for nuclear power reactors in 
the United States and in co-operating foreign 
countries. However, in the light of the need 
to match future requirements more closely 
with enrichment capacity, its undertakings 
to supply reactor fuel abroad, like those for 
domestic reactors, would be made when supply 
contracts were entered into for individual 
reactor projects, rather than in advance in 
conjunction with the ceiling quantities in 
United States agreements on co-operation. 

55. Countries with advanced nuclear power 
programmes were understandably reluctant to 
be totally dependent on any one country for 
enriched uranium. In July 1971, those countries 

GC(XV)/OR. 144 

that had indicated interest in a multinational 
enrichment project were notified of the willingness 
of the United States to enter into 
exploratory discussions with a view to possible 
arrangements for making available gaseous 
diffusion technology and know-how for one or 
more multinational projects, subject to 
appropriate safeguards. 

56. Finally, on the subject of reactors, he 
wished to mention the proposed nuclear 
energy centre in Puerto Rico, for which a 
feasibility study had been completed. The 
centre would be an integrated complex 
incorporating a 540-MW(e) nuclear power 
station, a 20-million-gallon-per-day desalting 
plant and various chemical and other industrial 
plants consuming large amounts of energy. The 
study had concluded that a nuclear energy 
centre would be economically attractive for 
Puerto Rico, and also that there could be a 
shift in the agricultural system from the 
present emphasis on sugar-cane to increased 
production of fruit and vegetables, thus 
eliminating the need to import a portion of the 
island's food and providing income from exports. 
57. Commenting on the "environmental era" 
that had been entered within the past two years 
in its relation to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, he felt it unfortunate that often those 
people who were so rightly concerned about the 
environment believed that an energy-intensive 
society such as now existed in the advanced 
nations must inevitably be "self-destructive". 
Those who believed it would be possible to 
reduce the total energy consumption and return 
to a "more natural" way of life, failed to take 
into account, first, the increase in future 
populations, even if population control efforts 
were successful; second, that the energy 
demands of the population would increase as 
the standard of living inevitably increased; and, 
third, that energy-intensive industries 
involving recycle plants and the production of 
synthetics were the key to saving the environment, 
rather than destroying it. 
58. Those countries in the nuclear energy 
community were probably justified in thinking 
of themselves as pragmatic environmentalists, 
in that they were developing a source of energy 
that could be the least harmful to the environment 
from a power generation standpoint, 
while providing the increased power that would 
be needed for a wide variety of industries and 
facilities, including pollution abatement. In 
addition, the questions of nuclear power's 
safety and its environmental aspects, that were 
so much on people's minds, were being 
effectively dealt with, although perhaps that 
aspect of the matter was not sufficiently 
well known. 

59. It was in that area of public information 
that there would most likely be an increased 
contribution by the Agency. An expanded 
layman's version of the Agency's booklet 
"Nuclear Energy and the Environment" was in 
preparation with a view to presenting a 
balanced, factual discussion of the problems 
most often raised by environmentalists. The 
international authority of the Agency was a 
valuable asset in providing additional 
information which the public could regard as 
unbiased. The Agency was developing plans 
to serve as a central repository for data on 
the amounts and concentrations of radioactivity 
released to the environment in 
connection with civilian uses of nuclear energy, 
which was very gratifying to see. 

60. In conclusion, he wished to make a few 
predictions regarding nuclear power and the 
environment in the United States. By the year 
2000, it was planned to generate about 1000 
million kilowatts of electricity from about 1000 
nuclear power reactors, carrying about half 
the nation's power load. A significant fraction 
of those nuclear facilities would be powered by 
fast-breeder reactors, and a number of those 
would have been in operation long enough to 
produce sufficient new fuel to refuel themselves 
and an equal number of other reactors. 
61. The annual average whole-body radiation 
exposure to the population of the United States 
due to the release of radioactivity into the 
environment from the normal operation of all 
nuclear power plants in the year 2000 would be 
equivalent to less than 1% of the radiation 
exposure to the population from natural background 
radiation. Furthermore, the plants 
emitting that negligible radiation would be 
indirectly responsible for a reduction of 
billions of tons of carbon dioxide, millions of 
tons of sulphur dioxide and large quantities of 
nitrogen oxides and particulate matter that 
could be expected each year from fossil-fuelled 
plants, even those with pollution controls, if 
one continued to rely on such plants for most of 
the electricity in the United States. 
62. Long before the year 2000, the high-level 
waste produced in fuel reprocessing would be 
routinely converted into solids and buried or 
stored where it could not reach the biosphere. 
The nuclear plants would be sited and equipped 
to avoid producing harmful thermal effects and 
much of their waste heat would be put to beneficial 
uses. Finally, the nuclear industry would 
continue to rank high among the safest 
industires in the country. 
63. In addition, he wished to make a 
prediction of even greater significance than 
those concerning the quantity of power and the 
quality of the environment. In view of the 
greatly accelerated rate of change taking place, 
not only in scientific and technological development, 
but in the social sciences as well, in 
another 30 years one should have learned to 
apply the increased power far more wisely and 
in far-sighted ways that would support the just 
needs of all the people, who would have learned 
to live in closer harmony with their environment. 
Man would have made great progress 
in learning to live with his modern techno


10 



GC(XV)/OR.144 


logical capacity and, with its wise application, 
to live up to his responsibilities as a human 
being. 

64. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) said that the 
Agency could look back with satisfaction on a 
fruitful year, highlighted by the Fourth Geneva 
Conference and the conclusion of the work of 
the Board on the structure and content of 
agreements between the Agency and parties to 
NPT. 
65. He had no doubt that the Fourth Geneva 
Conference, directed as it was at public 
leaders, economists and planners, would 
contribute largely to the full utilization of the 
benefits of nuclear energy in all developing 
countries. The Agency was to be commended 
for its efforts in helping to make that 
conference an outstanding contribution to 
nuclear progress. However, it was highly 
unlikely that in future it would either be 
desirable or necessary to convene those 
conferences on such a mammoth scale. 
66. There could be no doubt that an effective 
and acceptable safeguards system would 
facilitate the international exchange of nuclear 
materials, equipment and information and would 
thus further the advancement of developing 
countries. The previous year he had expressed 
his country's satisfaction at the establishment 
of the Board's safeguards committee and the 
co-operative spirit displayed in its initial 
assignment. [8] Whilst reservations were held 
on certain important recommendations of the 
committee, it was generally agreed that a 
commendable compromise had been achieved largely 
thanks to the efforts of the regular 
chairman, Academician Straub. The goodwill 
and sense of responsibility shown in the 
committee were an all too rare phenomenon in 
international organizations and provided an 
inspiring example of how a topic of considerable 
political delicacy and controversy should be 
handled. 
67. A stage had now been reached where 
guidelines for the conclusion of safeguards 
agreements in connection with NPT had been 
approved and the first such agreements, 
involving Austria, Finland and Uruguay, had 
already been concluded. 
68. The question still remained, however, 
whether the Agency should apply to a group of 
States the same set of controls it applied to a 
single State, and it might be necessary to 
reconvene the safeguards committee in that 
connection. 
69. On the financing of safeguards his 
country still felt that the Agency should not 
have to bear safeguards costs in nuclearweapon 
States except to the extent and for the 
limited period required to enable its 
inspectorate to acquire suitable expertise. 
[8] GC(XIV)/OR. 136, para. 37. 
The Board had authorized the Director General 
to start negotiations with the the United 
Kingdom and the United States on that issue. 

70. The South African delegation considered 
that the proposed change in the scale of 
assessments to finance Agency safeguards 
activities was contrary to the spirit of the 
relevant statutory provisions. That was a 
complex issue and he would merely state that 
in view of the widespread agreement on a 
delicately negotiated assessments formula 
South Africa would not oppose the proposal but 
would have to abstain. 
71. In spite of the achievements of the past 
year there was concern in South Africa and 
many other countries over the increasing 
imbalance between the funds allocated to the 
payment of salaries and associated personnel 
costs and the amount expended on direct 
programme activities. A wage and salary 
freeze was impossible under current inflation 
and thus economies might best be achieved 
by freezing the total number of posts in the 
establishment under the 1972 budget, leaving 
it to the Director General to reallocate posts 
where necessary. 
72. His delegation was sceptical about the 
feasibility of augmenting the General Fund 
by increasing the contributions target in 
successive years but noted that there was a 
gentleman's agreement that there would be no 
further increase until 1974 at the earliest. 
Therefore his Government would continue the 
tradition, jointly initiated by South Africa and 
Brazil, of contributing to the General Fund 
on the basis of its percentage contribution to 
the Regular Budget. But it might have to review 
the matter in 1972 if a number of other 
States, financially in a position to do so, failed 
to contribute to the General Fund on the basis 
of their assessed percentage. His country was 
ever prepared to consider providing finance 
or experts for further technical assistance 
projects in the region of Africa and the Middle 
East which had been considered sound by the 
Agency's Secretariat but for which funds were 
lacking. 

73. Turning to marine disposal of radioactive 
waste, he emphasized the increasingly vital 
importance of the problem to countries concerned 
in nuclear power generation. Situated at the 
conflux of two great oceans often polluted by oil 
tankers rounding the Cape of Good Hope, South 
Africa was particularly interested in an early 
solution to the problem of marine disposal of 
radioactive waste. Moreover, South Africa's 
first nuclear power station (the 500-MW 
"Koeberg" Station) was to be built on the 
southernmost tip of the African continent at 
Duynefontein north of Cape Town and would be 
commissioned in 1978. 
74. There were two basic schools of thought 
on marine disposal which were not entirely 
irreconcilable, but if the Agency procrastinated, 
- 11 



GC(XV)/OR. 144 


some other international organization might 
assume responsibility. He hoped that there 
would be a full-scale discussion of that subject 
at the next meeting of the Board, since it had 
failed to discuss it in June as planned. In the 
meantime he was pleased to note the progress 
reported by the Director General in his statement. 

75. A further important question was that of 
uranium supplies. With the increase in demand 
for nuclear power, it was encouraging that new 
deposits were being discovered in various parts 
of the world and he was happy to say that in 
South Africa, too, "reasonably assured" 
reserves, recoverable at a cost of up to $10 
per lb, had risen from 200 000 to 300 000 tons 
as a result of new discoveries and improved 
extraction efficiencies. However, those areas 
where little or no exploration had been done 
should be prospected and the Agency could play 
a useful role in that field, particularly in the 
case of developing countries with favourable 
geological conditions. 
76. The Agency had established itself as one 
of the most effective channels of international 
co-operation, serving to ensure that the 
benefits of nuclear energy were widely shared, 
especially by developing countries, and his 
delegation had no doubt that the Agency was 
well equipped to fulfil its future role with 
distinction. 
77. Mr. SCOTT (Jamaica) said that the Board 
and its safeguards committee was to be 
congratulated on the work it had done in 
preparing ground rules on the structure and 
content of agreements between the Agency and 
States in connection with NPT, His delegation 
welcomed the fact that those who had worked 
out those rules seemed to have appreciated that 
the developing countries would for some time to 
come require preferential treatment in the 
various aspects of financing safeguards. 
78. Nuclear energy, so it was being said, 
had come of age, and he would venture to 
suggest that the Agency had also come of age. 
The Agency had shown its maturity by the 
comprehensive range of services and 
assistance it now offered in research, education 
and training, and in the compilation and 
dissemination of nuclear information. 
79. The Fourth Geneva Conference had 
further demonstrated the viability of the use of 
the atom in agriculture and industry. However, 
despite the emphasis which had been placed on 
the development of nuclear electric power at 
that conference, available statistics on the use 
of such power in the developing countries were 
not encouraging. At the end of 1970 developing 
countries had accounted for only 0. 3% of the 
total electricity generated by the atom. 
Projections for 1975 and 1980 showed only 
modest improvements of 1. 4% and 7% 
respectively, those percentages being on the 
optimistic side. For the foreseeable future it 
would seem that that source of energy would 
remain in the service of developed countries 
only. 

80. It was therefore necessary to ask the 
following questions: firstly, what factors 
contributed to the continuing lack of 
comprehension and awareness of the wider use 
of atomic energy in developing countries; 
secondly, what could be done to ensure that 
the scarce resources of developing countries 
were not wasted on an inappropriate 
technology; thirdly, what could be done to 
quicken the pace of the application of nuclear 
energy in developing countries' 
81. Concerning the lack of general 
comprehension and awareness, it seemed to 
his delegation that public officials, economists, 
planners, and technologists in the developing 
countries still did not have the tools which 
would enable those countries to participate to 
the full in the benefits which nuclear power 
could bring. The introduction of nuclear 
power involved considerable investment in 
education, machinery and new institutions, an 
investment which would have to be made in 
addition to the large sums needed to improve 
traditional technologies. A study made by the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development had found that even without 
recourse to nuclear plants, developing 
countries would have to find some US $85 000 
million for their power development in the 
1970s. Going nuclear would add an extra 
$4500 million to the bill. A point of 
equally great importance was that two thirds 
of the additional expenditure resulting from 
adopting the nuclear alternative would have to 
be paid in foreign exchange. 
82. The seeming lack of interest in nuclear 
power could also derive from a feeling that its 
application was still inappropriate in the 
developing countries. Under the International 
Development Strategy for the Second United 
Nations Development Decade, developed 
countries were committed to assist developing 
nations in identifying technologies which were 
appropriate to their needs, and to assist in 
avoiding the expenditure of scarce resources 
on unsuitable technologies. In the World Plan 
of Action for the Application of Science and 
Technology to Development, [9] developed 
countries were likewise urged to devote a 
considerable amount of their research and 
development expenditure in their own countries 
to technologies suitable for adoption in 
developing States. The developing countries 
themselves were committed to devote a minimum 
average expenditure on research and 
development equivalent to one half per cent 
of the gross national product. 
83. A recent review paper produced by the 
Agency's Secretariat, [10] referring to the 
[9 ] See United Nations documents E/4962 and 
Corr. 1 (vol. I) and E/4962/Add. 1 (vol. II). 
[10] GC(XV)/458, Annex. 
12 



GC(XV)/OR. 144 


increase in the size of nuclear power plants, 
pointed out that smaller and less industrialized 
countries, which usually paid higher prices for 
imported fuel and had smaller electrical grids, 
were unable to absorb large nuclear units and 
faced a difficult situation in that respect. 
There were other indications also that the 
nuclear industry would only be viable if it could 
benefit from certain economies of scale. The 
Agency was recognizing the facts of the 
situation by undertaking a technical and cost 

assessment of intermediate-sized nuclear 
power reactors. 

84. While a strict commercial orientation 
might suggest arguments for economies of 
scale, the existence of home-built reactors in 
India and Spain already questioned the truth of 
those arguments. Ways would have to be found 
for industry in developing countries to make a 
contribution to the reduction of costs of nuclear 
plants in the form of local fabrication of 
components and the provision of managerial 
know-how. 
85. That brought him to the question of what 
could be done to quicken the pace of application 
of nuclear power in developing countries. To 
achieve that aim he wished to put forward three 
suggestions. 
86. First, the Agency should prepare a "Manual 
on the Introduction of Nuclear Power in 
Developing Countries". That manual would 
include all the relevant factors in a single publication, 
and would cover technical aspects, 
education and training, legal and institutional 
frameworks, financing, environmental 
considerations and international commitments 
as to safeguards, etc. In preparing the manual, 
the Agency might wish to draw on the 
experience of the few developing countries 
which had or were planning nuclear programmes 
while bearing in mind that the vast majority 
of developing countries would be starting 
practically from scratch in the nuclear power field. 

87. Secondly, developing Members, when 
planning their aid programmes, should take 
the initiative in suggesting the application of 
nuclear power as the preferred long-term 
solution to the problems of the developing 
countries. 
88. Thirdly, the agencies offering multilateral 
assistance and UNDP should direct 
particular attention to the need for the 
developing countries to consider the application 
of nuclear energy in their economies. 
89. He earnestly hoped his suggestion for a 
"Manual on the Introduction of Nuclear Power 
in Developing Countries" would be supported 
by the Conference and that work thereon 
could be accomodated in the Agency's 
programme for 1972. 
90. Ide ANAK AGUNG Gde AGUNG (Indonesia) 
said that his delegation had listened with great 
interest to the statement of the Director 

General. The Agency had clearly succeeded in 

implementing the programme outlined by the 

General Conference at its fourteenth regular 

session. Among the outstanding accomplishments 
of the past year had been the framing of 
material for safeguards agreements in 
connection with NPT, in particular the clauses 
on financing; that marked a considerable step 
towards realizing the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy throughout the world. The long and 
exciting deliberations which had finally yielded 
a general understanding in the Board's 
safeguards committee were still remembered. 
His delegation wished to avail itself of the 
opportunity to congratulate all who had 
participated in those deliberations and had 
accordingly had a hand in bringing about their 

successful issue. The financial arrangement 
was undoubtedly a product of compromise 
between conflicting points of view, but it 
reflected the democratic spirit which had 
informed the deliberations of the committee 
and made manifest the desire of the majority 
to find a solution to an intricate problem which 
had been the subject of discussion for almost a 
year. Indonesia had accepted the compromise 
on the understanding that, at a suitable date 
after 1975, the financial arrangements would 
again be reviewed in the light of the circumstances 
prevailing at that time. 

91. His delegation was fully aware that even 
a provisional agreement could not have been 
reached without a sympathetic understanding 
on the part of advanced nuclear countries for 
the circumstances and needs of the developing 
countries. He accordingly wished to express 
his keen appreciation of the co-operative 
spirit which those countries had displayed, for 
it had done much to make the discussions on 
safeguards financing fruitful. 
92. It was exhilarating to see that the work of 
the committee had already given concrete proof 
of its usefulness in the form of three agreements 
which had been or soon would be concluded 
between the Agency and the Governments of 
Austria, Finland and Uruguay. 
93. Another question which had also demanded 
close attention in the past was the financing of 
nuclear power in developing countries. His 
delegation wished to express its appreciation 
of the work done by the Agency's Secretariat 
in that matter. The Secretariat's analysis 
had shown that nuclear power could, in 
certain conditions, compete very well with 
conventional power in developing countries. 
That was a fact that should be brought to the 
attention of planning agencies, financing 
institutions and suppliers of nuclear power 
equipment. The developing countries had now 
been given a valuable document upon which 
future plans for nuclear power might be based. 
His delegation would continue to support the 
work of the Agency related to the introduction 
of nuclear power in developing countries. It 
welcomed the initiative to study the question 
- 13 



GC(XV}/OR. 144 

of standardization of reactor components and 
would endorse any study the Agency might plan 
in relation to the possibilities of financing 
nuclear power projects. 

94. Technical assistance remained, to 
developing countries, one of the most important 
parts of the Agency's programme. In some 
circles it was being urged that the Agency should 
lay more emphasis on assistance to the least 
developed among the developing nations, so that 
they too could benefit from the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Certainly much time and 
effort would be required, but those efforts 
should be undertaken seriously out of fairness 
to those who at present were not so fortunate 
as to have the means and manpower to 
develop the applications of nuclear energy 
in their countries by themselves. 

95. Indonesia had made good progress in the 
use of nuclear energy with the assistance of the 
Agency. Since 1969 no less than six technical 
assistance projects had been completed. In 
three of them particularly useful results had 
been obtained, namely in radiography, nuclear 
medicine and radioisotope production, and 
activities relating to each of those subjects had 
continued to grow since the departure of the 
Agency's experts. In radiobiology and food 
preservation, research activities had continued 
and progress had been made. A further 
expansion of research activities, particularly 
in food preservation, was anticipated in the 
near future. Indonesia's only paper at the recent 
Fourth Geneva Conference had been concerned 
with food irradiation. 
96. In all those applications of nuclear energy, 
future development would depend primarily on the 
determination of local scientists, their 
capabilities and the means available to them. 
At the same time Indonesia held co-operation 
with other countries, in particular with 
neighbouring countries, to be very important. 
In that spirit it had welcomed the emergence of 
the Association of South East Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) in 1967, in which five countries of 
South East Asia, namely Indonesia, Malaysia, 
the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand, had 
pledged to co-operate closely with each other 
and in particular to strengthen and further 
their economic relations in order to achieve 
progress and development for the people of the 
whole area. Among the objectives of ASEAN, 
close co-operation in the applications of 
nuclear energy should find a prominent place. 
Neighbouring countries would then be able to 
avoid duplication of effort, save money and 
make more effective use not only of locally 
available resources but also of the assistance 
supplied by the Agency. 
97. Indonesia was also pleased to be able to 
participate in several regional co-operation 
schemes, such as the Regional Co-operation 
on Neutron Scattering and the Co-ordinated 
Rice Research Programme. His Government 
would be particularly happy if, in return, 
Indonesia could serve as host to one of the 
regional co-operation projects sponsored by 
the Agency. For that purpose it was prepared 
to organize, in one of its research facilities 
near Djakarta, a Regional Co-operation Centre 
devoted to the preservation of food. The 
possibility had been examined by an Agency 
expert during a visit to the Research Centre in 
February 1971. The Research Centre, 
Indonesia believed, had the necessary equipment 
and staff; its present activities were 
concentrated on radurization of fish and shrimp 
and on dislnfestation of rice. As a second 
priority, work on the eradication of the tobacco 
beetle was also in progress. Preliminary work 
had been done on the inhibition of potato 
sprouting under local conditions, and the 
stimulation of sprouting was at present under 
investigation. Analyses of the nutritional 
value of irradiated food were also being carried 
out. In order to step up the efficiency of the 
work, a cobalt-60 irradiation facility 
(100 000 curies initially), which would be 
more effective, was scheduled to be installed 
in 1972. 

98. It would thus be evident that Indonesia 
was making some progress in the applications 
of nuclear energy, though perhaps not such 
rapid progress as one might wish to see. But 
if political and economic conditions were taken 
into account there seemed no need to be 
pessimistic; on the contrary, Indonesia held 
the best hopes for the future. 
99. In the past three years, Indonesia could 
claim significant achievements in many spheres. 
It had achieved political stability - a prerequisite 
for development - for the first time 
since independence. The most recent general 
elections on 3 July had substantially increased 
that stability; the results could be considered 
as a mandate to the present administration to 
continue its policy of large-scale economic 
development, as outlined in its first five-year 
plan. They had also shown that democracy 
was a living reality in Indonesia. 
100. Indonesia had, furthermore, succeeded 
in eliminating the scourge of inflation in a 
relatively short period of time. It had 
regained the confidence of foreign investors. 
Even its modest nuclear energy programme 
had brought some useful results. Since the 
beginning of 1971 two international meetings 
had been held in Indonesia with the support 
of the Agency, namely a Research 
Co-ordination Meeting on Rice Production, in 
February in Djakarta, and a Study Group 
Meeting on Research Reactor Utilization, in 
August in Bandung. On the national plane, a 
series of draft regulations on the protection 
of radiation workers and on licensing of 
radiation facilities had been drawn up by a 
working group consisting of members of 
Government departments. 
101. All those things had given rise to greater 
hopes for the future. Results could be 
- 14 



GC(XV)/OR. 144 


achieved only through hard work on the part of 
the people of Indonesia, who were conscious of 
the economic development of their country and 
of its importance. They wished to accomplish 
that development in a democratic way, 
maintaining cordial relations with friendly 
countries which understood their needs and 
regarded them as partners in development. 

102. Indonesia had endeavoured to use nuclear 
techniques in a modest way to solve some 
problems related to the economy. The first 
five-year plan was based on agriculture, and 
research work was accordingly being carried 
out which aimed at increasing food production, 
one of its most important problems. It was 
indeed fortunate that the economic policymaking 
bodies of the country now had a better 
understanding of the opportunities afforded by 
nuclear techniques in that sector. A committee 
consisting of officials from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, the National Planning Board, the 
National Atomic Energy Agency and other 
Government agencies had been set up to explore 
the possibilities of using science and 
technology, including nuclear techniques, to 
increase food production. There would of 
course be problems of financing, obtaining 
expert advice, equipment and materials, etc. 
His delegation sincerely hoped that the Agency 
would give its support to Indonesia's earnest 
endeavours. 
103. With regard to the Agency's budget for 
1972, the discussions in the June meetings of 
the Board had confirmed the grave concern 
felt by many Member States concerning their 
financial responsibilities to the Agency. Some 
had stated that they could not be expected to 
increase their contributions every year. On 
the other hand, it was fully realized that an 
increase in contributions to the General Fund 
would be necessary if technical assistance 
activities were to be maintained at the same 
level as in 1963. One solution would be to 
make the use of funds and manpower 
available to the Secretariat more efficient, 
so that there would be an equitable balance 
between expenditures for staff and for 
technical activities; the Agency would then 
have more scope to increase its technical 
assistance activities. At present only 27% 
of the total budget was allocated directly for 
technical activities. He realized that 
Indonesia's proposal to increase the 
efficiency with which funds and manpower 
were used was not new; it had been put 
forward by several Members at previous 
sessions of the General Conference; but now, 
more than ever before, it was a problem that 
merited the fullest consideration of the 
Agency. One could only hope that a Secretariat 
study of the matter would yield results just as 
satisfactory as those that had been obtained in 
the examination of the financing of nuclear 
power in developing countries. 

104. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea), 
describing the main nuclear energy projects 
now under way in Korea, said that the Korea 
Electric Company had been proceeding with the 
construction of a nuclear power plant, the first 
unit in a series of such facilities scheduled for 
construction in the country. Work at the site 
had started in 1970 and preparatory activities 
were moving forward. The Government 
bodies concerned were speeding up safety 

analysis work so that the operator, the Korea 

Electric Company, could be issued the formal 

permit enabling it to implement the project 

according to schedule. The power reactor to 

be installed was of the PWR type with a gross 

generating capacity of 595 MW(e). Construc


tion of the plant was scheduled to be 

completed in 1975. 

105. He wished to express thanks to the 
Agency for its decision to send to Korea a 
mission consisting of four experts to give 
detailed advice on safety analysis procedures 
for determining the reliability and efficiency 
of the-power reactor. It was felt, however, 
that the mission's proposed stay of about 
20 days in Korea was rather short and should 
therefore be extended. 


106. The pulsed 2-MW TRIGA Mark-Ill 
research reactor was nearing completion. The 
building to house it was ready and erection of 
the reactor itself was expected to be 
finished by the end of 1971. He was proud to 
state that the technical knowledge and skill of 
Korean scientists and engineers were being 
utilized to the fullest extent in connection with 
the engineering aspects of the reactor 
installation. 
107. Operation of the Mark-Ill reactor, in 
conjunction with that of the TRIGA Mark-II 
which was now in continuous operation, would 
enable Korea to meet the steadily increasing 
domestic demand for radioisotopes for use in 
industry, agriculture, medicine and other 
fields. At the same time, research activities 
making use of high neutron fluxes would thus 
be greatly expanded. 
108. In an effort to further promote the 
industrial applications of nuclear radiation, his 
Government had in 1970 submitted to UNDP 
headquarters detailed proposals for establishing 
a large radiation processing pilot plant in 
Korea. UNDP had promised to send a mission to 
Korea to look into the various aspects of the 
proposed project. As the Korean Government 
was anxious to carry out the project in as 
short a time as possible, it hoped to be able 
to count on the active support of the Agency. 
Once under way, the project would accelerate 
the development of industry still further. 

109. As regards the regional co-operation 
programme on neutron scattering research, 
proposed as a follow-up to the IPA project 
(joint training and research project between 
India, Philippines and the Agency, using a 
neutron crystal spectrometer), he hoped that 
the Agency would play a more active role in 

- 15 



GC(XV)/OR. 144 


encouraging formal signature of the agreement 
on that programme by the countries concerned 
at the earliest date. The Korean Government 
had already informed the Agency of its 
approval. He wished to emphasize that 
successful implementation of that programme 
would contribute to a spirit of friendship and 
co-operation among the scientists of 
interested countries in Asia and the Far East, 
and especially Korea, Indonesia, Thailand, 
the Philippines and India. 

110. His Government wished to avail itself 
of the opportunity of thanking the Agency for 
the various kinds of assistance it had provided 
thus far under the regular programmes. 
111. As regards the revision of Article VI of 
the Statute, Korea had become the tenth 
Government to deposit, on 11 August 1971, its 
instrument of acceptance with the depositary 
Government. 
• The meeting rose at 12. 55 p.m. 
- 16 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 

International Atomic Energy Agency 26 July 1972* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday, 22 September 1971, at 3. 15 p.m. 


President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 


Item of 
the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
9 General debate and 1-111 
report of the Board of 
Governors for 1970-71 
(continued) 
Statements by the 
delegates of: 
Bulgaria 
Italy 
Federal Republic of 
Germany 
Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics 
United Kingdom 
Belgium 
Finland 
Nigeria 
1 1935 
55 
71 
81 
9518 
34 
53 
54 
70 
80 
94 
110 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 28 September 1971. 
** GC(XV)/469. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 145 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1970-71 
(GC(XV)/455, 466) (continued) 

1. Mr. VASSILEV (Bulgaria) said thai for the 
past 15 years the Agency had been working for the 
development and use of atomic energy for the 
welfare of mankind. The Agency deserved 
universal recognition as an organization which was 
truly competent in matters relating to the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. It had demonstrated its 
ability to solve complex and difficult problems by 
adopting solutions which were acceptable to all. 
2. However, he wished to point out that the 
Agency would gain greatly in universality if it 
were to do everything necessary to bring about 
the admission of all States which desired to join 
and which met its requirements. In particular, 
he had in mind the admission of the German 
Democratic Republic, whose scientific and 
technological development, particularly in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, was completely 
consistent with the goals pursued by the Agency. 
Moreover, the German Democratic Republic was 
an equal party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [1] and as early 
as in February 1971 it had indicated to the Agency 
that it was ready to start negotiations regarding 
the application of the safeguards provided for in 
that Treaty. The admission of the German 
Democratic Republic to membership of the Agency 
would be a genuine reflection of the political 
situation in Europe and in the world. 
3. The past year had been characterized by the 
efforts of the Agency to carry out within the 
appointed time the tasks imposed upon it by NPT. 
Its efforts in that direction had met with success 
and one basic document - a model agreement 
between the Agency and non-nuclear-weapon 
States party to NPT - had already been submitted 
to the States concerned. The People's Republic 
of Bulgaria, which had been one of the first 
signatories of NPT, was doing everything in its 
power to place its nuclear activities under Agency 
safeguards within the time limit imposed by the 
Treaty. His delegation expressed the hope that 
other European States and States in other 
continents would lose no time in confirming their 
signature through ratification of NPT. Such 
action would represent a true contribution to the 
efforts of nations to consolidate peace in Europe 
and the world. 
4. The Bulgarian delegation wished to take the 
present opportunity to thank the members of the 
Board's safeguards committee for their efforts in 
drafting its final document. By overcoming 
disagreements in a spirit of realistic co-operation, 
the committee had succeeded in producing a 
document acceptable to all. The committee's 
work could also serve as a model for other 
[1 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
collective bodies trying to find solutions to 
disarmament problems. 

5. His delegation had studied with interest the 
various aspects of the Agency's activity as 
reflected in the Board's report for the past 
year [2] and was convinced that the Agency was 
making consistent efforts to promote the use of 
atomic energy for the good of mankind. 
6. The main activity of the Agency was, and 
would continue to be in the years ahead, the 
provision of technical assistance to developing 
countries. He wished to emphasize the 
importance which his Government attributed to 
the Agency's activity in technical assistance 
matters. Its opinion of the manner in which the 
Agency made use of the contributions to the 
General Fund was, on the whole, favourable. 
However, the Bulgarian Government could not 
agree with the provision of technical assistance to 
countries for which such aid indirectly facilitated 
their engaging in non-peaceful activities. 
7. More than half of the funds allocated for 
technical assistance were used for experts. 
Although it did not seek to minimize the 
services performed by experts, his delegation 
raised the question whether the Agency should not 
consider some means of better equalizing the 
amounts spent on experts and those available for 
the material requirements of a project. 
8. It was to be noted that during the past two 
years technical assistance requests related mainly 
to agricultural matters, and in that domain the 
irradiation of foodstuffs was assuming an 
increasingly important position. In that 
connection, agricultural science in Bulgaria had 
achieved definite advances. In the case of certain 
crops, the use of radiation had resulted in highly 
productive forms with an increased - from 3 to 
6% - protein content. Definitely favourable 
results had also been achieved in the programme 
of seed irradiation for the purpose of stimulating 
plant growth. Bulgaria was also taking part in 
the Agency's seed stimulation programme and was 
doing everything in its power to ensure the 
successful completion of the project. 

9. As an important producer of agricultural 
products, his country had an interest in the 
implementation of the Agency's programme for 
the irradiation of foodstuffs and it was ready to 
participate in its implementation to the best of 
its abilities. 
10. He also wished to mention the very useful 
activity of the Agency in information matters, and 
especially the establishment and operation of the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
For the past few months his country had been 
making its contribution to INIS output, submitting 
appropriate information in the form of worksheets. 
It would be useful if countries which for some 
reason had not sent their representatives to the 
[2 ] GC(XV)/455. 
-2 



INIS training seminars organized by the Agencycould 
be afforded an opportunity to obtain practical 
training by being able to send them to work on 
INIS for a period of three or four weeks. 

11. On the subject of INIS, his delegation did 
not consider it appropriate to include in the 
agenda of the forthcoming meeting of the INIS 
Advisory Committee the question of supplying 
INIS output to private undertakings. Such a step 
could only do harm to the system and would be 
extremely unfavourable to the developing 
countries from the financial point of view. 
12. Another item on the agenda for the 
Conference's current session was the question of 
financing the construction of nuclear reactors. In 
his opinion, power was the basic problem in the 
further development of any State, and hence the 
important and significant role that could be played 
by nuclear reactors as sources of electric power. 
However, the date when reactor construction 
could be started, the type of reactor to be built 
and its capacity, were matters which could only 
be determined in the light of a number of factors, 
e. g. the size of the conventional energy sources 
already available, the energy balance, general 
economic conditions and so on. 
13. His country, which was successfully 
carrying out socialist construction, was 
experiencing a constant need for new power 
capacity. At the end of 1944 the total capacity of 
electric power stations in Bulgaria had amounted 
to 103 MW(e) or a total of 45 kWh per head of 
population; at the end of 1970 their total capacity 
had grown to 4073 MW(e), or 2212 kWh. The 
forecast for 1980 was 6400 kWh and for the year 
2000, 18 000 kWh per head of population. Such a 
rapid growth in the need for electric power had 
made necessary a careful study of the country's 
resources of conventional raw materials (coal, 
gas, oil) and also of the use of water resources. 
The study had led to the adoption of a decision to 
proceed immediately with the construction of the 
country's first nuclear power station, "Kozlodui", 
a water-moderated, water-cooled power reactor 
which would have an initial capacity of 880 MW(e), 
and later of 1760 MW(e). Plans for future 
development provided for the construction of 
additional large-scale nuclear power stations. 
14. Construction of the nuclear station was being 
carried out under a bilateral agreement with the 
Soviet Union: the first of the two reactors was 
expected to go into operation in 1974 and the 
second in 1975. The reactor was being built by 
Bulgarian specialists who were receiving advice 
from Soviet experts. 
15. The bulk of the equipment would be supplied 
by the Soviet Union, and part of the auxiliary 
equipment was to be constructed in Bulgaria. 
16. In connection with the steadily increasing 
construction of nuclear power stations throughout 
the world, he believed that the Agency should 
issue a special brochure or take some other step 
which would help dissipate unwarranted fears 
GC(XV)/OR. 145 


concerning the hazards of radioactive contamination 
of the environment, 

17. His delegation felt concern over the steadily 
increasing size of the budget. It was foreseen 
that expenditures would increase by 19% in 1972, 
a rate which was too high to be acceptable, the 
more so since two thirds of it would be going to 
meet increased salary costs. Such an increase in 
salaries seemed premature, since changes were 
being planned in the system of staff emoluments 
applied by organizations in the United Nations 
family. 
18. In conclusion he wished to state that the 
Bulgarian Government would continue supporting 
the Agency's activities in the direction of wider 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
19. Mr. PEDINI (Italy) said that the fifteenth 
regular session of the General Conference clearly 
reflected the fact that the objectives laid down in 
the Agency's Statute were gaining ever greater 
topical significance and represented the 
fundamental aims which all countries sought to 
attain in order to deal with the problems typical 
of modern society. Those objectives summed up 
the requirements of international collaboration in 
the peaceful uses of the atom, particularly in view 
of the progressive application of nuclear 
technology in the industrial and economic sectors 
of Member States and the growing need for power. 
20. The steps taken by the Agency during the 
past year therefore deserved the greatest 
attention in view of their far-reaching implications. 
21. The Fourth International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy (Fourth Geneva 
Conference) had recently confirmed the growing 
role that the atom was called upon to play at the 
present time in power production. The rising cost 
of conventional fuel and the difficulties faced in 
ensuring normal supplies on a long-term basis, 
chiefly because of the increased power demand, 
were a clear indication that nuclear power offered 
the greatest advantages and gave the greatest 
promise in that sector of the economy. 
22. In Italy, the generation of electricity of 
nuclear origin had for some time been at the stage 
of industrial exploitation. The three nuclear 
power plants currently in service - Latina, 
Garigliano and Trino Vercellese (with a total 
capacity of 622 MW(e)) - had generated a total of 
22 441 million kWh between the time they had been 
put into operation and 30 April 1971. That figure 
put Italy fourth on the world list of countries 
producing nuclear electric power. The fourth 
power station, with an 800-MW(e) capacity, had 
already been built by Ente Nazionale per l'Energia 
Elettrica: it was to be put into service in 1975 and 
would double the present output of electricity of 
nuclear origin. 
23. The Agency's activities during the past year, 
particularly those related to the environment, 
were of very special interest in that the 
disadvantages of nuclear power in terms of 
-3 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 

environmental pollution had proved to be less than 
those of other technologies and industrial 
processes. Nevertheless, the public still showed 
undue concern for the hazards inherent in nuclear 
techniques. That was the reason why the Agency's 
activities, both in regard to public information and 
the regulation and control of radioactive material, 
were making a very valuable contribution to the 
increasing use of nuclear technology. 

24. Italy had always shown the greatest interest 
in the Agency's work in the areas of food 
production, agriculture and radioactivity, to which 
it had contributed for several years in the form of 
numerous cost-free research contracts with the 
national laboratories concerned. A case in point 
was participation by the Italian Nuclear Energy 
Commission (CNJEN) in the programme of tests 
on the wholesomeness of irradiated foodstuffs, 
jointly conducted by the Agency and the 
European Nuclear Energy Agency (ENEA). Italy 
intended to continue with and further intensify 
collaboration of that kind so that the Agency's 
programmes in key areas could be successfully 
put into operation. 
25. The Italian Government was gratified to see 
the progress made by INIS during its second year 
of activity and the steadily increasing collaboration 
between the Agency and the main international 
bodies of relevance, namely, the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
and the European Nuclear Energy Agency. 
26. As part of the collaboration between Italy 
and the Agency, CNEN would place at the Agency's 
disposal, for 1972, 20 fellowships, corresponding 
to 1 60 months of training, to be used for the 
benefit of students and experts from the developing 
countries. 
27. The Italian Government had, furthermore, 
followed with great interest the activities of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste. The Centre had operated on a very 
satisfactory basis thanks to the considerable 
investments and the contributions made by Italy, 
both at national and regional level, as well as the 
support provided by the Agency and UNESCO. By 
its very nature the Centre was to be numbered 
among the great research establishments of the 
present day; and, at the same time, it could meet 
the teaching requirements of young specialists 
from the developing countries. 
28. Unanimous international recognition of the 
Centre was evidence that it had not only been 
successful, but was also regarded as an example 
that should be followed. 
29. During the previous session of the Conference 
it had proved possible to meet the long-held 
wishes of an ever-growing number of Member 
States for amendment of Article VI of the Statute; 
that amendment [3 ] had been adopted by a large 
[3 ] Set forth in Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272. 
majority and would ensure more representative 
participation by the developing Members in the 
Agency's executive body - the Board of Governors, 
and a more appropriate status for the Members 
further advanced in the utilization of nuclear energy. 

30. The fifteenth session provided an 
opportunity for stressing once again the 
importance of that amendment, which could indeed 
by expected to provide a new impetus for the 
Agency's activities associated with its added 
responsibilities resulting from the coming into 
force of NPT. His Government was convinced that 
the session would help to speed up the process of 
ratification of the amendment. 
31. As part of the new responsibilities incumbent 
upon the Agency through the entry into force of 
NPT, the Board's safeguards committee had 
drafted a document that would serve as a basis 
for agreements between the Agency and Member 
States, or groups of States, pursuant to 
Article III of NPT. 
32. The Italian Government had actively 
assisted with the work of the safeguards committee 
and was gratified by the results achieved; he 
nevertheless wished to restate the reservations 
which his delegation had expressed there and in 
the Board on the matter of the latter's powers in 
settling disputes between a signatory State and 
the Agency over the implementation and 
interpretation of safeguards agreements. The 
Board's powers, though necessary, should not be 
a substitute for an impartial tribunal in settling 
such differences. 
33. Taken as a whole, the model agreement 
would still be of benefit for the negotiations in the 
not-too-distant future for the conclusion of a 
verification agreement between EURATOM and 
the Agency. In that connection he wished to state 
on behalf of the other Member States of EURATOM 
that the Council of Ministers of the European 
Communities, which had met in Brussels on 
20 September 1971, had unanimously given 
EURATOM a mandate to enter into negotiations 
with the Agency for the conclusion of a verification 
agreement with EURATOM. There was no doubt 
that such negotiations would constitute an 
important step towards increasing the number of 
States party to NPT, which had to be as universal 
as possible if it was to attain its aim. 
34. He therefore hoped that the future activities 
of the Agency, to which his country wished to 
make an active contribution, would bring about 
mutual understanding and co-operation between 
countries in the vital field of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
35. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) said that the main achievement of the 
Agency since the Conference's preceding 
session was the completion of the work of the 
Board's safeguards committee. It had prepared 
important procedures which would enable the 
Agency to carry out verifications in the interest 
of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons without 
-4 



unduly interfering with nuclear research and 
industry and without placing excessive financial 
burdens on Governments. Expressing the hope 
that the practical implementation of those 
procedures would prove to be a success, he 

stressed the need to continue the development by 
the Agency of safeguards techniques. Progress 
in that field would not only contribute to the 
efficiency of safeguards measures but would also 
reduce costs. His Government was willing to 

continue its active participation in the further 

development of those techniques. 

36. Indicating his Government's approval of the 
financial arrangements worked out by the safeguards 
committee which were now before the 
General Conference, he pointed out that his 
Government had supported them at the safeguards 
committee mainly in order to enable the latter to 
complete its work successfully. The solution 
reached was not an ideal one, even though it was 
agreed that those arrangements could not be 
considered as a precedent for any other financial 
arrangement within or outside the Agency. 
37. His Government welcomed the fact that the 
committee had also taken note of the offers made 
by the United Kingdom and the United States 
voluntarily to accept safeguards concerning their 
civilian nuclear energy activities and that the 
Board had requested the Director General to enter 
into consultations on the content of safeguards 
agreements with those two Governments. His 
Government attached great importance, for 
ensuring equal opportunities in the economic and 
scientific fields, to the fulfilment of the 
assurance given by the United States and the 
United Kingdom regarding the application of 
safeguards to their peaceful nuclear activities. 
He expressed the hope that other nuclear-weapon 
States would give similar assurances. The 
successful outcome of the Director General's 
consultations with those countries would certainly 
facilitate the ratification of NPT. 

38. His Government had contributed to an early 
start of negotiations between EURATOM and the 
Agency, which EURATOM had now been authorized 
to conduct. He hoped that would encourage other 
States to do so at an early date. 
39. As in the past years, he attached great 
importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, comparable with that attached to 
safeguards. The strategy for the Second 
Development Decade decided upon by the 
United Nations the preceding year and the new 
system of operation of the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), according to 
which major decisions on priority measures were 
to be taken by the countries concerned, would 
have repercussions on the Agency's activities. 
The Federal Republic of Germany had worked out 
a concept for development aid in the Second 
Development Decade comprising both bilateral 
assistance and co-operation within multilateral 
organizations. 
40. The Agency had gained considerable 
experience in the supply of technical know-how 
GC(XV)/OR. 145 

and material assistance, despite its limited funds. 
His Government was, therefore, in favour of 
increasing the General Fund from $2. 5 million to 

$3 million [4] and willing to raise its contribution 
to it, although it considered that the increase of 

17, 9% in the assessment of contributions to the 
Regular Budget [5] was unusually high. 

41. It was also increasing its non-financial 
contributions to the Agency. In the preceding year 
it had accepted 44 Agency fellows and the 
services of 13 German experts had been made 
available to the Agency for assignment in 
Member States. In 1972, too, it would offer an 
initially unlimited number of fellowships in all 
sectors of nuclear research and development. In 
addition, numerous German experts would again be 
available for assignment. A training reactor given 
by the Federal Republic of Germany had been 
installed some weeks ago at the University of 
Rosario in Argentina with the Agency's assistance. 
Mexico would receive a reactor of the same type 
the following year. In 1972, a gamma irradiation 
plant for use in a comprehensive programme to 
control harmful insects would be made available 
to the atomic energy authority of Peru. 

42. Mention should also be made of the joint 
programme of the Agency, FAO and the Federal 
Republic of Germany for co-ordinated research to 
improve the protein content and quality of crops 
by nuclear techniques. In May 1971, an agreement 
had been concluded between the Agency and the 
Gesellschaft fur Strahlen- und Umweltforschung 
(Radiation and Environmental Research Corporation) 
at Munich, under which grants of more than 
$800 000 would be given over a period of 
five years to be used for research activities in a 
large number of institutes, particularly in several 
Asian countries. In addition to that sum, his 
Government had made available to the Agency, 
for that programme, equipment worth more than 
$50 000 which was being used in the Agency's 
Laboratory at Seibersdorf. Lastly, his 
Government contributed to the international food 
irradiation project carried out by the Agency, 
FAO and ENEA. 
43. Co-operation agreements between 
laboratories in less advanced countries and those 
in industrialized ones constituted another method 
of promoting the development of nuclear energy. 
He was pleased to note that the Agency had 
increased its efforts to bring about such "sister 
laboratory arrangements". Mention should be 
made of the proposed co-operation of Heidelberg 
University with the Teheran Centre for Research 
and the Ile-Ife University in Nigeria in the use of 
isotopes in hydrology and of the cost-free 
participation of about fifteen German institutes in 
co-ordinated research programmes of the Agency. 
44. The Agency was playing a useful role in 
bringing together scientists from different 
countries. In 1970, more than 400 German 
[4] See document GC(XV)/460, para. I. 11. 
[5 ] Ibid. , para. I. 7. 
-5 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 


experts had taken part in the Agency's symposia 
and presented some 100 papers. Another 
150 German experts had participated in panel and 
working group meetings. In the current year, 
three major scientific conferences had been held 
in his country under the aegis of the Agency. 

45. In the Federal Republic of Germany, nuclear 
technology after 16 years of development and 
active public promotion had become a part of 
industrial engineering and production. In 1971, 
light-water reactors had enjoyed the greatest 
development: nuclear power stations with a total 
capacity of 5000 MW(e) were in operation or under 
construction and plants with a capacity of 
5000 MW(e) had been ordered. Thus, in 1977 at 
least 15% of the installed electrical capacity and 
more than 20% of the electricity produced would be 
of nuclear origin. 
46. The structure of industry was also changing. 
Now only a few large companies were engaged in 
the nuclear energy business. Leading European 
firms had recently agreed to co-operate closely 
in several sectors of nuclear energy. 
47. The promotional activities of the Federal 
Government were directed mainly to the development 
of advanced reactors, i. e, fast breeders 
and high-temperature reactors, to the supply of 
natural uranium, the enrichment of uranium and 
development of the other fuel cycle services. 
48. It attached particular importance to the 
problems of reactor safety and environmental 
protection and stressed the need for more 
intensive international co-operation in that field. 
49. 
All development activities in his country, 
e.g. the breeder reactor project and the uranium 
centrifuge development, were integrated into a 
comprehensive system of international cooperation, 
in particular with the neighbouring 
European countries. 
50. On the basis of the increasing experience 
available in his country, efforts were being made 
to intensify the transfer of know-how to 
developing countries and thus to contribute to the 
introduction of nuclear energy in those countries. 
An important part was played by the German 
nuclear research centres, which had international 
bureaux responsible for rendering assistance to 
other countries on a partnership basis. 
51. The Fourth Geneva Conference had shown 
that, although important advances had been made 
in nuclear science and technology, those had been 
achieved mainly in the industrialized countries. 
A number of obstacles had still to be overcome 
before nuclear energy could be introduced in 
developing countries, which really needed it. The 
Agency was particularly suited to help in removing 
those obstacles, for example, in the matters of 
standardization of safety requirements in international 
bids for nuclear power plants and the 
introduction of standards for the fabrication of 
components. Those measures would facilitate 
international co-operation in the construction of 
small and medium-sized nuclear power plants and 
reduce their costs. So far as his country was 
concerned, it intended to devote a special part of 
the fourth German atomic energy programme, 
which was to begin in 1973, to the promotion of 
nuclear techniques of particular interest to 
developing countries. 

52. Drawing attention to the protection of the 
environment, he considered that the Agency 
should continue actively to promote protective 
measures. Nuclear energy offered a safe 
alternative to certain non-nuclear processes of 
energy production which might be harmful to the 
environment and the public should be made aware 
of that fact. 
53. Referring to the amendment of Article VI 
of the Statute, he stressed that it was a necessary 
measure which would enable the Agency to 
continue its successful work in future. He urged 
the Member States which had not ratified it to do 
so at an early date so that it could enter into 
force before the next session of the General 
Conference. 
54. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) made the following statement*: 
(1) 
"Mr. President, distinguished delegates: 
allow me, Mr. President, first of all to 
congratulate you on your election to this 
high office. The Soviet delegation is 
confident that your work as President will 
contribute to the success of the fifteenth 
session of the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency. 
(2) 
"The Agency's General Conference is now 
meeting for the fifteenth time in its annual 
regular session. Fifteen years is a fair 
span in the life of any international 
organization, so we should now be able to 
see more clearly than in past years what 
the Agency's successes have been and what 
its shortcomings. 
(3) 
"I think one can say without fear of 
exaggeration that the Agency has done a great 
deal of useful work in promoting international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The Agency's Statute says that it 
'shall seek to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world1. 
This important goal should continue to be 
treated as paramount in the Agency's 
activities, indeed in any new undertaking 
which it pursues. 
(4) 
"In the past few years large changes have 
been wrought in the life of the Agency by 
the new duties which it has assumed under 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
* This translation of a statement made in 
Russian is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's 
request under Rule 92(b) of the Conference's 
Rules of Procedure, 
-6 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 

Nuclear Weapons. Let me say that these 

new functions are perfectly in harmony with 

that main goal of the Agency which I have 

already mentioned. They are playing an 

ever larger role in the day-to-day work of 

the organization, and in point of fact they 

have given the Agency renewed life. The 

control functions which the Agency will be 

called upon to discharge under the Non-

Proliferation Treaty have already increased 

its weight and authority as an international 

organization. In future that authority will 

continue to grow, will be further secured, 

in the measure that the control functions 

foreseen in the Treaty are carried out. 

(5) 
"In our view this activity of the Agency is 
also perfectly in line with the main task of 
the modern world - the task of securing 
peace, guaranteeing international security 
and enlarging co-operation among peoples. 
In the peace programme recently put forward 
by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union -a 
programme which is being rigorously 
implemented by the Soviet Government - the 
most important place is devoted to avoiding 
the danger of nuclear war, to prohibiting 
and eliminating nuclear armaments; and of 
the many problems that exist in this regard, 
that of preventing the proliferation of 
nuclear armaments is by no means the least. 
In his report to the Twenty-Fourth Congress, 
the General Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, 
L.I. Brezhnev, assessed in favourable 
terms the Non-Proliferation Treaty which 
entered into force in 1970, emphasizing that 
although not all States had yet become party 
to the Treaty, it nevertheless, to some 
extent, diminished the danger of nuclear 
war. 
(6) 
"We note with satisfaction that our aim of 
strengthening the provisions of this Treaty 
and putting them into effect as soon as 
possible is an aim shared in the IAEA; that 
much is apparent at this session of the 
General Conference. It is surely no 
accident that both the statement of the 
Director General and those of delegations 
have raised questions related to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty in one form or another. 
(7) 
"We also fully share the positive assessment 
of the work done by the Board and the 
Safeguards Committee (1970) in this 
important area, an assessment which 
Dr. Eklund made in his statement and which 
is contained in the Agency's report to the 
United Nations General Assembly. In the 
year that has elapsed since the last session 
of the General Conference, we have seen 
the completion of a draft model agreement 
on the safeguards to be applied pursuant to 
Article III of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. 
(8) 
"The Soviet delegation would like to 
emphasize once more that the draft model 
agreement evolved by the safeguards 

committee and approved by the Board does 

in fact answer the requirements of the Non-

Proliferation Treaty and the tasks it 

implies; it has laid the essential groundwork 

for negotiations between States party to the 

Treaty and the Agency for the conclusion of 

safeguards agreements. 

(9) 
"From the Director General's statement 
we gather that a substantial number of 
States party to the Treaty have already 
declared their readiness to begin negotiations 
with the Agency for the conclusion of safeguards 
agreements, and that some have, in 
fact, already begun such negotiations. We 
note with satisfaction that a number of 
countries, such as Finland, Austria and 
Uruguay, have already completed their 
negotiations and that the Board of Governors 
has approved the resulting safeguards 
agreements with those countries. Some 
socialist countries party to the Treaty, too, 
are completing their negotiations with the 
Agency: Poland is a case in point. 
(10) 
"At the same time the Soviet delegation 
draws attention to the vital importance of 
concluding the safeguards agreements 
required by the Treaty as soon as possible. 
We all know that Article III of the Treaty lays 
down specific deadlines for the conduct of 
negotiations and the entry into force of 
agreements. According to the provisions of 
that Article, these safeguards agreements 
must enter into force not later than 
1 March 1972 in the case of a large group of 
States party to the Treaty. We feel that 
every effort should now be directed towards 
completing the requisite negotiations between 
the Agency and States party to the Treaty 
within the specified time, so that the 
provisions of Article III of the Treaty will 
be fulfilled. 

(11) 
"The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons serves the interests of all 
countries in the world, large and small, 
nuclear and non-nuclear alike. No wonder, 
therefore, that the twenty-second session of 
the United Nations General Assembly should 
have welcomed the Treaty and urged that the 
largest possible number of States adhere to 
it. Now the Treaty has already entered into 
force, and the complex safeguards problems 
which it raised are being successfully dealt 
with; so an appropriate moment for enlarging 
the circle of signatory States would seem to 
have come. In this connection we recall a 
statement made by the distinguished 
representative of Italy at the General 
Conference some time ago, that the 
Members of the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) were prepared to 
begin negotiations with the IAEA concerning 
matters of safeguards under the Non-
Proliferation Treaty. We would hope that, 
having taken that step, the countries in 
question will now ratify the Treaty, and we 
-7 

GC(XV)/OR. 145 


also hope that other countries which, for one 

reason or another, have not yet signed the 

Treaty, or have not yet confirmed their 

signature through ratification, will take the 

final step and become parties to the Treaty. 

This would undoubtedly serve not only their 

own interests but also the cause of peace. 

(12) 
"It would, in our opinion, be only right if 
the General Conference, the most 
representative and most responsible body 
associated with the IAEA, were to make its 
own contribution to the solution of these 
important problems: it could do that by 
recognizing the Agency's useful work in the 
matter of NPT safeguards and by stressing 
the importance of fulfilling the tasks which 
the Treaty requires. 
(13) 
"The adoption of a resolution along those 
lines by the General Conference would follow 
logically from the debates we have heard 
here in the Conference itself and from the 
Agency's report to the United Nations 
General Assembly, a report which contains 
significant material describing the Agency's 
work in this area. The taking of such a 
decision would also be significant in relation 
to discussions of the Agency's activities in 
the United Nations General Assembly, for it 
would point to the work that the Agency has 
done and would testify to the Agency's clear 
understanding of the importance of the tasks 
it has assumed under the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. 
(14) 
"Let me stress in this connection that the 
significance of the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
is manifold and that its positive consequences 
have a bearing on the most various aspects 
of social and scientific life. This applies 
first and foremost, of course, to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
(15) 
"A few days ago the Fourth International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy in Geneva - one of the largest 
international events ever held in this field completed 
its work. 
(16) 
"As A.N. Kosygin, Chairman of the USSR 
Council of Ministers, said in a message 
which he addressed to the Fourth Geneva 
Conference, the Soviet Union, having itself 
achieved great successes in the practical 
application of atomic energy, is working 
steadfastly towards a type of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy which will satisfy in full measure the 
goals and principles enshrined in the 
Statutes of the United Nations and the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, as well 
as in the provisions of the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. 
(17) 
"The motto of the Fourth Geneva 
Conference, 'Benefits for mankind from the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy', is near to 
the hearts of Soviet experts in the atomic 
energy field, and it is moreover consonant 

with the goals envisaged for atomic energy 

in the documents presented at the Twenty-

Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of 

the Soviet Union. 

(18) 
"The significance of the Geneva Conference 
for the development of atomic science and 
technology throughout the world lies in the 
fact that virtually all problems related to the 
further development of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy for the good of mankind were 
illumined there. In this connection I should 
like to stress the important contribution to 
the work of the Conference made by Soviet 
scientists, who presented 56 papers on 
topics related to nuclear power, research 
into new methods of converting atomic 
energy to electricity, radioactive waste 
management and protection of the environment, 
high-temperature plasma research, 
problems of fast reactor technology, the use 
of nuclear methods to increase food 
production and, finally, nuclear applications 
in industry and in medicine. 
(19) 
"These papers not only summarize the 
results of the vast research programme in 
atomic science and technology carried out in 
the Soviet Union in recent years but also 
point to new and promising ways of using 
atomic energy for the good of mankind and 
consider ways and means of solving the 
complex scientific and technological 
problems to which these new techniques can 
give rise. Indeed, it is hard to overestimate 
the importance of the Fourth Geneva 
Conference. It enabled us to gather, 
generalize and make accessible for widespread 
use an enormous quantity of very 
important material, and I naturally take 
pleasure in mentioning the important and 
distinguished role which Soviet scientists 
played at the Conference. 
(20) 
"As we know, the Agency was responsible 
for preparing and running the Fourth Geneva 
Conference. The Agency indeed proved 
itself equal to the task of arranging a large 
and complex international event of this kind. 
Most of us who are present here also took 
part in the Geneva Conference, and I am 
confident that we all agree with the high 
estimate of the work of the Agency's 
Secretariat which Academician N.N. Bogolyubov, 
Director of the Joint Institute for 
Nuclear Research at Dubna, uttered in his 
final remarks. In this speech, in which he 
summarized the results of the Conference, 
Academician Bogolyubov particularly 
stressed the good work done by the Agency's 
staff, and by its Director General 
Dr. Eklund himself, in preparing and 
conducting the Conference. 

(21) 
"Distinguished delegates, the programme 
for the economic development of the 
Soviet Union adopted at the Twenty-Fourth 
Congress of the Communist Party of the 
-8 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 


Soviet Union foresees a substantial 

improvement in the material and cultural 

life of the people, based on a rapid 

evolution of socialist production, improved 

efficiency, scientific and technological 

progress and an accelerated growth of the 

productivity of labour. As a result of all 

this, 
gross national income is to increase 

by 37-40% over the period of the Five Year 

Plan. 

(22) 
"A broad development of power generation, 
including atomic power, is part of this 
programme. By 1975 the Soviet Union will 
have built and will be operating on its 
territory a series of large atomic power 
stations with an installed unit capacity of 
1000 MW and above, and a total installed 
capacity of 6000-8000 MW, accounting for 
about 12% of all the power generating 
capacity installed during the five-year 
period. 
(23) 
"Since the first atomic power station in the 
world went into operation at Obninsk, the 
Soviet Union has continued to design and 
develop large, extremely safe and 
economically efficient atomic power plants. 
The purpose of this research and development 
work has from the start been to 
prepare, on the broadest possible front, for 
a coherent system of atomic power stations 
based on thermal reactors - stations which 
are capable of providing electric power in 
the European part of the Soviet Union at a 
lower cost than power stations using 
conventional fuels. 
(24) 
"The ample supplies of conventional fuel 
existing in our country (I might mention 
open-face mining of extremely cheap coal in 
Kazakhstan, the discovery of large oil and 
gas deposits in western Siberia, the use of 
massive hydro resources and so on) have 
enabled the Soviet Union to develop nuclear 
power at a moderate tempo, without 
indulging in wasteful investments. 
(25) 
"The nuclear power stations I have 
mentioned are called 'first-phase stations' 
in the Soviet Union. Apart from furnishing 
electric power they will be called upon to 
provide the fuel base for our second-phase 
nuclear power stations. These second-phase 
stations will have breeding ratios adequate 
to provide the nuclear fuel base for future, 
advanced fast neutron reactors, and these 
in turn will be able to provide power on any 
scale required. 

(26) 
"Thus the past year has been, in some 
senses, a rather remarkable year for 
nuclear industry in the Soviet Union, for it 
marked the transition, one might say, from 
a large scientific-industrial experiment in 
the development of promising nuclear power 
plant types to the actual construction of 
nuclear power stations on a massive scale i. 
e. the creation of a fully developed nuclear 
power industry. Existing plans for the 
development of nuclear power in the 
Soviet Union foresee a total installed nuclear 
capacity of 30 000 MW(e) by 1980. Under 
this programme intensive construction work 
is going ahead on the Leningrad, Kursk, 
Chernobylsk, Smolensk, Western, Kola, 
Bilibin and Armenian nuclear power 
stations; and preparations are being made 
for the construction of a further series of 
new power stations. At the same time new 
units are being added to the Novo-Voronezh 
and Beloyarsk stations, which have been 
operating successfully for a long time. 

(27) 
"The Soviet Union has consistently been^in 
favour of broad international co-operation in 
the atomic energy field. Our co-operation 
with other socialist countries has developed 
to a substantial degree during the year that 
has elapsed since the last session of the 
General Conference. The recent twentyfifth 
session of the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (COMECON), under 
whose auspices the Soviet Union's cooperation 
with socialist countries is realized, 
unanimously adopted a broad composite 
programme aimed at further strengthening 
and perfecting collaboration and the 
development of socialist economic 
integration among the organization's 
Member States. 
(28) 
"in the atomic energy sphere this composite 
programme aims at co-ordinating the 
efforts of socialist countries so that nuclear 
power can be developed through the 
establishment in those countries, with the 
Soviet Union's technical assistance, of 
nuclear power stations using VVER-type 
reactors; atomic energy is to be introduced 
in interested countries on an industrial 
scale; and the programme likewise foresees 
co-operation in the development and 
manufacture of modern installations and 
equipment required for nuclear power, 
custom-made measuring devices required 
for the manufacture of nuclear instruments, 
and so on. This composite programme 
opens up attractive prospects for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in States 
Members of COMECON. 
(29) 
"Apart from fraternal co-operation with 
fellow socialist countries, the Soviet Union 
is engaged in broad programmes of 
scientific and technical co-operation with 
numerous other countries in areas related 
to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Cooperation 
of this kind, both bilateral and 
multilateral, is also carried out to a 
considerable extent through the IAEA. The 
participation of Soviet scientists in 
scientific events sponsored by the Agency, 
the submission to the Agency of the results 
of scientific research carried out in the 
Soviet Union, the provision under the 
INIS programme of scientific publications on 
a wide range of problems associated with 

-9 

GC(XV)/OR. 145 

the peaceful uses of atomic energy, the 
holding of experts' meetings, scientific 
study tours and the like in the USSR - all 
these are forms of international cooperation 
which the Soviet Union has used to 
good effect in the past year. 

(30) 
"Appreciating the enriched uranium 
requirements of non-nuclear countries, and 
desirous of promoting the development of 
nuclear power in those countries, the 
Soviet Union declared, at an earlier session 
of the General Conference, its willingness 
to provide enrichment services for uranium 
belonging to non-nuclear countries. 
(31) 
"We regard this as a particularly 
important contribution of our country to 
international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, and we well understand 
the interest which many countries are 
showing in co-operation with the Soviet Union 
in this area. 
(32) 
"The services offered by the Soviet Union in 
connection with uranium enrichment can 
provide a profitable, reliable and durable 
basis for atomic power in those countries 
which wish to avail themselves of these 
services. 
(33) 
"It is understood of course that foreign 
uranium enriched in the Soviet Union would 
have to be used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes, under the supervision of the 
IAEA, as foreseen in the Non-Proliferation 
Treaty. 
(34) 
"The Soviet Government has continued, 
furthermore, to give careful attention to the 
provision of technical assistance to 
developing countries under the Agency's 
programme. 
(35) 
"The Soviet Union's voluntary contribution 
provided valuable goods and services for 
the Agency's technical assistance 
programme in 1971. Apart from the 
provision of instruments, equipment and 
materials for developing countries, two 
scientific study tours have been organized 
in the Soviet Union during the current year, 
relating to standardization in radiation 
dosimetry and to the applications of 
radiations and isotopes in agriculture. 
Representatives of more than 50 developing 
Member States of the Agency took part in 
these tours. Representatives of many 
countries are perfecting their knowledge 
and obtaining practical experience in 
scientific research centres and institutions 
in the Soviet Union under Type II fellowships 
earlier awarded by the Agency. The 
services provided by Soviet experts sent to 
developing countries under the auspices of 
the Agency, to assist in the adjustment and 
operation of equipment provided and to 
train local staff in its use, have grown from 
year to year. We would also welcome an 
increase in other forms of technical 

assistance such as short scientific visits by 

leading scientists and specialists from the 

developing countries who could familiarize 

themselves with the achievements of the 

Soviet Union in the medical, agricultural 

and other applications of atomic energy. 

(36) 
"In the interests of continued international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, the Soviet delegation is empowered 
to state that the Soviet voluntary contribution 
to the Agency's technical assistance fund for 
1972 will amount to 250 000 roubles in 
national currency, for the provision of 
equipment, instruments and materials, for 
scientific meetings in the USSR, and for 
scientific study tours, seminars and courses 
for the benefit of representatives of 
developing countries. 
(37) 
"While we are discussing the activities of 
the Agency, it would be wrong to pass over 
one particularly important matter: I have in 
mind the observance of the principle of 
universality which is enshrined in the 
Agency's Statute. Consistent application of 
this principle means that all States which 
share the aims of the Agency and whose 
policies are consistent with those aims 
should be able to take part in its activities 
with equal rights. What I have said applies 
in full measure to a State such as the 
German Democratic Republic, which has 
realized significant achievements in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy; a State, 
moreover, whose actions fully satisfy the 
requirements which the Agency's Statute lays 
down for membership of the Agency. The 
German Democratic Republic, as we all 
know, was one of the first countries to sign 
and ratify the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons and to declare its 
intention of concluding with the Agency the 
safeguards agreement required by that 
Treaty; and, again as we all know, the 
German Democratic Republic is prepared in 
the very near future to begin negotiations 
with the Agency for the conclusion of such 
an agreement. 

(38) 
"The importance of granting the German 
Democratic Republic equal rights in international 
organizations is receiving ever 
wider recognition throughout the world. In 
this connection I should like to draw your 
attention to the communique summarizing 
the results of the recent meeting between 
W. Brandt, Federal Chancellor of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, and 
L.I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the 
Central Committee of the Communist Party 
of the Soviet Union: this communique refers 
among other things to the great significance 
which the entry of both German States into 
the United Nations and specialized international 
organizations would have, and 
stresses the determination of both parties 
to work towards that goal. There is no doubt 
- 10 

GC(XV)/OR. 145 


that if the German Democratic Republic were 

a Member of the Agency it could make a 

valuable contribution to the fulfilment of the 

Agency's growing obligations, to the 

accomplishment of its tasks and its goals. 

(39) 
"In conclusion, distinguished delegates, I 
should like to express our confidence that 
the Agency will discharge its obligations 
successfully. The Agency's work is 
becoming ever more closely linked with the 
vital problems of preserving peace and 
security and banishing the threat of nuclear 
war. All this is bound to make increasing 
demands on the Agency. If these demands 
are to be met we must above all recognize 
the responsibility which has been vested in 
the Agency in the circumstances of modern 
international life, and fully avail ourselves 
of the possibilities at the organization's 
disposal. For its part, the Soviet Union will 
devote its best efforts to ensuring that the 
Agency's work measures up to the tasks 
that confront it. " 
55. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) congratulated 
the Director General on the part played by the 
Agency in the Fourth Geneva Conference. All 
must be conscious, particularly in the current 
year, that such international gatherings imposed 
great demands on their time. Nevertheless, they 
helped to remind everyone of a truth that could 
not be over-emphasized, namely that the atom was 
international. The dangers of the atom spread 
beyond the country where atomic energy was used, 
and international action was needed to limit them. 
The same was true on the positive side. Countries 
used to think in terms of national self-sufficiency 
in the atomic field; or of having their own 
individual atomic programmes for prestige 
reasons. But there were few, and perhaps no, 
countries which could exploit atomic energy fully 
in a purely national framework. 

56. It was encouraging to note that, in most 
parts of the world, and particularly in Western 
Europe, collaboration between Governments, 
between commissions and between industries was 
the order of the day. The previous year he had 
told the Conference of a Tripartite Agreement 
between the Federal Republic of Germany, the 
Netherlands and the United Kingdom to develop 
and exploit the gas centrifuge. [6] That agreement 
had since led to the establishment of two 
companies, with the participation of industrial 
concerns from the three countries, and the three 
countries were looking forward to participation of 
other countries in the project. Construction of 
two plants to enrich uranium was already in 
hand; tripartite confidence in the gas centrifuge 
process continued, and was indeed increasing, 
57. Collaboration was also developing between 
British companies and companies in other 
countries in the field of reactor design and 
construction, and of reprocessing. The United 
[6] 
GC(XIV)/OR. 139, para. 22. 
Kingdom was happy at the prospect of deepening 
its collaboration with other European countries 
through membership of EURATOM. 

58. Within the United Kingdom the commercialization 
of nuclear industry had passed a new 
milestone in the past year with the establishment 
of British Nuclear Fuels Limited and The Radiochemical 
Centre Limited. Those new concerns 
would continue, in an industrial company 
structure, to provide the reprocessing, fuel 
fabrication, and isotope production and marketing 
services formerly provided by the Atomic Energy 
Authority. 
59. The fast reactor project continued to run 
according to programme, and the 250-MW prototype 
was expected to be on power by the end of 
1972. A centre was being established at 
Dounreay to provide training in the operation of 
commercial fast reactors. In the past there had 
been too little real collaboration on fast reactors; 
but there too the picture was changing and good 
prospects for close industrial collaboration could 
be seen. 
60. The United Kingdom delegation was well 
satisfied with the Agency's work as a whole, and 
with the annual report, a number of points in 
which called for special comment, 
61. In the view of his delegation, the successful 
conclusion by the Board's safeguards committee 
of its task and the elaboration of the model safeguards 
agreement were truly outstanding achievements. 
It was gratifying to note that the spirit of 
compromise in the committee had been 
maintained and that a series of delicate political 
and commercial issues had been resolved with 
the participation of nearly 60 States. For so 
many States to resolve so many complex 
questions in so short a time was a remarkable 
event - a success story in international relations. 
The committee's work deserved respect and 
support. 
62. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
the Board had already approved three safeguards 
agreements based on the safeguards committee's 
model agreement. It hoped that other countries 
would not be long in concluding similar agreements 
so that NPT would become an effective 
instrument as soon as possible. In that 
connection, the United Kingdom warmly welcomed 
the news that the Council of Ministers of the 
European Communities had given a mandate for 
negotiations with the Agency. 
63. The settlement of the vexed question of 
safeguards financing was not the least important 
achievement of the safeguards committee. In his 
delegation's view, the compromise reached was 
particularly favourable to the developing 
countries; nevertheless, the United Kingdom 
accepted it in good part and was glad that the 
issue was now out of the way for some years. 
64. Another important aspect of the Agency's 
work had been the effort in regard to pollution. 
- 11 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 

Everyone in the atomic field realized that there 
was a spotlight focused on the whole subject, and 
it was up to all to give wholehearted support to 
the Agency's endeavours in that respect. No one 
should withhold any relevant information; nor 
should political play be made with such an issue. 
All should be ready to undertake in good faith the 
fullest possible exchange of knowledge and 
experience. The project for a register of 
disposals of radioactive waste into the sea, and 
into rivers flowing into the sea, had been discussed 
in the Board. The United Kingdom, for its part, 
was already making available virtually all of the 
information that would be required from it for 
such a register; and it would be happy to go along 
with the register if others were prepared to 
contribute on an equitable basis. 

65. In the United Kingdom view, it was most 
desirable for the Agency to play the leading international 
role on issues of atomic pollution and to 
elaborate recommended codes of practice. It 
could work to the disadvantage of atomic energy, 
and of the Agency, if some other non-atomic 
body were to take over, for example, the 
administration of the register, or to initiate any 
other project in that field. 
66. The United Kingdom had played a big part in 
bringing INIS to its present stage, and it 
contributed regularly - and at a not negligible 
cost - all the information for which it was asked. 
However, his delegation had misgivings about the 
rapidly growing expenditure on the project, and 
about the advisability of developing it so quickly, 
and would be posing some questions in committee. 
67. The United Kingdom would support the 
proposed budget for 1972 and would pay its full 
assessed contribution towards the increased 
target figure for the Operational Budget. 
68. By way of additional support for the Agency's 
operational programme, the Central Electricity 
Generating Board would once again be willing to 
receive Agency fellows for training at United 
Kingdom nuclear power stations without charge to 
the Agency. He hoped that that would help to 
alleviate the shortage of such training facilities, 
which had recently been commented on in the 
Board. 
69. The United Kingdom would be glad to assist 
the proposed study related to the introduction of 
nuclear power in developing countries, 
70. He could not conclude his remarks without 
paying tribute to his friend and colleague 
Glenn Seaborg, who had made an outstanding 
contribution not only to the Agency's work but 
also to atomic energy from its very inception. 
He was sure that all wished him well on his 
return to university life. 
71. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) said that the 
harmonious and peaceful conference devoted to 
scientific and technical achievements in the 
nuclear field which had just taken place in Geneva 
and to which the Agency had made a major 
contribution gave grounds for confidence in the 
prospects offered to humanity by the ever more 
rapid development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 

72. The favourable atmosphere which had 
prevailed at Geneva had likewise manifested itself 
in the deliberations of the Board's safeguards 
committee. His country was grateful to the 
Inspector General for the part he had played in 
the committee's protracted discussions on 
problems which had seemed to be insoluble. The 
Inspector General's competence and tact and the 
obvious will displayed by representatives to reach 
a settlement had enabled the committee to achieve 
the formulation of an adequate structure for the 
agreements to be concluded in connection with 
NPT. 
73. One success led to another, and as had 
already been stated by the delegates of Italy and 
the Federal Republic of Germany, the difficulties 
which had arisen in formulating the authority to 
negotiate of the Commission of the European 
Communities for the conclusion of a verification 
agreement between EURATOM and the Agency had 
been overcome in their turn, and the Commission 
was now in a position to initiate negotations with 
the Agency for the purpose of concluding the 
agreement to which the ratification of NPT had 
been made subject by Belgium as well as its 
partners concerned in EURATOM. The present 
propitious atmosphere for reaching agreement 
would certainly promote a prompt and successful 
outcome of the negotiations between EURATOM 
and the Agency. Without in any way affecting one 
of the foundations of EURATOM, which had 
constituted a stage in the process of unifying an 
expanding Europe, Belgium would now be able to 
shoulder fully its obligations under NPT. 
74. Undoubtedly the Agency would have to be 
extremely active in the coming months in drafting, 
concluding and bringing into force the agreements 
envisaged in Article III of NPT with the States 
party to the Treaty. 
75. However, that task was only one part of the 
Agency's statutory functions. Its help continued 
to be essential for promoting the use of atomic 
energy in developing countries in close cooperation 
with the specialized agencies directly 
concerned. Nevertheless, judicious choices must 
be made in order to avoid the wasteful 
dissipation of funds at the Agency's disposal, 
which would always be too small in relation to the 
requests for assistance that it would receive. 
The Agency should make an even more determined 
effort to obtain financial support from the international 
organizations at whose request or 
suggestion it had undertaken projects, as indeed 
it had already done in the case of FAO. However, 
the cost of activities connected with the main 
functions of other specialized agencies (FAO, 
UNESCO and the World Health Organization (WHO)) 
should be borne primarily by those organizations 
and not for the greater part or even to the extent 
of one half by the Agency. 

- 12 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 


76. That duty of prudent management of funds 
allocated to the Agency was all the more 
imperative because of the disturbingly 
spectacular growth of the Agency's budget: a 40% 
rise in two years was far higher than normal, 
even having regard to the inescapable increases 
due to the rise in the cost of living and to the 
disturbances in the world monetary system. 
77. Apart from its regulatory and technical 
assistance activities, the Agency would continue 
to deal with certain questions of world concern. 
At the present time, when public opinion had 
become aware of the importance of preserving the 
"quality of life" for humanity, it was logical for 
the Agency to continue its efforts to improve 
methods of preventing pollution resulting from 
radioactivity, but it should confine itself to that 
pollutant alone. Indeed, as the United States 
delegate had indicated, nuclear energy was, after 
water power, the cleanest source of electricity, 
thanks to the particular care taken in its 
production. [7 ] However, nuclear industry, like 
industry as a whole, did produce waste. It was 
one of the Agency's functions to perfect techniques 
for dealing with the highly toxic nature of that 
waste. The Agency should devote special 
attention to devising improved technical and 
regulatory solutions to the problem of radioactive 
waste disposal and above all, its storage. Of 
course, so far such problems had concerned only 
a small number of industrialized countries but, in 
the nature of things, they would in time confront 
all States, judging from the picture of the 
development of nuclear power stations painted by 
the United States delegate at the previous meeting. 
78. Belgium considered that the Agency should 
concentrate on establishing suitable sites for 
storing waste, which would be accessible to 
anyone requiring to dispose of such materials, 
subject to the observance of strict rules and the 
exercise of effective control. 
79. Belgium would in the near future deposit 
its instrument of acceptance of the amendment to 
Article VI of the Statute. 
80. In conclusion, he stated that as in the past 
Belgium would place at the Agency's disposal six 
Type II fellowships and would endeavour, within 
the limits of its human and financial resources, 
to contribute towards the Agency's valuable 
efforts in developing technical assistance. 
81. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) said it was obvious, 
in considering the Agency's activities for the past 
year, that the performance of its tasks in 
connection with the implementation of NPT had 
played an increasingly important part. The 
Board's safeguards committee had successfully 
completed its work, and negotiations for the 
conclusion of safeguards agreements in connection 
with NPT were now proceeding. 
82. Finland had been one of the first States to 
ratify NPT and also the first Member State to 
[7 ] See document GC(XV)/OR. 144, paras 57-63. 
conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency 
under Article III thereof (signed in June 1971). [8 ] 
It was hoped that the consultations in that regard 
has proved helpful in clarifying the many issues 
arising in respect of the application of international 
safeguards to all the peaceful nuclear activities in 
a State and in paving the way for the successful 
outcome of the safeguards committee's work. His 
country was appreciative of the solid co-operation 
provided throughout by the Agency. It would be 
continuing negotiations after the General 
Conference in regard to the necessary subsidiary 
arrangements and he was confident that the 
agreement would be in force well before the 
deadline of 1 March 1972. In pursuit of its oftstated 
aim to place its nuclear programme under 
the safeguards of a single international authority, 
namely the Agency, Finland intended to suspend 
the rights accorded to its bilateral partners, as 
provided for in the relevant bilateral agreements. 


83. It was to be hoped that the Agency would be 
able to develop its safeguards practices, bearing 
in mind the goal of optimum cost-effectiveness 
and the requirements in relation to commercial 
transactions in nuclear materials. Many international 
rules of practice would need to be 
evolved in order to minimize the bureaucratic 
burden in handling such matters. 
84. It would be evident that Finland attached 
great importance to NPT as a major contribution 
to international security. It was to be hoped that 
NPT would be implemented as widely and as soon 
as possible, in particular by the important 
industrial countries upon whose ratification its 
success would largely depend. His country took 
the view that collective security could be truly 
effective only when universal. Appropriate ways 
should therefore be found to secure the 
participation of States not yet Members of the 
Agency. In that connection, Finland wished to 
point out that the seat of China in the Agency 
belonged to the People's Republic of China. 
85. In regard to budgetary matters, it was 
somewhat disturbing that the Director General had 
had to present Regular Budget estimates for 1972 
providing for an increase of 17. 9% as compared 
with 1971. In addition, the Conference had before 
it a proposal for a supplementary appropriation to 
meet increased expenditure under the Regular 
Budget for 1971 [9 ]. The proposal dealt with 
certain expenditures which, although foreseen in 
advance, had not been taken into account in 
preparing the approved budget for 1971. An effort 
should be made to draw up the budget for 1972 in 
a more realistic way in order that actual 
requirements would be covered. In view of 
increasing expenditure for salaries, the Director 
General's decision further to study organizational 
changes so as to obtain more efficient utilization 
of staff was to be welcomed. 

[8 ] For the text, see document INFCIRC/155. 
[9 ] GC(XV)/457. 
- 13 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 

86. His delegation strongly supported 
appropriate activities for further developing the 
philosophy of safeguards as well as safeguards 
practices. Consideration should be given, for 
instance, to training technicians to serve as 
safeguards inspectors rather than using highlyqualified 
engineers or people with academic 
degrees. It was to be hoped also that States party 
to NPT would adopt the rules of the Agency's 
system in their national regulations, thus 
reducing the burden and cost of safeguards. 
87. With regard to technical assistance, his 
Government approved the raising of the target for 
voluntary contributions to $3 million. Subject to 
parliamentary approval, Finland would contribute 
to the General Fund in accordance with its 
Regular Budget assessment and, in addition, it 
was prepared to offer Type II fellowships in 
various peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
The number of such fellowships would not be 
limited, but it would be subject to actual needs and 
the possibilities of providing the training required 
in Finland. 
88. As indicated in the Director General's 
report on the provision of technical assistance by 
the Agency with special reference to 1970, [10] 
certain changes were to be instituted in UNDP 
procedures in order better to meet the requirements 
of the recipient countries and to augment 
the impact of technical assistance. It should be 
noted that, despite its support for the increased 
target for voluntary contributions, his 
Government preferred international multilateral 
aid to be channelled mainly through UNDP. It 
therefore expected that the technical assistance 
provided by the Agency would be co-ordinated as 
much as possible with UNDP aid; national 
priorities should, however, be given due weight. 
89. There had been criticism on many 
occasions of the practice of splitting limited funds 
among a large number of small projects throughout 
the world. It would be worth while from now 
on to pay more attention to the merits of the 
projects put forward for support and seriously 
consider having fewer but larger projects that 
could be prepared and implemented more 
efficiently. 
90. It was a matter for satisfaction that the 
Agency was continuing its close co-operation with 
other United Nations bodies. Such co-operation 
was an obligation rather than a privilege; for 
nuclear energy was a tool which could serve a 
useful purpose in many sectors coming within the 
competence of other United Nations bodies, and 
for many years to come the problems connected 
with its peaceful applications would necessarily 
be in the hands of the Agency. 
91. His Government wished to emphasize the 
importance of nuclear power as a new source for 
meeting increased energy requirements in the 
world. The problems in that area were manifold 
and lack of experience often made for difficult 
[10] GC(XV)/INF/131. 
situations, particularly in the developing 
countries. The major difficulty in developing 
nuclear power did not, in his opinion, lie in 
financing of the investment. Once a country's 
future energy requirements had been estimated, 
it should be possible to decide between nuclear 
and conventional power. In all the phases of such 
development the Agency could render valuable 
assistance and service, but the decision rested 
with the country alone. The large majority of 
Member States opting for nuclear power would 
have to purchase their power plants from abroad; 
and the purchaser's interest in having all 
economic and safety requirements fully met 

should be kept in mind. Environmental protection 

and the safety of nuclear installations were 
matters in which public interest was greatly 
increasing. 

92. The Agency should increase its activities in 
informing the international community of the 
positive role that nuclear power stations, as 
opposed to those operated by fossil fuels, could 
play in reducing pollution of the environment. 
Much new information in that connection would 
come out of the Stockholm Conference on the 
Human Environment. 
93. The total capacity of nuclear power plants 
would rise in the very near future, and such 
plants would play a substantial part in the power 
economy of many countries. At the same time, 
the number of countries installing nuclear power 
would increase, and hence foreign trade in the 
supply of nuclear plants. Speedy ratification of 
NPT and the conclusion of safeguards agreements 
with the Agency would serve to standardize international 
safeguards rules, and that would greatly 
facilitate the trade in question, which was of 
common interest and a challenge to all. 
94. In conclusion, he commended the Director 
General and the Secretariat for the constructive 
work done over the past year. The Agency 
deserved special credit for its performance in the 
face of challenging and difficult responsibilities. 
His Government would pledge its full support for 
the continuation of that work in the future. 
95. Mr. OGUNIANA (Nigeria) recalled that in 
the early and mid-1950s the applications of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes had been in 
an embryonic stage. Before that period the 
mention of the expression "atomic power" had 
conjured up in the minds of most people a sordid 
picture of the wholesale destruction of people and 
their cultural monuments. Mankind was eternally 
indebted to the renowned scientists who had 
discovered and developed the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. The continued dread of the 
destructive power of atomic energy was to some 
extent relieved by the growing emphasis on the 
peaceful application of atomic power. The 
Nigerian delegation wished to make a strong 
appeal to the more technologically advanced 
countries, particularly the two Super Powers, to 
allow the positive and peaceful aspects of nuclear 
science to have lasting ascendancy over its 
destructive ones. 
- 14 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 


9 6. The impact of the great discoveries of the 
renowned scientists might never have been felt, 
however, if there had been no vehicles to bring 
the skills of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
to the doorsteps of most countries. The creation 
of the Agency in October 1956 had provided the 
greatest impetus to the universal application of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes in pursuance 
of Article II of its Statute. The Director General, 
among others, was to be congratulated on the 
Agency's record of achievement since 1956. 
97. The four Geneva Conferences on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy convened in 
1955, 1958, 1964 and 1971, in particular the last 
Conference, which had ended only the previous 
week (and in which the Agency had played a 
leading role), had educated scientists and laymen 
alike on the promise and danger of atomic energy. 
The Fourth Geneva Conference had brought into 
sharp focus the staggering developments in the 
application of atomic energy for the production of 
electricity and large-scale desalting of sea water, 
the various uses of isotopes in agriculture and 
industry and the application of radiation in 
medicine. The Director General had graphically 
outlined the progress made when he had said that 
we had now reached the stage where nuclear 
power could in some areas compete with 
conventional means of generating electricity and 
that it was accounting for an ever-increasing 
proportion of installed capacity. The present 
figure was 2%, but by 1980 it was expected to 
reach 13% and by the turn of the century, some 
50%. Responsibility for the development and 
construction of reactors had, to a great extent, 
been taken over by industry. The large-scale 
introduction of nuclear power had become a 
matter of importance to economists, planners and 
government officials. 
98. Although the above-mentioned developments 
were laudable and welcome, the Nigerian 
delegation believed that the end of the tunnel would 
not be in sight until the countries which, through 
unfortunate circumstances, had remained onlookers 
in the staggering scientific revolution 
became participants for the mutual benefit of all 
mankind. It was a matter for regret that many 
countries still remained on the fringes in the 
momentous developments described. It was true 
that only the more advanced and richer countries 
could at present derive benefits in economic terms 
from the more sophisticated applications of 
nuclear energy. However, developing countries 
should be assisted at a faster pace than at 
present to raise standards in agriculture, 
engineering, medicine, etc. by introducing the 
numerous applications of nuclear science. While 
the Nigerian delegation was not asking the more 
advanced nations to wait for others, it felt that 
the whole of mankind would be enriched if some 
impetus were given to scientific revolutions in 
developing countries so that the yawning 
scientific gap currently existing between the two 
categories of States in the world could be bridged. 
99. The problem of under-developed countries 
was that of introducing modern science and 
technology into their societies, and transforming 
their economies into those relying on sciencebased 
industries. The establishment of a world 

standard capability in nuclear science would have 
far-reaching ramifications. Nigerian experience, 
particularly in the recent past, had shown that 
reliance on others led to more reliance -a 
vicious circle that made despair inevitable. It 
was a lack of self-reliance that led to economic 
servitude and human exploitation which political 
independence alone could not eliminate. Those 
who remained consumers as opposed to producers 
could not expect to become self-reliant. 

100. His delegation's viewpoint was that there 
was no point in blaming others for the plight of 
the under-developed. A country had to be aware 
that nuclear science could not be useful to it if it 
were not useful to nuclear science. 
101. The General Conference afforded Members 
an annual opportunity to take stock of the activities 
of the Agency. The Nigerian delegation had read 
with keen interest the background documents for 
the session, in particular the annual report in 
document GC(XV)/455, on which the Board was to 
be congratulated. One of the greatest events of 
the past year in the context of the diverse 
activities of the Agency had been the successful 
formulation of the structure and content of the 
safeguards agreements to be concluded between 
the Agency and non-nuclear-weapon States party 
to NPT as required by Article III. 4 thereof. In 
June 1970 the Board had established a safeguards 
committee to advise it as a matter of urgency on 
the scope and content of the agreements envisaged. 
The Nigerian delegation believed that the Agency 
and the safeguards committee deserved the 
wholehearted gratitude of the Conference for the 
logical and expeditious manner in which they had 
performed the seemingly impossible task of 
formulating recommendations for the negotiation 
of the agreements. In fact, it had been said in 
many forums outside the Agency that the 
expeditious manner in which the safeguards 
committee had elaborated the delicate compromise 
document could serve as a model for other United 
Nations bodies and international meetings 
handling similar intractable issues. 
102. The Nigerian Government welcomed the 
arrangements recommended by the safeguards 
committee, in particular those relating to the 
financing of safeguards, where a delicate balance 
had been struck between the interests of the rich 
and the developing areas of the world, giving a 
slight advantage to the latter. It was his 
delegation's hope that the safeguards procedures 
would prevent the further proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
103. The Nigerian delegation wished, however, 
to appeal to nuclear Powers to move a step further 
than the Moscow Partial Test Ban Treaty, and to 
conclude a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty 
that would cover all underground tests. He was 
aware that the matter was being considered in the 
appropriate forum in Geneva, but felt that it was 
apposite to make a reference to it while discussing 
further steps which non-nuclear-weapon States 
- 15 



GC(XV)/OR. 145 

were taking to fulfil the obligations they had 
assumed under NPT. It should be emphasized 
that the prospect of an early comprehensive 
nuclear test ban treaty was the quid pro quo for 
the signing of NPT by many non-nuclear-weapon 
States, a Treaty which some had aptly dubbed 
"the disarming of the unarmed". 

104. The Nigerian delegation was happy to 
observe the Agency's growing emphasis on 
technical assistance activities, particularly in 
regard to agriculture, engineering, medicine and 
health. It was also gratifying to note that of all 
those areas of technical assistance, agriculture 
had had the lion's share. His delegation had noted 
that the resources made available to the Agency 
for technical assistance had grown. Members of 
the Agency were at different levels of nuclear 
development, however. Those not in a position to 
derive full benefit from the Agency's more 
comprehensive and sophisticated applications of 
nuclear power for peaceful purposes should 
therefore have in compensation at least the 
opportunity of raising standards in agriculture, 
engineering, medicine, etc. through the goods 
and services provided by the Agency and both the 
Special Fund and Technical Assistance components 
of UNDP. 
105. In Nigeria some technical assistance 
programmes were being implemented in electronics 
engineering, radiation protection and the 
application of isotopes in agriculture. Many 
Nigerian nationals had also derived immense 
benefits from Agency fellowships in various fields. 
The technical assistance given by the Agency was 
greatly appreciated, but it was hoped that in 
future a more liberal approach would be taken in 
approving technical assistance projects, in 
particular for countries that were not in a 
position to take advantage of the broader 
possibilities offered by the Agency. In that 
connection the Nigerian delegation wished to 
appeal to the richer nations to make more 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund. It 
was encouraging to note that $ 3 million was the 
target for voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund. 
106. His delegation wished to endorse the Board's 
recommendations concerning the Agency's annual 
reports to United Nations organs. [11 ] In order 
to avoid needless duplication of reports and thus 
effect savings in expenditure on documentation, 
the General Conference should decide that the 
report which it received each year from the 
Board should henceforth serve as the Agency's 
annual report to the General Assembly of the 
United Nations and its annual report to the 
Economic and Social Council. 
107. With regard to the direction that the Agency's 
programmes in developing countries should take, 
[11] 
GC(XV)/467. 
the Nigerian delegation considered that they 
should include the following elements: 

(a) 
Developing countries should be encouraged 
to contribute to nuclear science in a 
significant way, for only those who could 
produce could fully absorb; 
(b) 
Supporting experiments and tests should be 
tailored to fit those contributions; 
(c) 
Particular encouragement should be given 
to the development of nuclear science and 
technology related to prospecting and the 
evaluation of natural resources, and to 
other applications designed to strengthen a 
country's development; and 
(d) 
Above all, maximum support should be given 
to countries that were innovative, 
disengaging themselves from the usual 
nuclear gadgets and toys. 
108. A country like Nigeria, which was rich in 
oil and other minerals, was an excellent example 
of a poor country in which what had just been 
suggested could be of enormous assistance in 
promoting scientific and economic development. 
The amount of time and expense that would be 
saved by using nuclear techniques for prospecting, 
evaluation and possibly the production of oil in 
Nigeria should not be underestimated. Such an 
approach would enable the country simultaneously 
to absorb the benefits of nuclear science and to 
accumulate the wealth to engage in further 
industrial development. 
109. In that connection, the Nigerian delegation 
wished to see further research on peaceful 
nuclear explosions (PNE), in pursuance of 
Article V of NPT, which provided for international 
co-operation in sharing the benefits that might be 
derived from the use of nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes with non-nuclear-weapon States. 
It had been gratifying to note at the second international 
technical meeting on PNE in January 1971 
that it was now technologically possible to use 
nuclear explosives underground on an industrial 
scale to stimulate gas and oil production, to 
create storage space for hydrocarbons (gas, oil 
and oil products) and to seal defective gas and oil 
wells. It was hoped that in the not-too-distant 
future Nigeria would have acquired the 
prerequisites that would enable her to absorb the 
benefits of nuclear techniques on an industrial 
scale. 
110. While his delegation was aware that the 
Agency was essentially a technical body, it 
considered it necessary to stress that the 
presence of South Africa in the Agency was 
inimical to the interests of the African continent. 
It was appalled by the fact that through a loophole 
in the Statute of the Agency, South Africa was 
a Member of the Board, purportedly on the basis 
of being the most advanced country in nuclear 
technology in Africa. It was obvious, in his view, 
that a country that was notorious for its policy on 
racial relations and for its persistent disregard 
- 16 



GC(XV)/OK. 145 

of United Nations decisions could not co-operate 
meaningfully with other African countries in the 
applications of nuclear science. It was the 
fervent hope of his delegation that the Agencywould 
address itself to that very serious problem. 

111. Mr. GLENNAN (United States of America) 
said that the United States delegation welcomed 
with great satisfaction the announcement by the 
delegate of Italy that EURATOM was ready to 
commence negotiations with the Agency under 
Article III of NPT. It looked forward to the 
successful conclusion of those negotiations, which 
would represent a major step toward the 
realization of the world-wide system of safeguards 
that NPT envisaged. 

• The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m. 
- 17 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 
3 August 1972* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 23 September 1971, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 


Item of 
the 
agenda** 

9 

Subject 

General debate and 
report of the Board of 
Governors for 1970--71 
(continued) 

Statements by the 
delegates of: 

Japan 
Australia 
Czechoslovakia 
Viet-Nam 
Yugoslavia 
Netherlands 
Romania 
India 
China 
Israel 

Paragraphs 

1 - 117 

1-14 
15 - 32 
33 - 43 
44 - 51 
52 - 63 
64 - 74 
75 - 89 
90 - 101 

102 - 111 
112 - 117 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 29 September 1971. 
** GC(XV)/469. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 146 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE BOARD 
OF GOVERNORS FOR 1970-71 (GC(XV)/455, 466) 
(continued) 

1. Mr. FUJIYAMA (Japan), continuing the 
general debate, observed that the world was now 
entering upon a stage of rapid growth in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, and the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [1] 
should serve the purpose of providing a secure 
framework for such growth. The role of the 
Agency had been even further enhanced by the 
coming into force of NPT. His delegation also 
wished to mention the timely convening of the 
Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy (the Fourth Geneva 
Conference), at which useful discussions had 
taken place covering a vast range of subjects of 
common interest. 
2. According to the latest forecast by the 
Japanese Government's Energy Survey Commission, 
Japan's total demand for energy would be 2. 5 times 
greater in 1975 and 5. 4 to 6 times greater in 1985 
than it had been in 1967. By 1975 the total demand 
for installed generating capacity would be about 
117 000 MW, and would rise to about 230 000 MW 
by 1985. 
3. Against a background of supply, price and 
air pollution difficulties attending the further use 
of fossil fuel, the rapid development of nuclear 
power generation had indeed become essential in 
Japan. The Japanese power industry had made 
great efforts for the introduction of nuclear power 
into its plant construction programmes. As a 
result, there were now four nuclear power plants 
in operation, with a total capacity of 1300 MW, and 
nine more plants were under construction. 
Japan1 s nuclear power capacity should be of the 
order of 8600 MW by 1975 and 60 000 MW by 1985, 
accounting for 8% and 26% respectively of the 
total electric power supply required in the years 
in question. 
4. In the face of such a great expansion of 
nuclear power generation, the task of securing 
uranium resources and enriched uranium would 
certainly be of vital importance for Japan. The 
cumulative requirements of U„Og were estimated 
to amount to 18 000 tons by 1975, 120 000 tons by 
1985 and 170 000-200 000 tons by 1990. In order 
to meet that large demand, the country would have 
to conclude long-term import contracts and 
participate in the development of uranium resources 
in various areas. The demand for enriched 
uranium would likewise increase dramatically 
by 1985, and while the United States was at 
the moment the sole supplier of that material, the 
Japanese Atomic Energy Commission was carrying 
out its own technical research and development 
projects with a view to meeting part of the 
demand from national sources. 
[1 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
5. The Japanese Government had designated, 
as an important national project, the development 
of advanced thermal reactors and fast 
breeder reactors, and was undertaking research 
and development programmes with a view to the 
early introduction of such facilities. Fast 
breeder reactors were expected to be commissioned 
in the late 1980s, with the first experimental 
reactor attaining criticality in 1974. 
Advanced thermal reactors would go into service 
in the late 1970s, and the prototype reactor, 
which was now under construction, would be 
critical in 1975. 
6. The competent Japanese authorities were 
making great efforts to promote the nuclear fuel 
fabrication industry, to build up a reprocessing 
system, and to encourage the use of plutonium as 
fuel. The present year had seen a start made on 
the construction of a reprocessing plant with a 
capacity of 210 tons per year. 
7. The construction of a nuclear-powered ship, 
the "Mutsu", had been making good progress and 
the vessel was expected to be completed in early 
1973. In addition, the law governing liability 
for nuclear damage had been revised, with a 
view to facilitating the entry of nuclear ships into 
Japanese ports. 
8. In the light of the swift development of 
nuclear power generation throughout the world, 
the demand for enriched uranium continued to 
expand at a very great pace, and the present 
capacity to supply enriched uranium would, it 
was estimated, be surpassed by the demand in 
the 1980s. In that connection, Japan particularly 
appreciated recent offers which would allow 
Japanese industry access to uranium enrichment 
technology. Japan would be ready to participate 
in multinational talks to discuss the proposed 
joint venture in uranium enrichment. 
9. Such offers would, moreover, be of importance 
for the advancement of science and technology 
in the world. For the sake of the progress 
and welfare of mankind, all information available 
on achievements in the scientific and technological 
fields should be freely exchanged and utilized, as 
was laid down in Article IV of NPT. 
10. NPT, as a step on the road to nuclear disarmament, 
would certainly contribute to the 
stabilization of the world situation and to the 
strengthening of peace. However, its significance 
should not be limited to that aspect alone. It 
should also serve as a secure framework for the 
steady development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. If NPT proved itself capable of serving 
such a noble cause, its significance would be 
epochal in the history of the development of atomic 
energy. 
11. During the meetings of the Board's safeguards 
committee, his delegation had constantly pleaded 
for a rational and simple safeguards system in 
connection with NPT. He was convinced that 
efforts should be continued to ensure the further 
rationalization and simplification of safeguards 
procedures. 
-2 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


12. His delegation attached particular importance 
to the principle of equitable treatment as the 
guiding concept in the forthcoming negotations for 
the Japanese safeguards agreement. He wished 
to add that his Government intended to initiate 
exploratory talks in connection with the negotiations 
for the Japanese safeguards agreement with the 
Agency some time during the autumn of 1971. 
13. A vital issue affecting all nuclear countries 
was the environmental problems relating to 
nuclear power. Protection against the pollution 
of air and water, and indeed of the environment 
as a whole, was of paramount importance from 
the standpoint of the welfare and progress of mankind. 
As nuclear power produced much less air 
pollution than did fossil fuel, it would be more and 
more employed as an energy source on a world-wide 
scale. However, nuclear power generation had 
its own pollution problems, and the accumulation 
of radioactive wastes and their disposal would 
become a problem of increasing importance. 
Japan was greatly concerned at the possible effects 
of the development of nuclear technology on the 
human environment, and had begun to make comprehensive 
efforts to tackle the problem. However, 
it went without saying that environmental problems 
could be better solved through international understanding 
and co-operation. Japan was therefore 
looking to the Agency for prudent guidance in the 
rational solution of that vital issue. 
14. The tasks of the Agency would continue to 
expand in the coming years. The co-operation of 
Member States would become even more necessary 
if the Agency was fully to discharge its responsibilities 
under the Statute. The Japanese delegation 
wished to reiterate its firm determination to 
contribute to that end. 
15. Mr. TIMBS (Australia) said that the use of 
nuclear energy was well-established, particularly 
in nuclear power generation where it was becoming 
to a much greater extent a commercial and 
industrial responsibility. However, perhaps more 
than ever, there was a need for government 
involvement and international co-operation, as had 
been stressed at the Fourth Geneva Conference. 
The investments that would be needed in the future 
would make an important impact on the economy 
of most countries. Governments must continue 
to sponsor research and to act in the field of 
regulation and control. 

16. In the autumn of 1970 the world had first 
heard the announcements by the companies concerned 
of substantial reserves of uranium in ores of high 
grade in Australia. Some of those announcements 
had been made prematurely and adequate drilling 
had to be completed before the amounts were 
known with certainty. The reserves stated by the 
companies had since been written down substantially. 
Nevertheless the prospect of large high-grade 
reserves had been sustained and he was confident 
that, in the course of time, the exploration 
programmes would show that Australia was one of 
the important uranium provinces of the world. 
17. During the past 12 months the Atomic Energy 
Commission had been making an assessment of 
tenders received for the construction of a nuclear 
power station at Jervis Bay. However, in June 1971 
the Government had decided to defer consideration 
of the project. Whilst the delay in coming to a 
decision was disappointing it would not affect the 
ability of the utilities to make available adequate 
supplies of electrical power. As Australia had 
large reserves of easily mineable high-grade coal, 
there was less urgency for it to enter the field of 
nuclear generation. 
18. Australia welcomed the invitation of France 
to participate in studies relating to the technical 
and economic feasibility of the application of 
French enrichment technology in Australia. As 
Australia would be a major exporter of uranium it 
was pleased to learn that the United States was 
willing to discuss the basis on which American 
technology might be used in the construction of 
enrichment plants outside the United States. 
19. New power plants were now being sold and 
bought in most countries on the basis of their 
ability to produce power at competitive prices. 
They would also be sought as a means of pollution 
control. In a short time Australia would also 
need to "go nuclear" despite favourable fossil fuel 
resources. However, in an energy-hungry world, 
there was no room for complacency. Reactors 
developed to date had certainly not provided any 
long-term solution for the production of nuclear 
energy. There would be more emphasis on 
providing nuclear power plants for the developing 
countries in the 100-500 MW range because they 
normally required rather small increments of 
electric power. The development of the fast 
breeder reactor and the tapping of fusion energy 
must be pushed ahead at full speed if the world was 
not to face the prospect of a severe depletion of its 
energy reserves within the next few decades. 
Over the past 12 months increased emphasis had 
been given to fast breeder reactor programmes in 
all of the advanced nuclear nations. There was 
also a very large investment in the improvement 
of existing technology. That was very desirable 
and was most likely to receive the greatest impetus 
because there were a number of viable, proven 
reactor systems competing with each other. 
Therefore, Australia was particularly pleased to 
see another system move towards commercial 
acceptance with the recent announcement by the 
Philadelphia Electric Company and Gulf General 
Atomic of plans to build a 2300-MW hightemperature 
gas-cooled reactor. That reactor 
system had long found favour in Europe and in the 
United States and he admired the courage of those 
who had brought it to its present stage, accepting 
all the associated risks. 
20. Pollution control would be an important issue 
in the future and he commended the Agency on its 
work in that regard. 
21. The viability of existing systems, and their 
rate of growth, and in part the future of fast 
breeder reactor systems, depended on the 
provision of adequate supplies of uranium at 
-3 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


acceptable prices and on the necessary enrichment 
capacity to transform the uranium into reactor fuel. 
It was therefore unfortunate that the uranium 
mining industry throughout the world continued to 
be in a depressed condition with prices offered 
being hardly adequate to sustain long-term 
interest in the mining industry. He therefore 
paid tribute to the mining industry in pressing 
ahead, uncovering and proving new resources, 
despite that handicap. There was a growing need 
for some machinery for the orderly marketing of 
uranium if adequate supplies were to be assured 
in the future. 

22. During the past 12 months there had been 
growing international recognition of the need to 
make plans for the provision of the necessary 
enrichment capacity. The considerations involved 
were complex and the capital sums large. But a 
much greater capital investment was involved in 
the construction of the reactors which could be 
serviced by a single enrichment plant. It was 
reasonable therefore to expect that, given the 
necessary lead, industry could provide enrichment 
capacity with the same competence as it had 
displayed in the installation of nuclear generating 
capacity. The whole problem of the introduction 
of enrichment capacity had to be watched carefully. 
Those plants, which were highly capital intensive, 
should be operated at maximum capacity to be 
economical. Therefore the phasing-in of new 
enrichment plants beginning about the end of the 
current decade should be properly co-ordinated 
to ensure that there was enough capacity available 
at all times and, as far as practicable, that there 
would not be a sizable surplus of unused capacity. 

23. As an island nation at the end of the world's 
shipping routes, Australia viewed with interest 
the developments in the most advanced countries 
in nuclear propulsion. Whilst nuclear ships were 
still far from economic, there was scope for 
improving the situation by lowering construction 
and operating costs and determining the most 
suitable cargo-ship size and routes for nuclear 
operation. Nuclear propulsion for large bulk 
carriers engaged in long hauls appeared to be the 
ideal. 
24. The major marine propulsion programme 
under way in Japan, which was Australia's major 
trading partner, and the recent operation by the 
Federal Republic of Germany of the nuclear ship 
"Otto Hahn" as an ore carrier demonstrated the 
confidence of those nuclear countries in the future 
of such propulsion. A great pioneering effort 
had been made by the United States and the Soviet 
Union. In the final analysis, however, the 
success of that important new mode of transport 
depended in a large measure on international cooperation 
and goodwill in solving the problems of 
passage and access to ports throughout the world. 
That required full confidence in the integrity and 
safety of reactor systems and the goodwill of all 
countries in facilitating the operation of such 
ships. 
25. The development of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear explosives could be of immense benefit 
to mankind. But the maximum international cooperation 
would be essential if the potential 
benefits of that new technology were to be obtained. 
During the past year encouraging technical discussions 
had been conducted between the major 
nuclear countries with such programmes. The 
Soviet Union had used nuclear explosives successfully 
to extinguish otherwise uncontrollable gas-well 
fires and the United States had made good progress 
in proving the value of nuclear stimulation as a 
commercially viable technology for recovering 
natural gas from fields of low permeability. 
Those were promising developments in view of the 
problem of resources depletion. Despite the 
many obstacles facing the development of a viable 
peaceful nuclear explosions technology, the latter 
would surely play a significant role in assisting 
with a wide range of projects to conserve resources, 
raise productivity and recover resources which 
would not otherwise be available. 

26. There was still considerable scope for 
developing further uses of radioisotopes and 
radiation sources. Radioisotopes had already 
made a significant contribution to man's wellbeing. 
During the coming few years large 
radiation sources would find a much wider area of 
application in the chemical and food preservation 
industries, to the great benefit of mankind. 
27. Many great men had taken part in the contribution 
of atomic energy to human welfare. In 
selecting the members of the Scientific Advisory 
Committee (SAC), the Director General must have 
regard to geographical considerations and political 
balance but the overriding consideration was to 
choose men of intellectual distinction and wide 
experience. The Director General was contemplating 
widening the scope of SAC and would need 
to choose members from all Member States without 
distinction, unfettered by partisan pressures. 
28. A very significant advance made during the 
year had been the Agency's success in promoting 
the adoption by Member States and international 
organizations of uniform regulations for the safe 
transport of radioactive materials. Both safety 
and the nuclear industry were well served by those 
regulations, and he noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency was working on a revision of its 
Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive 
Materials [2] to take account of new problems and 
of experience gained to date. 
29. Australia had accepted its full share of 
responsibility as a Member of the Agency and a 
Member of the Board of Governors during the 
past 12 months and had participated in the development 
of the NPT safeguards arrangements. It 
had played a full part in the technical assistance 
programme, not only through its voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund but also through the 
provision, at its own expense, of experts and 
equipment in the Pacific area. 
30. Australia had welcomed the Symposium on 
the Biophysical Aspects of Radiation Quality which 
had been held at Lucas Heights in March 1971. 
[2] STI/PUB/148. 
_ 4 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


31. He paid tribute to the Chairman of the Board 
and to the Director General and his staff for a job 
done with patience and skill. He commended 
and approved the Board's annual report for 
1970-71 [3]. 
32. In future atomic energy would make a major 
contribution to civilization. Its progress could 
only be fostered through wide international cooperation, 
for which the Agency would provide 
the focal point. 
33. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) said that 
the Fourth Geneva Conference had provided clear 
evidence of the enormous development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in every field. 
That was particularly true of nuclear power, which 
was of such fundamental importance as a means 
of meeting the economic requirements of various 
countries and solving the vital problems currently 
facing mankind - such as providing enough food 
for the whole of the world's population. 
34. That progress had obviously been due in no 
small measure to the broad, vigorous and fruitful 
international co-operation which had existed from 
the start and was manifested in the activities of the 
Agency and the multilateral international contacts 
achieved between different countries through the 
medium of the Agency. 
35. Another success of international collaboration 
that had attracted comment at the Fourth 
Geneva Conference was the fact that the Agency 
had been entrusted with implementing NPT. The 
work which had been done, especially of late, to 
prepare and introduce an effective international 
safeguards system was worthy of close attention. 
His delegation considered that Member States had 
now had enough time, since the successful 
completion of the Board's safeguards committee's 
work in 1971, to set about concluding safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. In that connection 
the Czechoslovak delegation wished to state that 
it found the proposed method of financing safeguards 
activities quite acceptable. 

36. Consequently his delegation felt that events 
were taking the proper course and that by the 
beginning of March 1972 all negotiations between 
States party to NPT and the Agency should have 
been completed. The Czechoslovak Government 
attached great significance to observance of that 
deadline, for it regarded the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons as a matter of the utmost 
importance and would interpret the conclusion of 
safeguards agreements as evidence of a further 
endeavour on the part of Member States to achieve 
world security. It was natural that the growth of 
safeguards work should bring a corresponding 
increase in the number of Agency staff in the 
Department of Safeguards and Inspection. In 
that connection the Czechoslovak delegation urged 
that the Professional posts in question should be 
filled with due regard to fair geographical distribution 
among Member States. 
37. The implementation of the safeguards system 
would inevitably present certain problems in the 
early years, problems which would require an 
effective solution as and when they arose, but his 
delegation was confident that all future problems 
would be resolved in the same spirit of international 
collaboration which had prevailed throughout, 
especially in that particular field. 
38. His delegation believed that NPT would 
eventually be ratified by those countries which 
had so far remained uncommitted. 
39. The twenty-fifth Congress of the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON) recently 
held in Bucharest had discussed and approved a 
broad programme aimed at further consolidation 
and improvement of collaboration and the development 
of close economic integration. That programme 
offered a wide basis for further international 
collaboration with all States. 
40. In connection with matters already mentioned, 
the Czechoslovak delegation considered it necessary 
once again to point out the critical situation which 
had arisen because an advanced country like the 
German Democratic Republic was not represented 
in the Agency. The time had come for all to 
recognize the need for a realistic approach to 
that question. The admission of the German 
Democratic Republic would, in principle, have a 
positive effect on the future development of the 
Agency's activities. 
41. The Agency's detailed programme for 
1971-76 had already been discussed the previous 
year and the Czechoslovak delegation had 
expressed its fundamental agreement with the 
proposed programme at that time. There was 
accordingly no need to make any extensive 
comments on the revised programme for 1972. 
However, the possibility that the Agency might 
participate in an analysis of the present system of 
training nuclear engineers with a view to meeting 
the future needs of the nuclear power industry 
was something worth considering. The Agency's 
programme for 1972, in the opinion of the 
Czechoslovak delegation, unfortunately raised 
problems from the budgetary point of view, as had 
been the case in 1971. In analysing the budget [4] 
his delegation was most unhappy to note that 
virtually two thirds of the 14. 8% increase over 
1971 was attributable to increased salaries for 
Secretariat staff. Such an attitude to the budget 
was quite wrong, for it meant that 70% of the 
Agency's total real budget was expended on salaries 
for Secretariat staff, thereby restricting the scope 
of the Agency's work. 
42. From the budget document which had been 
presented it was impossible to draw the conclusion 
that the persistent rising trend in the budget was 
matched by a corresponding trend in the Agency's 
activities. It would be interesting to study that 
problem on the basis of both economic and noneconomic 
factors. 
[3] GC(XV)/455. [4 ] GC(XV)/460. 
-5 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


43. The Czechoslovak Government had instructed 
him to say that it proposed to supply to the Agency, 
within the framework of the 1972 programme of 
technical assistance to developing countries, 
Czechoslovak equipment worth 150 000 crowns; 
it would also offer five long-term fellowships for 
study in Czechoslovak higher educational 
establishments and four 12-month fellowships for 
study and work in research institutes and facilities 
of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. 
Furthermore, his country was again offering to 
receive specialists from developing countries on 
a study tour under the Agency's auspices. Lastly, 
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic proposed to 
act as host to one Agency symposium in 1972. 
44. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam) said that the 
Fourth Geneva Conference had given the whole 
world a demonstration of the efficiency of the 
Agency which, ever since its establishment, had 
done everything possible to promote and co-ordinate 
international efforts in the application of nuclear 
fission for the welfare and prosperity of mankind. 
The outstanding success of that Conference was to 
the credit of the Director General and his staff, 
to whom the Viet-Namese delegation wished to 
express its admiration and sympathy. 

45. The prestige enjoyed by the Agency and its 
solidly experienced staff in the United Nations 
family was steadily increasing, the more so 
since the changes in the composition of the Board 
of Governors would now ensure more rational 
participation and consequently wider support on 
the part of Member States. 
46. It seemed unnecessary to dwell on the 
Agency's contribution to progress in nuclear 
technology and advances in research on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, especially in agriculture 
and medicine. It should, however, be mentioned 
that the Agency was ready to assume the responsibility 
placed on it under NPT, and that the first 
safeguards agreements under that Treaty had 
already been concluded. The compromise 
solution which had been reached for financing those 
safeguards had been approved by Viet-Nam, as it 
was in keeping with the wishes expressed by that 
country's delegation at the preceding session. [5] 
47. Despite the heavy budgetary burden that it 
would have to support as from 1972 in consequence 
of the extension of safeguards, the Agency was not 
neglecting its statutory promotional and assistance 
obligations. He took particular pleasure in noting 
that under the Agency's programme of activities 
for the year ahead, it would continue to pay 
particular attention to technical assistance for 
developing countries. However, the Agency 
could not meet all requests for assistance unless 
Member States, especially the more advanced 
countries, were willing to increase their voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund so as to enable 
the Agency to meet its new target of US $ 3 million. 
The co-operation of the technically favoured 
countries would be all the more appreciated by the 
developing countries in that technical assistance 
[5] GC(XIV)/OR. 138, para. 7. 
under the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) would henceforth be provided only for 
nuclear research projects which had already 
received preliminary assistance from the Agency. 

48. As far as Viet-Nam was concerned, the 
Agency had already given very favourable consideration 
to its modest requests for technical assistance. 
The Isotopes Laboratory of the Saigon Medical 
Faculty, which had been equipped entirely with 
material supplied by the Agency, had rendered 
valuable services by using new radioactive 
diagnostic techniques and had obtained encouraging 
results in the treatment of goitre with radioactive 
iodine. Research on rice improvement undertaken 
by the Isotopes Laboratory of the Institute for 
Agricultural Research, carried out under Agency 
auspices, had yielded very worth-while results, 
and in the immediate future Viet-Nam intended to 
embark upon the study of food preservation by 
means of a gamma irradiation facility to be 
provided shortly by the Agency. Along with such 
technical support, the Agency had also made 
available to Viet-Nam advisory services in 
connection with nuclear legislation, which had 
enabled it to confirm the undeniable utility of the 
standards and recommendations which it had 
drafted on the subject of nuclear safety. There 
could be no doubt that the adoption of those 
standards by WHO would greatly facilitate 
collaboration between the health authorities and the 
authorities responsible for nuclear energy in the 
various countries. 

49. It was a well-known fact that implementation 
of nuclear programmes in the developing countries 
was encountering a number of serious difficulties, 
the most important of which was the lack of 
qualified technicians. The Agency had made a 
praiseworthy effort to organize training, 
specialized courses and study trips on a regular 
basis. He suggested, however, that the Agency 
should study the possibility of providing the 
developing countries with effective means for 
training qualified technicians at home, and more 
particularly technicians with intermediate 
qualifications. The creation of regional centres 
for nuclear training, along the lines of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, 
would be very welcome. For the countries of 
South East Asia, in particular, the Agency might 
study the question of co-operation with regional 
organizations, such as the Organization of the 
Ministers of Education of South East Asia. 
50. As regards regional co-operation proper, 
Viet-Nam reaffirmed its adherence to the decisions 
of the meeting organized at Bangkok in July 1970, 
and expressed the hope that the first co-operation 
projects would soon be implemented with the 
active support of the Agency. 
51. The Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam 
had just ratified NPT and the amendment of 
Article VI of the Agency's Statute. By taking 
those actions, it wished to indicate its interest in 
the extension of the Agency's activities and to 
contribute, to the best of its ability, to increasing 
-6 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


the prestige of the Agency. However, only when 
peace had been restored in his country which for 
30 years had been ravaged by a war which it did 
not want, would scientific research be able to 
operate under more satisfactory working conditions. 
Viet-Nam would then hope to be able to associate 
itself more effectively with the activities promoted 
by the Agency in order to extend the benefits of the 
atom to all nations. 

52. Mr. VOSNJAK (Yugoslavia) said that the 
1971 session of the General Conference followed 
a period of positive and fruitful work in some 
spheres of the Agency's activities: first there had 
been the conclusion of the work of the Board and 
its safeguards committee on the structure and 
content of agreements between the Agency and 
parties to NPT, and then there had been the 
Fourth Geneva Conference, which had just ended. 
Those were two important events in the life of the 
Agency and, in a sense, they might influence the 
course of its future activities. 
53. The Yugoslav delegation had participated 
actively in those two activities. Within the limits 
of its capabilities, it had contributed to a better 
mutual understanding among Member States, to 
peace and security and also to the promotion of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, especially 
in the developing countries. 
54. In participating in the work of the Board's 
safeguards committee, the Yugoslav delegation 
had always upheld the following principles: 
(a) 
Strict interpretation of Article III, 
paragraph 3 of NPT and application of safeguards 
to all peaceful activities within a 
State; 
(b) 
Application of safeguards in such a manner 
as to render impossible any diversion from 
the authorized use of nuclear energy to 
military uses, for the production of nuclear 
weapons and other explosive devices; 
(c) 
Application of safeguards in such a manner 
as to ensure maximum profitability and to 
ensure simplicity in methods of reporting 
and of keeping records of the nuclear 
materials which were not to be used for 
weapons production; 
(d) 
Inspection based on direct access to material 
throughput and on independent accounting and 
measurements; and 
(e) 
Distribution of the cost of safeguards among 
Members so as to achieve the following 
technical objectives: 
(i) 
A reduction in the total cost of safeguards, 
the only safeguards activities to be taken 
into account being those specifically 
mentioned in NPT; 
(ii) 
Distribution of the costs among Members 
in such a way as to minimize the amount 
payable by countries with small nuclear 
programmes or no nuclear activities at 
all; and 

(iii) 
The possibility of reviewing the financial 
provisions after several years' 
experience of the application of safeguards 
and, in particular, at the General 
Conference's session in 1975 when the 
operation of NPT would be evaluated 
and studied. 
It had been in the light of those considerations that 
the Yugoslav delegation in the safeguards committee 
had submitted its proposal and amendments to the 
resolution. 

55. The Yugoslav delegation considered that the 
principles set forth in the draft of the safeguards 
agreement were, to a large extent, acceptable. 
On the basis of that document, its Government 
was prepared to start negotiations with the Agency 
for the conclusion of a safeguards agreement. 
However, it thought it would be advisable to try 
to improve and complete the draft of the agreement 
to give more prominence to the interests of nonnuclear 
States and to reduce the gap between such 
States and the big Powers. 
56. Now that the first stage in the implementation 
of NPT had been accomplished, other matters must 
be dealt with. His delegation was thinking, in 
particular, of the clauses of NPT which dealt 
directly with the statutory functions of the Agency, 
namely the promotion of nuclear energy for peace 
and progress, particularly in the developing 
countries. 
57. The Fourth Geneva Conference had enabled 
a better idea to be obtained of the overall achievements 
of Member States in the field of nuclear 
energy. The developing countries had had some 
noteworthy successes in that field, particularly in 
respect of nuclear technology, nuclear power plants 
and research involving the use of isotopes in 
medicine, agriculture, industry and so on. Within 
the limits of its possibilities, the Agency had 
contributed to those results. However, the Fourth 
Geneva Conference had also shown that the gap 
between industrialized and developing countries 
had grown bigger than ever. That was particularly 
true in the case of nuclear energy, where the 
advances made by the industrialized countries 
were spectacular, whilst those made by the 
developing countries were very meagre. 
58. To remedy the existing situation, all Member 
States, and especially the nuclear Powers, must 
contribute to a more rapid and effective development 
of the applications of nuclear energy in the 
developing countries. The resolve of the nuclear 
Powers, as set for in NPT, to promote the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy throughout the 
world and, in particular, in the developing countries, 
had still not been translated into action. It was 
time that those Powers defined their intentions in 
concrete and specific terms and gave tangible 
proof of their sincere desire to keep their promises. 
-7 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 

59. The past experience of the Agency and the 
documents of the Fourth Geneva Conference provided 
sufficient information about the present status of 
nuclear energy and about the needs of the developing 
countries. They also provided information on the 
current trends of nuclear energy development 
throughout the world. The Yugoslav delegation 
suggested that the Director General and the 
Secretariat of the Agency should draw up an exhaustive 
draft technical assistance programme and 
define ways of implementing it and providing the 
financial assistance required. That draft could 
serve as a basis for a study by Member States of 
the effective and total implementation of NPT and 
of the long-term planning of the Agency's 
activities. 
60. Yugoslavia would continue to associate 
itself with all those efforts to make progress and 
would continue to work with the Powers of the 
world community to make NPT into a truly universal 
agreement, acceptable to all countries as an 
instrument of mutual confidence and respect for the 
sovereignty of the Agency's Member States. The 
system of control might then be considerably 
simplified until it became unnecessary. 
61. An analysis of the information provided for 
the 1971 session of the General Conference clearly 
showed that the Agency1 s budget was increasing 
year by year. The inadequacy of the efforts made 
by the Agency to find ways and means not- only of 
putting a brake on increases in the budget, but 
still more of reducing it, should be stressed. 
That could be achieved by reductions in the Agency's 
staff and by eliminating certain of the Agency's 
less important or less necessary current 
activities. 

62. An analysis of the Agency's activities showed 
that they had been wide-ranging, diverse and 
successful, thanks to the efforts of all its Members, 
its administrative organs, its Secretariat and its 
Director General. 
63. On the other hand, the principle of universality 
of the Agency had still not been translated into 
fact. Many countries, whose contributions to the 
Agency's work could be of great benefit to the 
international community, were still not members 
of the Agency. The Yugoslav delegation hoped 
that the existing barriers would soon be removed 
and that, through recognition of the realities of 
the modern world, the People's Republic of China, 
the German Democratic Republic and other 
countries could be welcomed as Member States. 
64. Baron van BOETZELAER (Netherlands) said 
that the main task was to plan for the future. In 
particular, safeguards activities took up a great 
deal of the time and money of the Secretariat and 
it was most important that that time and money 
should not be wasted. 
65. NPT was quite specific as to its aims but 
much less specific as to their implementation. 
Considering that the aims were to be achieved by 
a control system which thoroughly affected the 
sovereign rights of States, it was not to be 
wondered at if those States wished to know exactly 
their new obligations and rights nor that the Board1 s 
safeguards committee had taken nine months and 
82 meetings to reach agreement. 

66. His Government wished to commend the 
persevering work of the safeguards committee and 
the excellent services provided by the Director 
General and his dedicated staff. 
67. The formulation of the material on the 
structure and content of agreements required in 
connection with NPT [6] had been a most important 
step towards making NPT work, but it only provided 
a model and the next step was the conclusion of the 
agreements between the parties to NPT and the 
Agency required by Article III. As a Member of 
the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
his Government would shortly negotiate that agreement 
through and with the EURATOM Commission, 
which had just received a mandate to that effect 
from the Council of Ministers of the European 
Communities. 
68. His Government supported the view that the 
heavy responsibilities of the Agency under NPT 
should not hamper its other work and should not 
unduly burden countries with limited resources. 
For that reason it supported the solution for the 
financing of NPT safeguards elaborated by the 
safeguards committee and recommended by the 
Board to the Conference for acceptance. 
69. The Netherlands Government also supported 
the proposal, made by the Board, to raise the 
target of the voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund to $ 3 million, and had accordingly raised its 
1972 contribution above the required level. It 
also welcomed the upward trend in the availability 
of UNDP funds for technical assistance. 
70. For an extremely densely populated and 
highly industrialized country like the Netherlands, 
problems of environment urgently required solutions 
and the Agency's role in regard to the United 
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 
Stockholm in 1972 was much appreciated. 
71. The Fourth Geneva Conference had made it 
clear that by the end of the decade nuclear power 
would cover an important percentage of the power 
requirements of both advanced and developing 
countries. 
72. His Government was contributing to that 
development in several fields, such as the development 
of sodium cooled fast breeder reactors, other 
types of breeders, partly thorium based, and 
uranium enrichment facilities. Governmentfinanced 
research in plasma physics was carried 
out in close co-operation with other countries, in 
Europe mainly with EURATOM countries. 
73. The establishment of an International Fusion 
Research Council had been warmly welcomed by 
his Government. 
[6] INFCIRC/153. 
8 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


74. In order to maintain the high standard of the co-operation, both economic and scientific, 
symposia and seminars organized by the Agency should be for the benefit of all countries and 
and in order to select new subjects on which others should aim at reducing the gap between them. 
were to be held, the Director General would have to 

rely more and more on the advice of SAC. In the 
opinion of his Government the only guideline in 
selecting members of SAC should be the high 
scientific qualifications of the incumbents. 

75. Mr. URSU (Romania) said he wanted, first, 
to stress the importance Romania attached to the 
complex activities of the Agency, bearing in mind 
the significance of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in the development of his country. The 
high economic growth rates, achieved in Romania 
during the preceding two decades, required an 
approach based on contemporary science and, in 
particular, the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
The main task of Romania's State Committee for 
Nuclear Energy was to introduce the higher stages 
of technological research in order to achieve the 
basic objectives of the atomic energy industrialization 
programme. 
76. By utilizing the results of research it had 
been possible to put various nuclear facilities at 
the disposal of the national economy. Industry 
had received designs for the construction of 
critical and sub-critical assemblies; progress 
and expansion had been achieved in the industrial 
applications of radiations and isotopes, chemical 
extraction, pharmacology, metallurgy, agriculture, 
medicine and biology, and the results obtained had 
been presented at the Fourth Geneva Conference. 
The various items of equipment that had been 
developed in Romanian institutes included level 
gauges, multiple relays for checking furnace 
lining wear, defectoscopes, humidity meters, etc. 
77. The wide range of basic research problems 
dealt with would ensure the further development 
of nuclear physics in his country. A tandem 
accelerator would soon be put into operation, 
enabling researchers to conduct further work on 
medium energies and the collaboration of other 
countries would be invited. Technological research 
had been concentrated mainly on nuclear fuels and 
other nuclear materials. To accelerate the 
development of that important activity, a National 
Nuclear Programme had been elaborated. All 
branches of industry and many other economic and 
social sectors would co-operate within the framework 
of the Programme, whose main aim was to 
industrialize nuclear energy by installing about 
1000 MW(e) of nuclear capacity before 1980 and by 
establishing related industries; the underlying 
basic research would also be fostered. To carry 
out those tasks the State Committee for Nuclear 
Energy was co-ordinating the work of research, 
design and production units, education and information 
centres, enterprises dealing with the 
development of nuclear power plants, and other 
related institutions. 
78. Nuclear energy and its applications called 
for special measures beyond the capabilities of 
smaller countries, which led to the practical 
necessity of strengthening co-operation between 
all countries in the nuclear field. International 
79. Reflecting the interests of its people, 
Romania's foreign policy aimed at establishing a 
climate of peace, understanding and co-operation 
between all nations. His country favoured an 
open foreign policy, carried out under the control 
of the people, to ensure that the relations between 
all States were based on the principles of national 
independence and sovereignty, non-interference 
in internal affairs, abstention from the threat or 
use of force, equality of rights, and mutual 
advantage. His country regarded the strengthening 
of friendships, alliances and co-operation with 
all socialist countries as the centre of its international 
activity, and at the same time, it wanted 
co-operation with all countries, regardless of 
social systems. Romania believed that participation 
in the exchange of material and spiritual 
values was an essential condition for establishing 
world peace and security. As a European country, 
Romania was vitally interested in security in 
Europe. Now that conditions were favourable for 
preparing a general European conference, with the 
participation of all interested States, Romania 
would act firmly in that direction. His country 
believed that it was essential to remove all hotbeds 
of tension and conflict that existed throughout the 
world: foreign intervention in Indochina must be 
stopped, the rights of the Viet-Namese, Laotian 
and Cambodian peoples to decide their own destiny 
must be respected, and the conflict in the Middle 
East must be settled on the basis of the Security 
Council resolution of November 1967. The total 
liquidation of vestiges of colonialism, and of all 
forms of national oppression and racial discrimination 
was an imperative requirement, and the 
younger States should be assisted on their way to 
economic and social progress. 
80. His country was a firm advocate of general 
disarmament, starting with nuclear weapons and 
other mass-destruction weapons, and it had actively 
participated in the negotiation of NPT. When that 
Treaty came into force, Romania would support it 
to the full in both letter and spirit. His Government 
had stated its willingness to negotiate with 
the Agency the safeguards agreement specified 
under Article III of NPT. 

81. If the Agency was to fulfil its mission 
completely, it would have to become really 
universal. In reaffirming the consistent position 
of its Government, the Romanian delegation wanted 
to stress that China should be represented in all 
international organizations within the United 
Nations system by the People's Republic of China. 
It was urgently necessary to restore the lawful 
rights of the People's Republic of China in the 
Agency. Any attempt to prevent the participation 
of the People's Republic of China in United Nations 
activities, as a Member State, was an act against 
the cause of peace and international co-operation. 
At the same time, the Romanian Government 
considered that the German Democratic Republic a 
country with important achievements in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy - should be a 
-9 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 

Member of the Agency, and all obstacles which 
hampered the participation of other States in the 
Agency's activities should be removed. 

82. As an international organization in the 
United Nations family, the Agency could and must 
contribute to ensuring peace and international cooperation. 
At last year's session of the General 
Conference, His Excellency Mr. Nicolae Ceaugescu, 
President of the State Council of the Socialist 
Republic of Romania, had said that the Agency 
could contribute, through its activities, to the 
great benefits that were to be derived from the 
application of nuclear energy and could help in 
eliminating under-development and raising the 
levels of civilization of all peoples. Mr. Ceau^escu 
had said that particular importance was attached, 
in that connection, to the Agency's role in promoting 
co-operation in research and in the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, and in intensifying 
the efforts of Member States to overcome their 
handicap in that field. He had pointed out that, in 
that way, the Agency could greatly contribute to 
an international detente, to understanding among 
peoples, and to the cause of peace in the world. [7] 
In that spirit, his delegation wanted to make some 
appreciative comments on the annual report of the 
Board. 
83. The report reflected the Agency's achievements, 
and the inherent difficulties that arose 
from its multilateral activity, difficulties which 
had so far been surmounted. The report confirmed 
his delegation's opinion that the Agency was playing 
a useful role for the Member States. He did not 
doubt for a moment that the Agency would continue 
to carry out its task successfully. Romania had 
taken an active part in the elaboration of the 
safeguards agreement, which had been submitted 
to Member States for examination, and believed 
that bilateral agreements taking into account the 
specific interests of States would be reached. At 
the same time, his delegation thought the Agency 
realized the necessity of multilateral examination 
of its increased tasks in international co-operation 
and technical assistance so that it could contribute 
to the development of the non-nuclear-weapon 
States, in accordance with NPT, 

84. He was confident that the Agency would 
receive the necessary assistance from all its 
Members, and said that Romania would endeavour 
to play its part. 
85. The year just elapsed had seen a broadening 
of the Agency's sphere of activities. For example, 
the industrialization of atomic energy had been 
given more attention and the Agency's activities 
were beginning to extend to the entire fuel cycle. 
It would be very useful for Member States if the 
Agency also devoted some attention to uranium 
enrichment. 
86. To give only one example of the efficient 
assistance provided by the Agency in the technological 
domain, he wanted to mention the important 
[7 ] See document GC(XIV)/OR. 139, paras 9 
and 10. 
role played by a team of Agency experts in 
establishing the basis of a project for an institute 
of nuclear technology, to be established in Romania. 
The Agency's activities in regard to peaceful 
nuclear explosions should be continued. 

87. The Agency now acted as an executing agency 
for an increasing number of UNDP technical 
assistance projects and his delegation wanted to 
congratulate the Agency for that additional achievement. 
88. Certainly, one should not ignore the results 
obtained by granting technical assistance under 
established forms, but the progress registered 
was slow, especially compared with other Agency 
activities. In that context, his delegation 
supported the proposal of the Board to raise the 
target of voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund to US $ 3 million and would make its contribution 
in accordance with the established level. 
In addition, his country would offer the Agency 
fellowships tenable in Romanian scientific 
institutes in 1972. 
89. In reviewing the Agency's activities during 
the preceding year, he wanted to stress that his 
Government appreciated the results achieved. 
On behalf of his delegation he had pleasure in 
extending thanks to the Agency's Secretariat and 
to its Director General for the efforts they had 
made in assisting the Agency's Member States to 
develop international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
90. Mr. SARABHAI (India) wished to express his 
country's appreciation to the Director General and 
the staff of the Agency for their successful work 
during the past year and particularly for the very 
efficient manner in which the Agency had shouldered 
the responsibility of organizing the Fourth Geneva 
Conference on behalf of the United Nations. 
91. During the last two years the Agency had gone 
through a difficult period of adjusting to new circumstances 
and new responsibilities. The enlargement^ 
of the Board of Governors, the new basis for 
meeting the expenses arising out of safeguards and 
the development of a new framework for the 
implementation of safeguards were measures that 
were clearly overdue. However, it was tragic 
that progress in those directions had been 
accompanied by a steady erosion of the Agency's 
activities in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. It was a primary responsibility of Member 
States to manage the affairs of the Agency in such 
a way that those promotional efforts were expanded 
or at least maintained at a uniform level and not 
allowed to diminish in real terms through inflationary 
rises in costs. 
92. In principle, there must be a change of 
relative emphasis in the activities of any dynamic 
organization over a period of time. However, he 
was alarmed over the conversion of many posts in 
several Divisions to posts for safeguards 
activities. In his opinion, subjects which merited 
special emphasis included such activities as 
training, demonstration and technical assistance, 
- 10 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


particularly for scientists from the large number 
of developing countries which were at present not 
yet participating in any significant manner in the 
benefits of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
There had recently been a tendency to limit the 
number of scientific meetings held by the Agency 
in places other than Europe. Holding more panel 
meetings in developing countries, even if that 
meant additional costs for travel, and providing 
more facilities for training in laboratories and 
institutions associated with the Agency were 
perhaps the most cost-effective methods of 
promoting atomic energy. In the area of soil 
fertility, plant breeding and entomology, in 
particular, there was scope for increasing the 
admission of trainees to the laboratory at 
Seibersdorf. That could be done by providing 
fellowships and, if necessary, additional staff for 
training. 

93. The centres of the Atomic Energy Commission 
in India offered valuable opportunities for training 
and demonstration in fields such as reactor 
operations, radiation medicine, radiation protection, 
management of radioactive wastes, food preservation 
by irradiation, and neutron activation analysis all 
subjects of great practical value. Facilities 
for research and training in the basic physical and 
biological sciences were also available. The 
establishment at Trombay of a documentation 
service related to the International Nuclear Information 
System opened up the prospect of a regional 
centre which could also provide training in the 
specialized field of documentation on atomic energy. 

94. The Nuclear Research Centre for Agriculture, 
which had been set up as a joint UNDP/IAEA/FAOsupported 
programme in India, was now developing 
into an active centre of great significance to many 
nations of Asia which had to cope with problems of 
the same type as those found in India, The Centre 
would be formally inaugurated by the Prime 
Minister of India in November 1971, but research 
activities had been going on there for the past two 
years. Supported by efforts of the Bhabha Atomic 
Research Centre, the National Dairy Research 
Institute and the Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, the Centre's laboratories served as a 
national facility for augmenting productivity in 
agriculture and animal husbandry through the use 
of nuclear techniques. 

95. An important milestone in the development of 
atomic energy in India had been the acceptance by 
the Government of a ten-year programme involving 
not only the installation of 2700 MW of nuclear 
power by the end of the decade but also provision 
of a whole set of support facilities and back-up 
research and development work. In addition, the 
Indian Atomic Energy Commission had recently 
decided to set up a National Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Authority having responsibilities not 
only in accounting for fissile material but also in 
the field of health and safety. 
96. In collaboration with France, India had 
recently embarked on a programme for the design 
and construction of a fast breeder reactor. A 
test reactor of that type, along with other facilities, 
such as processing and reprocessing plants, were 
under construction at the newly created Reactor 
Research Centre at Kalpakkam, Madras with the 
objective of exploiting the country's extensive 
resources of thorium. A zero-energy fast reactor 
was scheduled to go into operation at Trombay 
before the end of the year. 

97. The Director General had referred in his 
statement to the need for increased support of the 
International Commission on Radiation Units and 
Measurements and the International Commission on 
Radiological Protection in work connected with 
safety standards and environmental pollution. [8] 
India would like to endorse that proposal. 
98. The Director General had also referred to a 
proposal to increase support of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste during 
the years ahead. [9] While appreciating the work 
of the Centre - which had helped young scientists 
from developing countries - India felt that at a 
time when programmes of practical use were so 
sorely handicapped for lack of adequate support, 
such an increase in support might create an imbalance. 
99. For several years India had participated 
actively in the Agency's programme of bringing together 
countries of a given region to collaborate in 
various developments related to the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. At the last Study Group meeting 
on the Utilization of Research Reactors held in 
Bandung, Indonesia in 1971, it had become clear 
that the earlier collaboration between countries 
in the South East Asian region was beginning to 
yield significant results. The Agency had always 
attached a great deal of importance to that type of 
promotional activity and he earnestly hoped that 
it would continue to support such efforts. Several 
countries had proposed that there should be an 
umbrella agreement between those countries and 
the Agency to ensure that various projects of joint 
interest could be taken up at appropriate times. 
His Government suggested that such an agreement 
be submitted to and approved by the Board as early 
as possible. A step along those lines would 
represent a new pattern in international cooperation 
between developing countries. 

100. The Indian delegation would like to commend 
the Director General's proposal to raise the target 
for voluntary contributions to the General Fund 
from its present level of US $ 2. 5 to US $ 3 million. 
He took pleasure in announcing his country's 
contribution of US $42 500 to the technical assistance 
programme of the Agency for the year 
1972. That contribution was a token of India's 
wholehearted support of the Agency and its 
activities. 
101. The Fourth Geneva Conference had left 
participants with the firm conviction that atomic 
energy was an essential ingredient not only for 
maintaining the standards of the economically 
[8] GC(XV)/OR. 144, para. 17. 
[9] Ibid., para. 25. 
- 11 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 

advanced nations but also for enabling the developing 
nations to shed their poverty. However, 
if the benefits of atomic energy were to be enjoyed 
by the world at large, it was necessary to ensure 
a free exchange of information and wholehearted 

co-operation in atomic matters, and not a 
parochial spirit of secrecy, a policy of sharing 
rather than of commercial and national acquisitiveness. 
That was the spirit in which science could 
develop. He realized, however, that in the world 
of reality, that was a most difficult dream to 
achieve. 

102. Mr. CHENG (China) said that a major 
development in the year now ending had been 
implementation of NPT, a process in which the 
Republic of China had also played a role. NPT 
required that non-nuclear-weapon States which had 
deposited their instruments of ratification should 
negotiate a safeguards agreement entering into 
force not later than March 1972. For that reason, 
a committee had been set up to advise on the drafting 
of a model agreement, and nearly 50 States had 
participated in its work. The Republic of China 
had been one of the nations to serve on the Committee. 
The Chinese Government had ratified 
NPT and was now engaged in negotiations with the 
Agency with a view to concluding a safeguards 
agreement. 
103. Sub-structure and auxiliary civil engineering 
work on the country's projected 600-MW(e) nuclear 
power plants had already been started and everything 
was proceeding according to schedule. The 
first unit was expected to go into commercial 
operation in 1975. The second unit, which was a 
duplication of the first, was scheduled for the 
subsequent year. A third and a fourth unit, with 
capacities of the order of 800 MW(e), were being 
planned for 1978 and 1979. ' In that connection, 
the Republic of China felt an obligation to express 
its deep appreciation to the Agency for the assistance 
it had received at every stage in the 
development of those plans. It was particularly 
indebted to the Agency for having sent a team 
recently to assist in the safety evaluation of the 
plant under construction. 
104. Construction was also going forward on a 
materials testing reactor of the heavy-water type. 
That project, too, was proceeding according to 
schedule and it was hoped that it would be completed 
by 1973. 
105. In conjunction with the latter installation, a 
10-kW swimming-pool reactor using the spent 
fuel of the existing Tsing Hua Open-Pool (THOR) 
facility had been completed and initial operation 
had begun on 2 February 1971. The reactor 
would be used for the testing of loops before they 
were placed in the materials testing reactor. At 
present, it was being used for the preliminary 
training of personnel. The reactors which he had 
mentioned had already been evaluated in accordance 
with safeguards procedures and had already been 
placed under Agency safeguards. 
106. During the past year his country had made 
steady progress in the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy. In medicine and agriculture 
particularly, the use of nuclear techniques had 
become more and more common. Industrial 
applications were also becoming quite popular. To 
improve public knowledge of the progress made in 
nuclear science and to stimulate its further development, 
a special "Atoms for Peace" exhibition 
had been held in Taiwan. The exhibition had been 
a great success and had been attended by more 
than 330 000 persons. It was felt that such exhibitions 
contributed greatly to public education 
and made the public more fully aware of the 
benefits that could be derived from peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy and of the safe character 
of those applications. 

107. His Government wished to express its deep 
appreciation for the many technical assistance 
projects which the Agency had carried out on 
behalf of China during the previous years and which 
had played a key role in the continuous development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the 
country. 
108. His delegation was glad to note that a suitable 
solution of the problem of financing the safeguards 
programme had been found. The Republic of 
China was in full agreement with that solution and 
wished to congratulate the Board's safeguards 
committee for having found such an equitable and 
workable formula. 
109. The question of enlarging the Board and reapportioning 
regional representation had also been 
solved. The amendment to Article VI of the 
Statute [10] had been ratified by the Chinese 
Government and the instrument of ratification had 
recently been deposited. His delegation felt that 
the amendment represented a balanced and fair 
readjustment. 
110. An increasing part was being played by 
Agency-sponsored projects of regional co-operation 
in nuclear science. Such projects had made 
possible the exchange of experience and mutual cooperation 
of a practical nature among the participants. 
In that connection, he wished to mention 
the recent Study Group meeting on the Utilization 
of Research Reactors held in Bandung, Indonesia. 
Meetings of that kind of the nations of a particular 
region having similar problems were of immense 
advantage. Now that the production of power 
through the use of nuclear energy was no longer a 
theoretical possibility but a practical fact, exchanges 
of information on common problems and 
experience in that field assumed increasing importance. 
Other problems suitable for discussion 
by nations of a given region included those of 
engineering, safety precautions, waste disposal 
and so on. The Chinese delegation was convinced 
that the pooling of information and the interflow 
of practical assistance within regions would 
contribute to the progress of all concerned. 
111. With regard to the budget estimates of the 
Agency for the coming year, his delegation, while 
reserving the right to comment on certain details, 
[10 ] Set forth in Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272. 
- 12 



GC(XV)/OR. 146 


nevertheless considered that the proposed increases 
were based on reasonable grounds. As in previous 
years, the Government of the Republic of China 
intended to make a voluntary contribution of 
US $10 000 to the General Fund for 1972. It had 
also placed at the disposal of the Agency a nuclear 
electronic demonstrator for use in training personnel. 
The equipment in question had arrived in 
Turin about a week before. An expert had been 
sent to the Turin training centre to supervise the 
assembly of the unit and to give initial instructions 
concerning its use. All the expenses involved, 
including those for the expert, were being met by 
the Chinese Government. Two more training 
devices of the same type were now under construction 
and would be placed at the Agency' s 
disposal during the present year and the year 
following. 

112. Mr. FREIER (Israel) said that his country 
had placed at the Agency's disposal expertise or 
experts in food preservation by irradiation, insect 
control by irradiation, uses of radiation and 
isotopes in human and veterinary medicine, the use 
of tracer techniques in industry and the study of 
environmental pollution, hydrology, reactor physics, 
health physics, the study of agro-industrial 
complexes, the storage and organization of nuclear 
data, and in a number of scientific fields of less 
immediately practical application. The range of 
Israel's professional contributions to the Agency 
might extend to other areas, as well, such as 
radiobiological research and the interaction of 
radiation with the solid state. 
113. There might also be interest in the Agency 
or in individual Member States in Israel's study 
of the introduction of nuclear power. They were 
considering dual-purpose plants for the generation 
of electricity and the desalination of water, as well 
as the phasing-in of single-purpose nuclear power 
plants into the electricity grid. 
114. He had been interested in Mr. Seaborg's 
suggestion that plants of up to 300-MW capacity 
deserved study for the benefit of developing 
countries, [11] but feared that even in the range of 
400-500-MW installations sufficiently reliable 
data were not available for a country to entrust 
to them a good portion of its electricity production 
at reasonable cost towards the latter half of the 
decade. 
115. Israel would be placing at the disposal of the 
Agency 45 man-months of fellowships in 1972. 
In addition, it had pledged its voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund, as assessed, and would fulfil 
its pledge as it had done in the past. 
116. However, in regard to voluntary contributions 
Israel had certain misgivings about the weight 
given to political and extraneous considerations in 
the councils of the Agency. 
117. In conclusion, he thanked the Agency for the 
assistance Israel had received during the past 
year. 
• The meeting rose at 12. 55 p. m. 
[11] GC(XV)/OR. 144, para. 53. 
- 13 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 
15 August 1972* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

OFFICIAL RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 23 September 1971, at 3. 15 p.m. 

President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 

Item of 

of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

General debate and report 143 
of the Board of Governors 
for 1970-71 (continued) 

Statement s by the 
delegates of: 

Kuwait 1 - 15 
Denmark 16 - 29 
France 30 - 45 
Hungary 46 - 53 
Pakistan 54 - 60 
Poland 61 - 77 
Mexico 78 - 103 
Brazil 104 - 123 
Ireland 124 - 135 
Thailand 136 - 143 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 1 October 1971. 
GC(XV)/469. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 147 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1970-71 
(GC(XV)/455, 466) (continued) 

1. Mr. OMAR (Kuwait) said he wished to 
express his appreciation to the Director General 
and the staff of the Agency for their highly efficient 
contribution to the success of the Fourth 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy (Fourth Geneva Conference), which 
had proved beyond doubt the role that nuclear 
science was, and would be, playing in the 
progress of mankind in developed as well as 
developing countries. 
2. Kuwait had joined the Agency in 1964 at a 
time when the Agency's attention was being 
devoted to nuclear power and desalination. Both 
those topics were of great interest to Kuwait, 
which met the bulk of its water requirements by 
means of desalination processes involving the use 
of conventional power and desalination plants. The 
need for both power and water had risen sharply in 
the 1960s with the expansion of urbanization, the 
development of industrial complexes, especially 
the petrochemical industry, and the marked growth 
of the population, which had increased by 50% 
between 1965 and 1970. Although Kuwait was considered 
to be one of the largest oil-producing 
countries, its Ministry of Electricity and Water 
had, in 1966, started to explore the possibility of 
introducing nuclear power. The Agency had been 
of assistance in that respect, as had the Chairman 
of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission, whom 
he wished to thank for the personal contribution he 
had made to the study of the matter. 
3. The intention of the authorities to establish 
a national atomic commission, about the structure 
and authority of and regulations for which the 
Agency had recently been consulted, was a reflection 
of the increasing interest in nuclear energy. 
The establishment of such a commission would 
promote all the applications of nuclear energy in 
Kuwait and enable it to enter the nuclear power 
field. 
4. Kuwait's first practical experience of nuclear 
energy had been with the applications of radioisotopes 
in medicine. Thanks to continuous 
encouragement from the Ministry of Health and to 
the generous allocation of funds, there had been a 
tremendous expansion in that field of medicine in 
Kuwait since work had first started in it in 1963. 
In 1969, a new Centre had been completed with a 
capacity to provide radiotherapeutic services for 
the population of Kuwait and for patients coming 
from Gulf States with which Kuwait had signed 
agreements. Treatment and hospitalization were 
provided free of charge. The Centre had gained a 
wide reputation in the area and was attracting 
patients from other neighbouring countries as well. 

5. A computer programme had been developed 
in connection with dose distribution in cobalt and 
radium therapy. The Agency was currently 
assessing the cobalt therapy programme. A computer 
programme in connection with cancer had 
also been developed and was functioning in the 
country. At the moment, the computer installed 
in the Kuwait Planning Board was being used, but 
the Ministry of Health would have its own by the 
end of the following year, which would lead to 
further development in the radiotherapy computer 
programme and in radioisotopic studies. 

6. The radioisotopic laboratory was carrying 
out many of the clinical investigations, although 
some difficulty was being experienced in obtaining 
short-lived isotopes. By the following year the 
laboratory should be in possession of a gammatomographic 
camera with an attached computer 
system, which would enable it to expand and 
develop its work considerably. His personal 
thanks were due to the Agency expert whose 
recommendations had made it possible for such an 
expensive piece of equipment to be obtained. 
7. The authorities in Kuwait believed that the 
standard achieved in the Centre had reached the 
level where training in radiotherapy, radiation 
physics and isotopic applications would be welcome. 
8. The Centre was also responsible for the 
implementation of the recommendations of the 
International Commission on Radiological 
Protection in all medical diagnostic radiological 
facilities, whether belonging to the Ministry of 
Health or to private clinics. With the help and 
co-operation of the Radiological Protection 
Service at Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom, the 
Centre was carrying out personnel monitoring of 
all occupationally exposed personnel, whether in 
the medical, industrial or research fields. By 
1972 a national radiological protection service 
would be functioning in Kuwait. 
9. Although the medical applications of nuclear 
energy seemed to be the main applications in 
Kuwait at the moment, research in underground 
water and agriculture had been carried out. Moreover, 
the Physics Department of the relatively 
recently established Kuwait University was 
expanding its section on radiation and nuclear 
physics and was contemplating purchasing a small 
research reactor. Kuwait had been co-operating 
and would continue to co-operate with the Middle 
Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre in Cairo, 
which had been responsible for the study of underground 
water in Kuwait and was providing training 
facilities, but it would like to see a greater expansion 
in that Centre's work. 
10. The experience of Kuwait might be of interest 
to many developing nations which were just entering 
the field of nuclear energy applications. 
Many problems had to be surmounted, especially 
with regard to providing national technical 
personnel. A great effort should be made in that 
respect if national nuclear programmes were to be 
carried out and developed. The Agency had played 
a great role in that regard and it should continue 
to do so. Furthermore, developed nations 
interested in exporting their nuclear facilities 
should put emphasis on nuclear technical assis-
2 



GC(XV/OR. 147 


tance in their cultural agreements with developing 
nations. 

11. The study by the Secretariat on the prospects 
for and financing of nuclear power plants in 
developing countries[l] was most interesting, as 
had been the discussions at the Fourth Geneva 
Conference. The provision of funds for nuclear 
power plants in developing countries was the most 
important of many existing problems, and it was 
up to the nuclear industries of the developed 
countries to continue in their endeavour to reduce 
the capital cost and also to seek national and international 
funds if they wished to exploit the considerable 
market available in the developing 
countries. 
12. His delegation appreciated the efforts being 
made by different national authorities and by the 
Agency to control radioactive waste disposal. He 
had been impressed by the United States delegate's 
statement that nuclear power would prove to be 
the cleanest source of energy. [2] The contribution 
the Agency was to make to the Conference on 
the Human Environment to be held in Stockholm 
in 1972 under the auspices of the United Nations 
was welcome. 
13. His delegation was concerned at the annually 
increasing budget of the Agency and, in particular, 
that only 0. 7% of the 17. 9% increase in the 1972 
budget was allocated to programmes other than 
those connected with safeguards, the bulk of the 
increase being absorbed in administrative 
expenses. Although Kuwait would contribute its 
share to the proposed budget, it would find it 
difficult to accept any future rise that was not 
reflected in scientific programmes and technical 
assistance. 
14. His delegation welcomed the decision of 
the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM) to negotiate an agreement with the 
Agency in connection with safeguards and hoped 
that the negotiations would come to a successful 
conclusion. That decision had been made possible 
by the work of the Board's safeguards committee, 
which should be congratulated on its effort. His 
delegation hoped that the States which had not yet 
ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[3] would do so in the near 
future. 
15. In conclusion he welcomed the agreement 
between the Agency and the League of Arab 
States[4]. He hoped that the implementation of 
that agreement would promote the progress of 
nuclear technology in the Arab countries. 
16. Mr. von BULOW (Denmark) recalled that for 
the past year his country had held a seat on the 
[1] GC(XV)/458, Annex. 
[2] See document GC(XV)/OR. 144, paras 57-63. 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[4] The draft agreement is set out in 
document GC(XV)/452, Annex. 
Board of Governors, and had thus been able to 
help in solving a number of interesting problems 
including those related to safeguards agreements 
in connection with NPT. The latter work had 
enabled the Secretariat to accelerate negotiations 
with individual parties to NPT regarding the control 
arrangements which would have to be made. 
His delegation also congratulated the Board's 

safeguards committee on its willingness to compromise 
and wanted to thank the Director General 

and his staff for their efforts. His Government 
had supported the conclusion of NPT and had been 
one of the first to ratify it. It was confident that 
the agreement reached in April 1971 on the structure 
and content of the agreements required in 

connection with NPT would contribute to the 
effective implementation of safeguards. It was 
his conviction that the control system resulting 
from the work of the safeguards committee would 
be both reliable and economic, and he hoped that 
it would be given wide application throughout the 
world. 

17. In compliance with Article III of NPT 
Denmark had in August 1970 expressed a desire to 
open negotiations with the Agency on a safeguards 
agreement. Those negotiations would probably be 
completed within a few months. In that same 
context his delegation also welcomed the pending 
negotiations on an analogous agreement between 
the Agency and EURATOM. 
18. He realized that in connection with the 
implementation of the safeguards system a number 
of technical and practical aspects were still under 
consideration. A Danish consultant had been 
assisting the Agency in analysing safeguards 
methods and in improving safeguards techniques. 
He wished to express his Government's willingness 
to provide all assistance that the safeguards 
inspectorate might desire in that respect. 
19. His delegation also welcomed the agreement 
on the financing of safeguards and hoped that it 
would eventually be accepted by all countries. He 
was particularly glad to note that the agreement 
provided that all parties to NPT should contribute 
to the cost of safeguards, including States not 
members of the Agency, because all countries 
would benefit from the safeguards system. He 
hoped the system would induce States that had not 
yet signed NPT to do so in the near future. 
20. At its fourteenth regular session, the 
General Conference had adopted a resolution 
relating to the amendment of Article VI of the 
Agency's Statute. [5] Although the resolution had 
not been unanimously adopted, his Government 
had acted in accordance with the wishes of the 
majority of Member States, and had accepted the 
amendment. 
21. His Government was of the opinion that all 
the Agency's activities deserved full support and it 
therefore accepted the proposal of the Board to 
raise the target for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund to $3 million. As in previous years, 
[5] Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272. 
3 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 

Denmark's contribution to the Fund would be in the 
same ratio as its contribution to the Regular 
Budget. 

22. He welcomed the Agency's work on the 
dissemination of information concerning the 
possible peaceful uses of nuclear explosions, but 
he wished to emphasize the need for thorough 
consideration of the ecological problems relating 
to such explosions. He was therefore looking 
forward with interest to the results of the Agency's 
studies in that field, in connection with its functions 
under Article V of NPT. 
23. His delegation also welcomed the worldwide 
debate regarding man's influence on his 
environment, and noted that nuclear energy had an 
exceptionally good record in regard to both 
pollution and safety. Nuclear energy authorities 
had been making great efforts to ensure that radioactive 
waste would be permanently isolated from 
man and his environment, and it was his belief 
that the knowledge thus gathered would help in the 
solution of other environmental problems. He 
therefore strongly supported the participation of 
the Agency in the 1972 Stockholm Conference on 
the Human Environment. His Government would 
support any reasonable initiative in that field on 
the part of the Agency, for instance the establishment 
of a register for releases of radioactive 
materials to any sector of the environment, when 
there was a risk that other countries might be 
affected. Denmark had accepted the 1958 Geneva 
Convention on the High Seas, which dealt in 
Article 25 with nuclear pollution of the sea. 
24. During the past year Denmark had further 
intensified its collaboration with the Agency and 
had been able to help, in particular, in perfecting 
the use of ionizing radiations in the sterilization 
of medical products. 
25. During the past five years, in particular, 
there had been fruitful co-operation between the 
Agency and Denmark in regard to radiation 
bacteriology and radiation techniques. 
26. No nuclear power station had as yet been 
ordered in Denmark, but it seemed likely that a 
decision to do so could be expected within a few 
years. A group of Danish utilities had just 
announced its intention to establish a group to 
elaborate a project for the first atomic power 
station in Denmark. The activities of the 
Research Establishment Ris</, created in Denmark 
about 15 years ago, had spread to cover a broad 
field within the nuclear sciences, and close cooperation 
had developed between the Danish Atomic 
Energy Commission and the Agency, for instance 
in food and agriculture programmes, radiation 
biology, solid-state physics and radiation damage. 
27. Co-operation with other countries had also 
steadily increased, and mention should be made of 
the close relationship between the Nordic nuclear 
research centres. 
28. As in previous years, Denmark would collaborate 
in the Agency's fellowship programme and 
would again provide a number of cost-free fellowships 
at the Research Establishment Ris^. His 
Government would also keep in mind the possibility 
of providing further financial assistance to the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste. 

29. Finally, he wanted to congratulate the 
Director General on the success of the Fourth 
Geneva Conference, a success which was largely 
due to the efforts of the Director General and his 
staff. 
30. Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT (France) said that in 
1970-71 the Agency had been concerned primarily 
with the forthcoming application of safeguards in 
those States which had signed NPT. 
31. Although France was among the States which 
had not signed NPT, it agreed that the Agency 
should assume responsibility for the safeguards 
provided for in the Treaty and had participated, 
as a Member of the Board, in the work of the 
Board's safeguards committee. In a relatively 
short time, bearing in mind the complexity of the 
problem, the committee had managed to formulate 
a model agreement for the application of safeguards 
under the new conditions created by NPT. 
32. Moreover, France had just agreed with its 
partners in EURATOM that the latter should 
negotiate, together with the five Member States 
which had signed NPT and were therefore directly 
concerned, an agreement enabling the Agency to 
verify EURATOM's safeguards for the application 
of NPT in the territory of those States. 
33. France was convinced that the Agency would 
not fail during those negotiations to take fully into 
account the effectiveness of EURATOM's existing 
safeguards system. 
34. Questions of safeguards should not be 
allowed to obscure the other important aspects of 
the Agency's work, especially technical assistance 
and the safety and protection problems arising out \ 
of the remarkable industrial development of 
nuclear energy currently taking place. 
35. The Agency was particularly fitted not only 
to participate in the formulation of safety standards 
but also, by virtue of its international technical 
reputation, to counter unjustified, alarmist 
propaganda campaigns. 
36. In the field of technical assistance, the 
Agency's efforts had in 1971 again exceeded those 
of the preceding year, especially as regards 
agricultural applications of isotopes and radiation. 
37. With respect to the day-to-day running of 
the Agency, he recalled that in 1970 the Director 
General had pointed to the disturbing increase in 
staff costs relative to the amounts expended on 
programme activities. Unfortunately, the trend 
had not been reversed; hence, as in 1970, his 
delegation shared the Director General's concern 
and suggested once more that he be authorized to 
make the choices necessary for achieving a better 
-4 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 


distribution of expenditure. Only in that way would 
it be possible to arrive at a reasonable budgetary 
level and an acceptable growth rate on the one 
hand and to maintain a balance between the 
Agency's statutory tasks on the other. Approval 
of the budget as presented would be tantamount to 
immediate confirmation by the General Conference 
of the arrangements which had been approved by 
the Board in April, despite the French objections, 
and which provided for the establishment of two 
separate scales of contribution to the Regular 
Budget, one applying to safeguards expenditure 
and the second to other expenditure. The French 
delegation had always been of the opinion that the 
cost of safeguards should not be borne by the 
Agency and that if it was not somehow included in 
the sales prices of nuclear materials subject to 
Agency inspections, it should be reimbursed by 
the States with which the Agency concluded safeguards 
agreements. Any other solution was 
entirely artificial - including the solution which 
made arbitrary distinctions between various 
States Members of the Agency but disregarded the 
obvious distinction between countries party to and 
not party to NPT. 

38. During the long discussions in the Board's 
safeguards committee, the French delegation had 
emphasized that three essential conditions would 
have to be met if it was to accept a compromise 
formula. 
39. First, the provisions of paragraph C of 
Article XIV of the Statute would have to be taken in 
into account. However, they had clearly been 
ignored in the proposed formula, which conflicted 
with the basic principle set forth in that paragraph, 
where it was stated that in fixing the costs of 
safeguards implementation "the Board of Governors 
shall deduct such amounts as are recoverable 
under agreements regarding the application of 
safeguards between the Agency and parties to 
bilateral or multilateral arrangements". 
40. Secondly, for reasons of principle, the 
French delegation had always maintained that a 
distinction should be made between States 
Members of the Agency which were parties to 
NPT and those which, like France, had not 
acceded to it. That had not been done, so that 
under the proposed formula all Members of the 
Agency without distinction would have to meet 
obligations entered into only by some. Paradoxically, 
the provisions of paragraph C of 
Article XIV of the Statute would be applied in 
financing inspections in States which, while being 
parties to NPT, were not Members of the Agency 
and consequently not bound by the Statute. 
41. Thirdly, the cost of applying safeguards to 
activities subjected unilaterally by nuclear-weapon 
States to Agency inspections should be borne by 
those States and not, under any circumstances, by 
other Members of the Agency, whether or not they 
were nuclear-weapon States and whether or not 
they had signed NPT. Such inspections were 
nowhere provided for in NPT. None the less, if 
a nuclear-weapon State, for reasons of its own, 
considered it desirable to subject activities of its 

choice to Agency inspections, the French delegation 
would in no way object, provided that the 
operation was paid for by the nuclear-weapon 
State in question. However, there was no such 
provision in the proposed formula, which would 
therefore require all Members of the Agency to 
meet obligations entered into unilaterally by 
nuclear-weapon States. 

42. Furthermore, the establishment of two 
different scales of contributions to the Regular 
Budget conflicted with the Agency's Statute. 
Accordingly, as it could not endorse such an 
arrangement, France intended to adopt a line of 
action which followed logically from its legal 
position: in its future contributions to the Agency's 
budget it would assign for safeguards an amount to 
be determined each year - which would no doubt 
correspond closely to the proportion of the 
Regular Budget normally contributed by France, 
but which would also reflect a small deduction 
made as a matter of principle. The deduction in 
question would correspond to what should not, 
under any circumstances, be financed by the 
Agency, but would of course take into account the 
importance of the safeguards to be entrusted to 
the Agency under agreements of which the first 
was to be concluded in the very near future. 
43. Independently of its participation in the 
Agency's activities, France continued to be aware 
of the need to participate in international enterprises 
- both bilateral and multilateral. 
44. His country was accordingly looking forward 
to the completion, within the framework of its 
nuclear co-operation with the Soviet Union, of the 
large bubble chamber, which - in conjunction with 
the powerful Serpukhov accelerator - would 
undoubtedly soon yield results of great value for 
man's understanding of the fundamental nature of 
matter. In the same context, he wished to note 
that the high-flux Franco-German reactor at 
Grenoble had recently gone critical. Moreover, 
German, Italian and French electricity producers 
had decided to build and operate jointly two fastneutron 
nuclear power stations each of 1000 MW(e), 
the first based on the experience which would be 
gained with the French 250-MW prototype plant, 
Phenix, scheduled to start up in 1973, and the 
other on the similar German-Belgian-Dutch 
prototype power station for which construction 
work was just beginning. 
45. In addition, France was deeply conscious of 
the need to take early measures aimed both at 
avoiding a shortage - by the end of the decade - of 
the enriched uranium essential for the generation 
of nuclear power and at ensuring sufficiently 
diversified sources of supply. As to the present, 
his country was in that respect fortunate in 
having concluded with the Soviet Union in 1971 an 
enrichment contract representing a considerable 
addition to the supplies obtained from the United 
States. Looking to the future, France had also 
officially offered to make available to interested 
countries its advanced technology in isotopic 
separation by gaseous diffusion, with a view to 
establishing one or more multinational plants for 
-5 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 

civilian use. Several countries had already 
expressed interest in the offer and as a first step 
technical-economic feasibility studies would be 
carried out in collaboration with specialized 
sectors of industry in the interested countries. 
On the basis of such studies, France's future 
partners would be in a position to take - as a 
second step - informed decisions on participation 
and financing, so that by the end of the decade 
work would have been completed on the first 
multinational plant, in which France hoped - in 
the light of the offer recently made by the 
Government of the United States - that the most 
advanced technologies available could be combined. 

46. Mr. STRAUB (Hungary) said that although 
the fifteenth regular session of the General 
Conference was being held in an improving 
international climate, some parts of the world 
were still afflicted by tension and wars which 
brought unhappiness to millions of people and 
prevented many countries from benefiting from the 
progress of science and technology. The forces 
striving for peace were working hard for a meaning 
ful European security conference, and the time had 
come to move on from bilateral consultations to 
multilateral talks in preparation for a successful 
conference. 
47. It was in that spirit that the Hungarian 
delegation had come to participate in the work of 
the General Conference. Over the two years that 
Hungary had been represented on the Board, his 
delegation had had an opportunity to appreciate 
the cautious and responsible approach taken by the 
Board to the very important problems arising 
during that period. The new Board, with the able 
assistance of the Secretariat, would undoubtedly 
cope in the same conscientious way with the 
problems which remained to be solved. 
48. If the Agency was to fulfil its obligations, 
it had to be truly international. It was heartening 
to see that co-operation between the Agency and 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(COMECON) was improving. One aspect of that 
co-operation was the exchange of information, and 
the relevant report was before the General 
Conference. The Complex Programme recently 
adopted by COMECON also included further 
development of the use of atomic energy. It was 
regrettable, however, that the Agency was still 
weakened by the absence of one of the countries 
participating in the Complex Programme - the 
German Democratic Republic. 
49. The work of the Agency since the previous 
General Conference had been by and large satisfactory. 
It had done its best to fulfil the obligations 
devolving upon it as a result of the entry 
into force of NPT. The Hungarian Government had 
ratified NPT and entered into negotiations with the 
Agency for the conclusion of the requisite agreement. 
50. His delegation, like many others, had shown 
concern at the budget increases over the last few 
years. While it was clear that the dynamic growth 
of the budget gave the Agency the means of fulfilling 
its manifold obligations, the increases 
arising from unnecessary administrative expenditure 
and changes in monetary systems were 
unacceptable. The fact that the revaluation of 
currencies required additional contributions from 
countries, including his own, made one wonder 
whether it was wise to go on calculating the budget 
in United States dollars. 

51. A very important section of the Agency's 
work was the programme of technical assistance. 
Its size and value in terms of funds had been under 
constant discussion, but its wise and equitable 
distribution was equally important. 
52. Having examined the Agency's programme 
for the coming years[6], his delegation wished to 
reiterate its conviction that the Agency should act 
first and foremost as a clearing-house for 
information and as a co-ordinator, while the actual 
scientific and development work should be carried 
out through national activities and not so much in 
the Agency's laboratories. The latter should serve 
more as a quality control service. 
53. With regard to the work on food and agriculture, 
the shift of emphasis foreseen for next 
year[7] was to be welcomed. In the life sciences 
sector, a better selection of programmes had led 
to a proper focus of attention on the most relevant 
problems. In view of intensified international 
efforts, the panel planned on environmental 
monitoring programmes and assessment of the 
significance of environmental contamination would 
definitely be of great value. It was also gratifying 
to see that the programme provided for the 
furnishing of assistance to Member States on 
legislation relating to the consumption of irradiated 
food and similar activities. 
54. Mr. USMANI (Pakistan) said that although 
Pakistan had started rather late, its young 
scientists and engineers had successfully brought 
KANUPP - the Candu-type 137-MW(e) nuclear 
power plant at Karachi - to criticality on 1 August 
1971. Thanks to the generous technical and 
financial assistance provided by the Canadian 
Government, Pakistan was the first country outside 
Canada where a heavy-water moderated, 
natural-uranium fuelled nuclear power reactor 
would soon be producing electricity for industrial, 
commercial and domestic consumption. As a 
base-load station, KANUPP would be generating 
power at about 4 to 5 paisas (8 to 10 mills) per 
unit (kWh) which would be competitive with power 
from conventional thermal stations. Experience 
with KANUPP, India's experience with the two 
boiling-water reactors at Tarapur, each of 
190 MW(e) capacity, and experience with Zorita a 
pressurized light-water moderated and cooled 
reactor - in that capacity range, in Spain, had 
proved beyond doubt two facts: that under conditions 
prevailing in developing countries, small 
nuclear power reactors could produce power at 

[6] See, in particular, the programme for 1972 
in document GC(XV)/460. 
[7] Ibid. , paras V. 4.1-V. 4. 9. 
-6 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 


competitive rates, and that nuclear power plants 
could be technologically managed by a small but 
highly trained corps of nuclear engineers and 

scientists. In answer to the assertion that the 
capital cost of nuclear stations of small sizes was 
very high, he observed that the extra capital 
investment in a nuclear plant could be recouped 
within 5 to 10 years and that, from a banker's 
point of view, the extra capital invested earned 
quite a handsome return. What was "economic" 
in the United States need not necessarily be so in 
Pakistan or other developing countries and vice 
versa. Pakistan paid a high price for electricity 
because the cost of conventional fuels (imported 
oil) was higher than 100 cents (US) per million Btu 
(British thermal units). Moreover, all countries 
paid a certain price to learn a new technology. If, 
therefore, nuclear power had a long-term future 
in a developing country, the first station might 
justifiably be small and carry a penalty if need be. 
The argument that developing countries should 
wait till their grids could absorb nuclear stations 
of 600 MW and above was puerile because by the 
time that happened it would be claimed that 
nothing less than 1000 MW was economic. As the 
advanced countries had made arrangements to 
finance the Agency's safeguards activities, they 
should also find a way of helping the developing 
countries to finance nuclear power. 

55. It was time for reactor manufacturers and 
financing institutions to have an unprejudiced 
second look at the prospects of small- and 
medium-sized nuclear power reactors as alternative 
sources of energy in developing countries 
with small grids in areas of high-cost fuel, and 
for the Agency to be more energetic in helping the 
developing countries than in the past. 
56. The Agency was not and should not become 
the police headquarters of the nuclear world, but 
it was a great organization for promoting nuclear 
technology. To lure the poor developing countries 
by saying that in the application of isotopes in 
agriculture and medicine lay their salvation, was 
to hoodwink them because radioisotopes were only 
a means to an end. The energy of the atom transformed 
into electricity alone could accelerate the 
pace of economic development, as the Agency 
should recognize. It should also be recognized that 
the developing countries needed the Agency more 
than the advanced countries, and the Director 
General should, therefore, be more dynamic and 
should come out with a bold "Atoms for Power" 
programme in developing countries during the 
coming 10-15 years. 
57. He welcomed the convening of a panel of 
experts to advise the Director General as to the 
ways and means of undertaking a survey of the 
energy situation in the developing countries. To 
expedite matters the survey should be limited to 
a representative group of about 15 countries 
where research reactors were operating and where 
the nucleus of trained manpower already existed. 
The countries surveyed should meet all the cost 
of the survey in their territories, which would 
greatly reduce the cost. International financing 
agencies could surely be persuaded to help 
finance the balance. 

58. If energy was the key to economic development, 
water was the key to human survival and 
social development. As the world population grew, 
the demand for basic essentials of civilized life 
like water would have to be met not "at a cost" 
but "at any cost". The Fourth Geneva Conference 
had shown that with breeder reactors in prospect, 
reactor technology had reached a point when the 
atom could be an unlimited source of energy. 
Fortunately the oceans could provide a limitless 
source of water if only sea-water could be 
desalinated on a large scale. Although the 
technology and processes of desalination had not 
yet been developed to produce large quantities of 
water in a single unit, undoubtedly within the next 
decade big desalination units capable of producing 
100-200 million gallons of water a day would 
become technically and economically feasible. 
For such large sizes, conventional fuels would 
obviously be too unwieldy and expensive. "Atoms 
for Water" should lead to dual-purpose nuclear 
power-cum-desalinating plants operating along 
the shores of some of the arid areas of the world 
in the current decade. The Agency should be 
more active in the nuclear desalination field and 
promote, through international and multiorganizational 
co-operation, the establishment of 
at least three dual-purpose nuclear plants, one in 
the Americas, one in North Africa and the Middle 
East and one in South Asia and the Near East, so 
that operating experience might be gained. He 
asked the Director General to examine seriously 
the question of setting up an international centre 
or school for desalination where scientists and 
technologists from developing countries could 
work on the research and development problems 
connected with various desalination processes 
under the guidance of colleagues from the advanced 
countries. Surely, if the Agency could establish 
an International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
and two laboratories, it could sponsor an international 
centre for desalination. 
59. They had come a long way to tame the atoms 
for peace by trying, through international treaties 
and through the Agency's safeguards system, to 
limit the number of nuclear-weapon States to five. 
Whereas the Test Ban Treaty of 1963 was a step 
towards preventing vertical proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, NPT was designed to prevent horizontal 
proliferation. In the interests of peace, the 
nuclear-weapon States should take one more step 
and agree to sign a comprehensive test ban 
treaty to stop the production, testing and use of 
nuclear weapons. He also wished that the nuclear, 
the near-nuclear and other non-nuclear-weapon 
States would adhere to the spirit and letter of 
NPT because in that approach alone lay the salvation 
of humanity. Unfortunately a false sense of 
prestige and misplaced arrogance prevented that 
approach from being universally accepted. It was 
particularly disturbing to find some of the poorest 
developing countries refusing to sign NPT and 
diverting their scarce resources of talent and 
money to produce and explode a nuclear device 
ostensibly for "peaceful purposes", which was 
tantamount to producing and exploding a nuclear 
weapon. Surely if nuclear explosions for 
"peaceful purposes" became technically and 
-7 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 

economically feasible - an exercise which could 
be undertaken by the nuclear-weapon States for 
the benefit of all concerned - the saner way would 
be to seek the services of the Agency as conceived 
in NPT regardless of whether a non-nuclearweapon 
State was or was not a party to the Treaty. 
Any other course would not only wreck NPT but 
would start a mad race among the non-nuclearweapon 
countries to produce nuclear weapons in 
the guise of nuclear devices for so-called 
"peaceful purposes". A very heavy responsibility 
rested on the nuclear-weapon States and the 
Agency to strive by every possible means to 
prevent such a race. If that were not done, some 
countries, in areas of tension, might be able to 
manufacture the nuclear devices and others might 
have the means and resources to acquire them. 
He was surprised that the nuclear-weapon States 
and the Agency were ignoring the trend in some 
non-nuclear-weapon States to produce nuclear 
devices for "peaceful purposes". A nuclear 
explosion was a nuclear explosion and it would 
destroy NPT if it were made by a non-nuclearweapon 
State. Did the great Powers want NPT to 
be wrecked, and could they exercise enough 
pressure to prevent the possession of nuclear 
devices or weapons by non-nuclear-weapon States? 
There might be some merit in demarcating 
"nuclear free zones" in non-nuclear regions of 
the world. If that were possible the United Nations 
should bring the countries concerned to a round 
table to define such zones. 

60. The fruits of nuclear technology could not 
be harvested unless the "haves" and "have-nots" 
became "partners in development". The more 
materially advanced countries must stop asking 
the developing countries why they wanted an 
atomic energy programme, because the developing 
countries could, with greater justification, ask why 
billions of dollars were being spent on going to 
the moon and on weapons. A constructive dialogue 
that would generate respect for each other's point 
of view was needed, as well as the pooling of 
moral and material resources for the healthy 
economic development and social welfare of the 
human race as a whole. 
61. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) said that 
during the past year the work of the Agency had 
been dominated by three problems: preparation of 
safeguards agreements in connection with NPT, 
technical co-operation, and preparation of the 
Fourth Geneva Conference. It had also devoted 
considerable attention to matters of environmental 
protection. 
62. Representatives of the Polish Government 
and Polish scientists had participated actively in 
the Agency's work in the spheres mentioned and 
also in its other scientific and technical activities. 
He wished to congratulate the Director General and 
his staff on having discharged their duties so 
satisfactorily. 
63. The Agency's role in and on behalf of the 
international community had been extended 
considerably during the past year, mainly as a 
result of the important control functions which had 
been entrusted to the Agency in connection with 
NPT. Poland and a number of other countries 
considered that NPT was an essential partial step 
towards disarmament. NPT had now been signed 
by over 100 countries, which was evidence of the 
wide support it enjoyed. The socialist countries 
and certain others were making intensive efforts 
to enhance the universality of NPT. As far as 
implementation of NPT was concerned, it was 
extremely important to take effective action 
against any proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
Hence the importance of the practical application 
of the safeguards provided for in Article III of 
NPT in respect of non-nuclear-weapon States, 
especially those which had nuclear facilities at 
their disposal. 

64. For those reasons, the delegation of Poland 
had repeatedly stated its satisfaction that the 
Board's safeguards committee had worked out the 
basic principles for the safeguards agreements 
which the States party to NPT would be required 
to conclude with the Agency. Poland, along with 
other States Members of the Agency, greatly 
appreciated the results of that committee's work, 
as approved by the Board. The principles 
formulated by the committee represented a 
gigantic step towards full implementation of NPT. 
65. The conditions thus established enabled all 
States concerned to initiate and continue negotiations 
aiming at the conclusion of safeguards 
agreements with the Agency in accordance with 
Article III of NPT. Poland had worked out with 
the Agency the text of an agreement on the application 
of safeguards; it had been the first country 
to start negotiations and it was making intensive 
preparations in connection with the Polish system 
of nuclear material inventories and control. He 
could assure the Conference that Poland would be 
ready on the technological side to assume its 
obligations under Article III of NPT. He expressed 
the hope that the procedures for ratification and 
conclusion of safeguards agreements would be 
speeded up and urged all States concerned to bend 
every effort in that direction. ^ 

66. The fact that the Agency had been granted 
means of applying safeguards and its future 
activities in that connection would represent an 
unprecedented event: the application for the first 
time in history of multilateral international controls 
on armament reduction in a sphere as 
important as that of the uses of nuclear energy. 
The favourable prospects for a reduction of 
tension in Europe created even better conditions 
for the ratification of NPT and for negotiations 
with the Agency. 
67. For those reasons it was all the more 
paradoxical that one of the German States, a party 
to NPT, was being prevented from joining the 
Agency. The delegations of Poland and the other 
socialist countries had repeatedly drawn attention 
to the fact that the German Democratic Republic 
should become a full Member of the Agency, since 
it was a sovereign State with great economic, 
scientific and technological potentialities, especially 
in the field of nuclear energy. He pointed out that 
-8 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 


the German Democratic Republic enjoyed growing 
international support and recognition, that it held a 
respected position in the scientific world and that 
it could contribute greatly to the work of the 
Agency. He was convinced that there would be a 
change in the present situation and that the Agency 
would become a truly universal organization, in 
the interests of all its Members. 

68. The Agency's technical co-operation activities 
had increased during 1970, thanks to the new 
method of working in the Secretariat and to the 
25% increase (compared with 1969) in the funds 
available to the Agency for that purpose. It had 
been right to allocate additional funds for supplying 
equipment and installations and for fellowships, as 
those were the most effective forms of assistance 
to developing countries. Similarly, the available 
funds had been judiciously apportioned among the 
various applications of nuclear technology, 
preference having been given to the practical 
application of isotopes and other nuclear techniques 
in industry, agriculture and food production. The 
Polish delegation noted with satisfaction that the 
funds available to the Agency under the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) had 
increased by 51% over those for 1969, evidence 
that nuclear technology was playing an increasing 
part in the measures undertaken by developing 
countries to accelerate their technical and 
economic development. 
69. It was perhaps too early to attempt to draw 
up a general balance sheet for the Fourth Geneva 
Conference, but even at the present stage he could 
state that for Polish scientists it had provided an 
opportunity to engage in a large-scale exchange of 
information and views. He wished to congratulate 
the Director General, Mr. Zheludev, Scientific 
Secretary of the Conference, and the staff of the 
Agency for the excellent organization of the 
Conference, which was doubtless an important 
step in the development of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and of international co-operation 
in that sphere. 
70. As regards the human environment, Poland 
had from the very start indicated its support of an 
international study of that problem and it viewed 
with satisfaction the growing role of the Agency in 
co-ordinating on an international scale the steps 
taken in relation to radiological protection of the 
environment, high-activity waste management 
and nuclear safety, as well as the application of 
nuclear techniques in work of a general nature 
designed to combat pollution. 
71. In addition to its work on radiological protection 
in all branches of industry, transport, 
scientific research and so on, the Agency had from 
the outset devoted particular attention to the protection 
of the environment, so that the nuclear 
industry was among the industries least hazardous 
to the natural environment. The Director General 
had expressed the same view at the Fourth Geneva 
Conference, and Poland would therefore continue 
its support of such activities. Similarly, it would 
examine with interest the project for setting up a 
central registry of all waste disposal into the 
environment. If such a register should be established, 
the Agency should certainly be assigned the 
responsibility of centralizing the data relating to 
that part of the register concerned with radioactive 
waste. 

72. In Poland, the year just past had been rich in 
events of great importance for the subsequent 
development of the Polish nuclear programme. For 
example, the Polish Government had decided to 
carry out the construction of the country's first 
nuclear power station, which would be supplying 
the power grid ten years hence. Poland, which 
possessed extensive coal resources, had no 
pressing need to proceed along that course. In 
addition, the construction of a high-flux reactor for 
use in materials analysis was going ahead actively; 
that reactor would, among other things, provide a 
basis for preparatory work connected with the 
Polish programme for the development of nuclear 
energy. 
73. Poland was also about to commission a linear 
electron accelerator which had been supplied by the 
Soviet Union and in connection with which an 
extensive programme for research and for sterilization 
of drugs and medical instruments had been 
worked out. Work was continuing on nuclear 
techniques and their applications in materials 
analysis and in industrial processes as well as on 
geological and hydrological research. 
74. He wished to point out that in the field of 
nuclear energy and its various applications, fruitful 
co-operation between the socialist countries 
was continuing within the framework of COMECON, 
and Poland had been a beneficiary of that co-operation. 
75. The Polish delegation had no serious objection 
to the programme proposed by the Board; 
nevertheless, it wished to express its concern at 
the implications of recent developments in the 
western monetary system for the budgets of the 
international organizations, as well as at the 
increase in the administrative costs of the Agency's 
Secretariat and, in particular, staff salaries. 
76. His delegation wished to associate itself with 
those delegations that had approved the Board's 
report for 1970-71[8]. That report had been drawn 
up in a clear and competent manner and presented 
a correct picture of the Agency's activities during 
the period in question. 
77. Lastly, he wished to state that Poland was 
very satisfied with the spirit in which its collaboration 
with the Agency had taken place and that it 
was ready to continue and extend that collaboration 
in all spheres, on the principle that the activity of 
the Agency, especially during the recent period, 
was an important element in the preservation of 
peace and international security. 
78. Mr. ALBA ANDRADE (Mexico) said that, in 
the past few days, the Fourth Geneva Conference 
had highlighted the many problems involved in 
[8] GC(XV)/455. 
-9 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 


extending the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
particularly in developing countries. The 
Conference had also shown how important it was to 
promote international co-operation at an accelerated 
pace. 

79. Such co-operation, by its very nature peaceful, 
would require a continuing effort to achieve 
nuclear disarmament. The nuclear arsenals were, 
and would continue to be as long as they existed, 
the supreme folly of a civilization bent on selfdestruction. 
80. From the time of the conclusion of the Treaty 
on the Antarctic in 1959 till the entry into force of 
NPT on 5 March 1970, no favourable opportunity 
had been missed, and a spirit of conciliation had 
consistently prevailed. Even so, the results 
obtained so far could not be said to provide a 
complete solution to the grave problems still 
confronting the world. 
81. The second period of meetings of the General 
Conference of the Agency for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL) had 
just been held in Mexico to deal with problems of 
that kind. 
82. Ambassador Benites Vinueza, Secretary 
General of OPANAL, had made the following statement 
in his report to the Conference: 
"When we consider that seven States of 
the Latin American region, some of them 
possessing vast territories and large 
populations as well as great economic 
and industrial potential and advanced 
technology in the nuclear field, have not 
joined OPANAL, although most of them 
are signatories [of the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America], we must confess that OPANAL 
cannot fully execute its functions or 
achieve in full the aims for which it was 
created. "[9] 

83. Speaking to the General Conference of 
OPANAL on 7 September, the Mexican Ambassador, 
Mr. Garcia Robles, had noted that nearly eight 
years had gone by since the General Assembly of 
the United Nations, in its resolution 1911 (XVIII) of 
27 November 1963, had noted with satisfaction the 
initiative taken for the prohibition of nuclear 
weapons in Latin America. Mr. Garcia Robles had 
observed further that it was worth recalling the 
aims which since that time had been declared 
before the most representative body of the world 
organization and which subsequently had been taken 
up in the preamble to the Treaty. 
84. His delegation believed that those aims still 
retained all their validity. 
85. There could be no doubt that Latin America 
would measure up to the moral and legal commitments 
laid upon it by its mission of peace, which 
[9] OPANAL document CG/45, para. 9 (Spanish 
only). 
it had freely accepted, and that it would do so, as 
he sincerely hoped, within the shortest possible 
time. 

86. With regard to the three nuclear Powers 
which had still not ratified Additional Protocol II 
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America, his delegation could do 
no better than repeat, and record its profound 
belief in, the sentiments which the Secretary-
General of the United Nations had conveyed through 
his distinguished personal representative to the 
delegations taking part in the second period of 
meetings of the General Conference of OPANAL. 
The Secretary-General had declared his 
''fervent hope that all Powers possessing 
nuclear weapons, in response to the invitations 
of the General Assembly, will 
demonstrate without delay their resolve to 
respect the lofty principles and noble 
objectives of the Treaty". 

87. Mexico was endeavouring at present to concentrate 
and organize its human and material 
resources and to follow steadfastly a path leading 
to sustained and rapid improvements in nuclear 
science and technology, an area where improvements 
were essential if the country was to 
accelerate its economic and social development. 
88. On the first day of September, faced with the 
country's present problems, including those 
brought on by a rapid growth of population, 
President Echeverria had said, in his first report 
to the Congress of the Union, that Mexico was 
"in the midst of a period of change", and that "the 
destiny of Mexico lies in our capacity to look to 
the future". To that end Mexico, in the President's 
own words, would have to 
"strengthen political democracy, reform 
the educational system, promote science 
and technology, improve the distribution 
of income, make the conditions of life 
more human in the urban centres as well 
as in the more remote areas, integrate the 
country's peripheral territories, modernize 
farming, make the best possible use of 
natural resources, continue to 'Mexicanize' 
the economy, decentralize industry and 
make it more efficient, increase overall 
productivity, make the public administration 
more flexible, increase the national 
product and productive investment, stimulate 
foreign trade and reaffirm the values 
of Mexican culture". 

89. Among the new instruments enacted for such 
purposes since the present Government had taken 
office was the law of 29 December 1970, by which 
the National Council of Science and Technology had 
been established. The Council's main functions 
were to advise the federal executive authority 
regarding the establishment, execution and evaluation 
of a national policy in science and technology, 
and to advise, in consequence, on the planning, 
programming, co-ordination, orientation, promotion 
and guidance with regard to activities associa- 
10 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 


ted with science and technology, as well as on the 
relationship of such matters to national development 
and foreign relations. 

90. Mexico's resources in nuclear science and 
technology were limited. Not all the country's 
institutions had, in sufficient quantity, the basic 
elements required for their work, although its 
nucleus of research workers - scientists and 
technologists alike - consisted of valuable and 
highly-qualified people. The country lacked 
specialists in areas vital to its development. In 
view of all those facts Mexico had resolved to 
redesign its programmes, to improve internal and 
external co-ordination, to promote inter-institutional 
collaboration, to set itself attainable and 
realistic objectives and to establish priorities such 
that efforts would be concentrated in the first 
instance on the problems of greatest moment for 
the country's economic, social, scientific and 
technological development. Mexico hoped, moreover, 
in furtherance of its purposes, to receive 
as much assistance as possible from the Agency. 

91. The growing requirements of Mexico's 
programmes meant that the present scientific 
infrastructure would have to be expanded, and the 
Nuclear Centre of Mexico, officially inaugurated on 
27 November 1970, with an investment of 
$13 million, marked a most useful step in that 
direction. 
92. The new programme of the National 
Nuclear Energy Commission (CNEN) established 
objectives and basic lines of action. It foresaw 
also a number of realistic alternatives which 
could be selected as required, in co-operation 
with the competent bodies, with a view to tackling 
the Commission's tasks in good time. 
93. In 1967 the Mexican Federal Electricity 
Commission (FEC) had begun studies for the construction 
of a first nuclear power plant with a 
nominal capacity of 600 MW(e), a matter about 
which the Agency had been informed at the time. 
94. CNEN had not only taken part in the various 
stages of the study conducted by the FEC but was 
also represented, along with other competent 
public bodies, in the Power Commission attached 
to the Office of the President, where the development 
of uranium and other new energy sources, as 
well as the alternatives available for the better 
utilization of such resources, were being studied 
in detail. 
95. At the same time CNEN had taken part in 
evaluation procedures for the selection of the first 
nuclear power plant. Its collaboration in that 
sphere had been guided by the aim of establishing 
criteria which would lead to a well-founded 
decision, a decision which by its very nature must 
aim at securing the best possible results from a 
long-term policy and establishing a firm basis for 
the development of nuclear electric power in 
Mexico. 
96. The full extent of those new prospects was 
indicated by the fact that the FEC expected to 
install a nuclear power capacity of between 
1200 and 1500 MW(e), because of the considerable 
economic and technological advantages which 
nuclear plants enjoyed over other forms of 
power generation. 

97. Mexico's nuclear power might well reach 
20 000 MW by the end of the century, quite apart 
from the nuclear energy required for desalination, 
which might amount to 10 000 MW in view of the 
growing water requirements of the towns, 
industry and agriculture. 
98. In support of the studies required to obtain 
authorization for the first nuclear power plant, 
under the development programme to which he had 
referred, CNEN had been able to rely on the 
collaboration of the Agency, which he was pleased 
to acknowledge with gratitude. The Agency had 
already sent two technical advisory missions and 
had judged the site proposed by the FEC at 
Laguna Verde, 70 kilometres north of Veracruz, 
to be feasible. 
99. In his first report as Head of Government, 
President Echeverria had recognized that Mexico 
"depends excessively on hydrocarbons, a 
fact which obliges us to diversify our sources 
of energy. For this reason the programmes 
of expansion of the petroleum and electric 
power industries envisage the possibility of 
using other sources of energy". 

The President had added that 

"the possibility of making use of nuclear 
energy for creative purposes is being 
thoroughly studied. Mexico has known 
reserves of uranium, and the geological 
indications lead us to assume the 
existence of other deposits. The experience 
of other countries has been made use of and 
all the technical and financial factors have 
been evaluated, which will permit us to 
take a sound decision when the time comes". 

100. To initiate, promote and develop nuclear 
technology in Mexico - those were the aims which 
guided his country's programme and determined 
its future plans. 
101. The Mexican Government was preparing 
well-defined technical assistance programmes in 
areas of vital importance for the country's 
nuclear development, and the aid which it hoped 
to receive from the Agency would be essential. 
102. During their recent visit to Mexico, 
Dr. Eklund, Director General of the Agency and 
Dr. Goswami, Deputy Director General had had 
an opportunity to witness the working spirit 
characteristic of Mexico's activities and to hold 
meetings in the course of which the requirements 
of the country's development had been examined 
in a preliminary way. Mexico had had particular 
pleasure in welcoming them and wished to thank 
them for the helpful and co-operative spirit they 
had shown. 
- 11 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 

103. He had felt - though he feared he might 
have spoken at too great length - that a description 
of Mexico's future plans was called for. That 
was all the more true because Mexico had 
invited the General Conference to hold its sixteenth 
regular session in Mexico City in 1972: 
fairly detailed information about the country which 
was offering its capital for the next session of the 
Conference was surely in order. It would be a 
great honour for Mexico to have the next session 
of the Conference held for the first time in a 
Latin American country. 
104. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) said that his 
delegation wished to congratulate the Director 
General and the staff of the Agency on the results 
obtained in the past year, in spite of well-known 
difficulties concerning the availability of funds. 
In that connection, he would like to make some 
comments on the Agency's programme and its 
impact on the development of nuclear energy in 
Brazil. 
105. In order to cope with fast growing power 
requirements in Brazil, which had been increasing 
at the rate of 12. 6% per year in most regions in 
the last five years, a 600-MW(e) plant, powered 
by a pressurized water reactor, was to be built 
in Angra dos Reis, State of Rio de Janeiro. It 
would be in full operation by 1976 and would be 
integrated into the Central South grid, which 
already had 9000 MW(e). 
106. A group of Agency experts, working with 
Brazilian groups, had conducted an extended 
survey of industrial capacity; the resulting report, 
just published by the Agency, had shown that 
private industry in Brazil was capable of manufacturing 
several reactor components which otherwise 
would have to be imported. 
107. Moreover, a partially private-owned 
company was to be set up to engage in the fuel 
cycle industry, from the mining of uranium ores 
to the fabrication of fuel elements, and subsequently 
in the reprocessing of reactor fuels. 
108. His country was very grateful to the Agency 
for lending its support to the project submitted to 
the Special Fund of UNDP aimed at the further 
development of agricultural education, research 
and production through the application of 
nuclear techniques, which was to be implemented 
at the Agricultural Centre of Piracicaba. Brazil 
was also participating in the food irradiation 
project sponsored by the Agency and the European 
Nuclear Energy Agency. 
109. In the field of dosimetry the specialized 
laboratory in Brazil was enjoying continuous and 
increasing co-operation with the Agency. 
110. The institution of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) and its continuous 
progress was one of the outstanding services 
rendered to the Member States by the Agency. 
Brazil's own Nuclear Information Centre was 
already taking full advantage of the material made 
available by the Agency. It was its intention to 
increase continuously its participation in INIS. 
111. In spite of the increase in the target for 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund, it 
was evident that progress in technical assistance 
was being curtailed by price increases and inflation 
throughout the world. It was indeed very sad 
that in terms of real value the technical assistance 
programme for 1972 could be at a lower level than 
the programme developed ten years earlier. His 
delegation emphasized that point, because Brazil's 
voluntary contribution had always been proportional 
to its share of the Regular Budget. 
112. His country had decided the previous year to 
increase its voluntary contribution from $20 500, 
which was in accordance with the United Nations 
ratio, to $30 000, and it would maintain the same 
level for 1972, although it had been asked to contribute 
only $21 900. 
113. It was well known that there was an 
important potential market for small and 
medium-sized nuclear power plants in the 
developing countries, and the Director General 
had mentioned the initiation, by the Agency, of a 
market study on the future demand for such 
nuclear power plants with a capacity below 
500 MW(e). [10] The Agency had also completed 
an admirable study of the economic feasibility of 
smaller power reactors, and his delegation would 
like to suggest that interested countries might 
send to the Agency a letter of intention, presenting 
their preliminary plans for the installation, in 
the next decade, of nuclear plants in the range, 
say, from 100 to 300 MW(e). 

114. Turning to the question of safeguards, he 
stated with the utmost emphasis that Brazil was 
not opposed to safeguards. It had a trilateral 
agreement with the United States of America and 
the Agency for the application of safeguards, 
which had been in effect for some years. [11] He 
was glad to report that his country was quite 
satisfied with the work of the Agency's inspectors, 
who visited it regularly. In the light of Brazil's 
experience, he suggested that the Inspector 
General might give some attention to the possibility 
of enlarging, whenever feasible, the role played 
by the inspectors. In Brazil, the control function 
of the inspectors had been complemented by what 
might be called a liaison exercise, which had been 
very useful to both parties. 
115. He also declared that-the Government of 
Brazil had decided to contribute to the financing 
of safeguards provided for in Article III of NPT, 
considering that such a service rendered by the 
Agency to Member States was in accordance with 
its statutory objectives. 
116. But the burden imposed by safeguards upon 
the Agency's budget might have the paradoxical 
result that the more the Agency tried to achieve 
its goal the less resources it would have available 
to perform its functions. 
[10] GC(XV)/OR. 144, para. 19. 
[11] See document INFCIRC/110. 
- 12 



GC(XV) /OR. 147 


117. The expenditure on safeguards, which could 
be expected to increase with the development of 
nuclear energy for peaceful applications, was 
solely needed to prevent the diversion of fissile 
materials for military purposes. That meant 
that such expenditure was mostly directed to 
guaranteeing the maintenance of the military 
status quo of the nuclear Powers, with no 
benefit whatsoever to the non-nuclear nations. 
118. His delegation suggested, therefore, that 
the nuclear Powers should contribute a small 
percentage of their annual budget for nuclear 
weapons to the fostering by the Agency of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
119. Turning to the question of the environment, 
he said that in a world where unfortunately there 
were millions dying of starvation, and very few of 
pollution, more and more power was needed to 
improve health and increase prosperity. That 
could only be achieved by the use of nuclear energy 
However, man was in a much better position than 
his ancestors to combat pollution, since science 
and technology had been developed to deal with 
ecological problems and it was certain that those 
problems could be solved, not only in the case of 
atomic energy, but in that of several other 
pollutants which had for centuries constituted a 
danger to mankind that was much more harmful 
than atomic energy. 
120. Unfortunately, the question of pollution 
was not just a technical problem. One could 
distinguish, in the widespread discussion of the 
question, two different aspects, firstly, the real 
existence of pollution, which nobody wanted to 
disregard and, secondly, the exaggeration of the 
problem, which could result from passion, 
ignorance and dishonesty. It was possible to cope 
with passion and ignorance by means of unemotional 
discussion and a good programme of public information. 
Dishonesty, either personal, or originating 
from group interests, could not be combated 
directly, but it would achieve its purpose less and 
less if people were enlightened by means of a 
steady and adequate information campaign. 
121. In that connection, he was sure that the 
Agency could be most effective, since its authority 
stemmed not only from its universally recognized 
technical capability, but especially from the fact 
that it was a neutral body closely co-operating with 
other United Nations organizations which were 
concerned with furthering health, prosperity and 
peace throughout the world. 
122. He was pleased to inform the General 
Conference that his Government had completed the 
constitutional process for the ratification of the 
amendment to Article VI of the Statute. It was 
expected that the instrument of acceptance would 
be deposited within the following two weeks. He 
expressed the hope that the necessary two-thirds 
majority of Members would ratify the amendment 
in the near future, so that the membership of the 
Board would have a better geographical distribution. 
123. In conclusion, his delegation wished to pay 
a special tribute to Dr. Glenn Seaborg, who was 
taking his leave of delegates after ten years of 
particularly rewarding co-operation. 
124. Mr. BIGGAR (Ireland) thanked the Board and 
the Director General for an excellent annual report 
and welcomed the new procedure whereby it would 
also serve as the Agency's report to the General 
Assembly of the United Nations. [12] Such a 
rationalization of procedures was welcome at a 
time when the duplication of material in international 
organizations was a problem. 
125. His delegation was particularly gratified that 
the Board's safeguards committee had elaborated 
a model agreement on safeguards to be used in the 
negotiations between the Agency and non-nuclearweapon 
States party to NPT in drawing up agreements 
under Article III of NPT. That an agreement 
had been reached after such long and protracted 
negotiations, particularly on the clauses relating 
to the financing of safeguards, was an achievement 
greatly redounding to the credit of all the 
States which had participated in the committee's 
work and the excellent services of the Secretariat. 
126. The task of implementing NPT had given the 
Agency a new and vital role, and his Government 
was confident of the Agency's ability to fulfil that 
role effectively in co-operation with the Member 
States concerned. For the first time since the 
ending of the Second World War and the beginning 
of the nuclear age, an international organization 
would be involved in providing the international 
inspection and control machinery for a major arms 
control measure of unparalleled importance, and he 
expressed satisfaction at the way in which the new 
and difficult challenge was being met by the Agency. 
127. Ireland had sponsored the resolution at the 
sixteenth session of the General Assembly which 
had initiated the work on NPT[13] and had been the 
first country to ratify the Treaty in July 1968. 
Ireland was and had always been fully committed 
to the objectives of NPT, seeing in them the 
embodiment of principles which were essential for 
increased security and political stability in the 
world. His Government was negotiating an agreement 
under Article III of NPT with the Agency and 
was confident of an early and successful outcome. 
128. He hoped that the industrially developed 
States which had not yet ratified NPT, but whose 
nuclear potentialities were obvious, would now 
give serious consideration to ratification, 
particularly in view of the conclusion of a model 
safeguards agreement which very fairly met the 
satisfactory criteria of effectiveness and 
acceptability and ensured the protection of 
legitimate commercial interests. He welcomed 
the offer by the Governments of the United 
Kingdom and the United States of America to place 
certain of their peaceful nuclear activities under 
Agency safeguards. The willingness on the part 
[12] See document GC(XV)/467. 
[13] Resolution 1665 (XVI). 
- 13 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 

of those two States to involve themselves voluntarily 
in the detailed safeguards procedures was encouraging 
and should go a long way towards allaying the 
apprehension of those States which feared a 
commercial disadvantage in being made subject to 
safeguards. 

129. With regard to the situation in Ireland, he 
said that while no considerable developments in 
relation to nuclear energy were expected in the 
immediate future, Ireland was interested in all 
developments in other countries, and was considering 
the possibility of the construction of nuclear 
energy plants to lessen its dependence on fossil 
fuels. Ireland had no coal or oil and, with hydro 
potential virtually exhausted, nuclear energy would 
become important in time. With that in mind, 
Parliament had recently approved legislation 
establishing a Nuclear Energy Board. The Board 
would keep constantly under review developments 
in other countries, so as to be in a position to offer 
expert advice to the Government on the action it 
should take at the appropriate time. A particular 
function of the Board would be to promote knowledge 
and research in nuclear science and technology. In 
addition, it would be responsible for the preparation 
of safety codes and regulations in accordance 
with internationally established norms. The 
legislation in question would enable his Government 
to provide for future developments in nuclear 
energy and to participate more fully in the Agency's 
future work. 
130. That legislation would also permit his 
Government to implement the provisions of the 
safeguards agreement in connection with NPT at 
present being negotiated with the Agency. In 
addition, his Government was taking steps to 
enable it in the very near future to ratify the 
Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the 
Agency[14] and to ratify the amendment to 
Article VI of the Statute. 
131. The Irish delegation had always expressed the 
view, particularly at the United Nations, that 
the Agency was the appropriate body to take on the 
role of the international service for nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes under Article V of NPT. 
As the technology involved was at an early stage of 
development, the specific functions of the service 
should evolve gradually after further international 
discussion. He therefore thanked the group of 
experts on the question of the international observation 
of peaceful nuclear explosions for their work. 
Their attempt to formulate general principles and 
definitions was a valuable contribution to the corpus 
of knowledge on the subject. The Board was to 
give further consideration to the matter in the light 
of the comments received from Governments on the 
report of the group of experts. He had also noted 
that discussions were continuing between the 
Governments of the United States and the Soviet 
Union on the technical and theoretical aspects of 
peaceful uses of nuclear explosions. 
[14] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/9/Rev. 2. 
132. With the ever-growing installed nuclear 
capacity throughout the world, the problem of the 
disposal of nuclear waste, particularly in the 
marine environment, was causing increasing concern. 
It was an important aspect, though possibly 
at present not the most urgent, of the world-wide 
destruction of natural resources, which was 
becoming one of the most vital problems confronting 
civilized peoples. The protection of the world's 
flora and fauna was of importance to every human 
being and his descendants. The indications were 
that, while the volume of nuclear waste being discharged 
into the sea was increasing, precautions 
were being taken to prevent significant pollution. 
Nevertheless, the utmost vigilance was needed to 
prevent the situation from getting worse. For that 
reason, his Government welcomed the conclusion 
of the Panel on Procedures for Establishing Limits 
for Radioactive Nuclides in the Sea, which had 
been convened by the Agency in November 1970, 
and particularly welcomed the panel's reiteration of 
the recommendation for the establishment of an 
international register of all substantial releases of 
radioactive wastes from peaceful nuclear activities 
into the seas and oceans. He hoped that, when the 
findings of the group of consultants, which had met 
in July 1971, were made available, it would be 
possible to take positive action on the question as 
a matter of some urgency. 

133. INIS had proved satisfactory, and he was 
confident that the Advisory Committee for INIS, 
which was to meet in November, would ensure an 
expansion of the service in line with the suggestions 
of the Board's Administrative and Budgetary 
Committee. 
134. The Board's annual report again showed the 
very wide range of work performed by the Agency. 
The outstanding achievement in the matter of 
safeguards must not, however, overshadow the 
Agency's promotional work in providing technical 
assistance. His Government hoped that the new 
responsibilities undertaken by the Agency in 
connection with NPT would in no way impede the 
Agency's excellent and more traditional programmes 
in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. A proper balance could be maintained 
between those two important aspects of the 
Agency's work. The recommended increase to 
$3 million for 1972 in the target for voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund was to be 
welcomed on that account, and was particularly 
appropriate during the Second Development Decade. 
His Government had pledged a contribution to the 
Fund in accordance with the recommended target. 
135. He welcomed the announcement that the 
Council of Ministers of the European Communities 
had authorized EURATOM to negotiate a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency in accordance with 
Article III of NPT; that was an important development 
in international co-operation. 
136. Mr. ISARANGKUN Na AYUTHAYA (Thailand) 
said he was pleased to report that with the expert 
advice and technical assistance provided by the 
Agency, of which his country was highly apprecia- 
14 



GC(XV)/OR. 147 


tive, substantial progress had been made in his 
country's nuclear energy activities in the past year. 

137. Thailand had always co-operated with the 
Agency and, by acting as host for technical 
meetings and training courses, had served the aims 
of regional and interregional co-operation. His 
delegation was pleased to note that a sub-regional 
co-operative project on neutron scattering was to 
be undertaken by the Agency and hoped that further 
valuable co-operative projects would follow. 
138. Thailand was proceeding cautiously in 
connection with the introduction of its first nuclear 
power plant. The Agency was being requested to 
assess the safety of a proposed site in 1972, and it 
was expected that it would provide expert advice on 
legal regulatory procedures in the near future. 
139. His delegation believed that through cooperation, 
much could be done to help realize the 
cherished hope for peace. Even more could be 
done if greater efforts were made to re-channel 
more of the available resources, whether in cash, 
kind or services, to peaceful uses. For that 
reason, his delegation felt that the proposal to 
increase the target for voluntary contributions to 
the General Fund, which were the very means by 
which the Agency could extend a helping hand to 
the developing countries, should be wholeheartedly 
supported. 
140. The Thai Government hoped that the cooperative 
enterprises of the Agency, such as the 
technical assistance programmes, the exchanges of 
scientific and technological information, as well 
as some other aspects of its work, would help 
build up mutual trust among the Member States. 
That, together with the need to inspire greater 
confidence among the non-member States, had 
become a fundamental prerequisite for the achievement 
of the long-term objective of a safe and 
prosperous world. 

141. Thailand strongly approved of the Agency's 
safeguards system and was willing to share the 
financial burden involved in its maintenance. 
142. With regard to the proposed amendment to 
Article VI of the Statute approved by the General 
Conference at its last session, he could report 
that Thailand had already deposited its instrument 
of acceptance with the appropriate authority. He 
hoped that other Member States would soon take 
the necessary action so that the amendment would 
come into force. 
143. Speaking then on behalf of his own delegation 
as well as those of other Asian States, he said 
the generous invitation of the Mexican Government 
to hold the next session of the General Conference 
in Mexico City had been noted with pleasure. 
Acceptance of that offer was warmly supported. 
• The meeting rose at 6. 5 p. m. 
- 15 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
9 August 1972* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 24 September 1971, at 10. 50 a.m. 

President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 

Item 
of the 
agenda'! '* Subject Paragraphs 

10 
Closing date of the session 1 -3 

9 
General debate and 4 - 125 
report of the Board of 
Governors for 1970-71 
(continued) 

Statements by the 
delegates of: 

Byelorussian Soviet 4-1 8 
Socialist Republic 
Spain 19 - 37 
Philippines 38 - 52 
Ukrainian Soviet 53 - 67 
Socialist Republic 
Austria 68 - 81 
Argentina 82 - 89 
Niger 90 - 94 
Turkey 95-101 
Burma 102 - 106 
Democratic Republic of 107 - 113 
the Congo 
Ghana 114 - 121 
Costa Rica 122 - 125 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 7 October 1971. 
** GC(XV)/469. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 148 


THE RECORD 
7. His delegation was opposed to the excessive 
increase in the Agency's budget for 1972. However, 
it approved of the increased expenditure on 

CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 
safeguards in connection with NPT. 

1. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure, the General 
Conference had to fix the closing date of the 
session, on the recommendation of the General 
Committee. 
2. The General Committee had considered the 
matter and had authorized him to recommend on 
its behalf that 27 September be fixed as the 
closing date, subject to all business having been 
disposed of by then. 
• 3. The General Committee's 
recommendation was accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1970-71 
(GC(XV)/455, 466) (continued) 

4. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic) said that the participants in 
the Third International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy at Geneva had 
all recognized that atomic energy could be widely 
used for peaceful purposes and had predicted that 
nuclear power would soon undergo extensive 
technical development. At the Fourth Geneva 
Conference many papers and exchanges of view 
had confirmed that mankind had indeed acquired 
mastery over a reliable, safe and economic form 
of power and had established a new technical 
foundation for promoting economic prosperity. 
5. Having carefully studied the documents 
submitted by the Board of Governors to the 
General Conference and having listened attentively 
to the statement by the Director General [1 ] and 
those of various delegates, his delegation 
associated itself with the view that the Agency had 
done much during the past year to promote the 
introduction of nuclear science and technology 
and the application of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes in many countries, particularly the 
developing ones. The Agency's Secretariat had 
indeed laid the foundations in record time for the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS) the 
first international information system in the 
world. 
6. His delegation noted with satisfaction the 
successful work done by the Board's safeguards 
committee, which had drafted a model agreement 
between States and the Agency in connection with 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) [2 ], and welcomed the fact that 
the first actual agreements had been concluded 
and that others were being negotiated by a number 
of countries. It was essential to speed up the 
conclusion of safeguards agreements. 
[1 ] GC(XV)/OR. 144, paras 5-35. 
[2 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-

8. Turning to the principle of the universality 
of the Agency, he pointed out that so far a 
sovereign European State - the German 
Democratic Republic - had not been admitted to 
membership. The purposes and problems of the 
Agency could only be fulfilled and solved if the 
principle of universality laid down in the Statute 
was observed. As was well known, Article IV of 
the Statute stated that any State, whether or not 
a Member of the United Nations, which accepted 
the Statute could become a Member of the Agency. 
That provision was entirely relevant to the 
German Democratic Republic, which met all the 
conditions of the Statute relating to admission to 
membership and whose policy accorded with the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations. The German Democratic Republic 
was an industrially developed country, and its 
achievements in the realm of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy were recognized the world over 
and could make a valuable contribution to the 
solution of problems facing the Agency. The 
German Democratic Republic was able and ready 
to use its advanced nuclear power industry and 
technology in the interests of co-operation. The 
Byelorussian delegation wholly endorsed the 
German Democratic Republic's right to be 
admitted to membership of the Agency. 

9. The Twenty-fourth Congress of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, held in 
March-April 1971, had summed up the results of 
the eighth five-year plan of economic development 
in the Soviet Union (1966-1970) and had established 
the objectives for the ninth five-year plan. The 
principal aim of the new five-year plan was to 
ensure a considerable improvement in the material 
and cultural living standards of the people by 
means of a rapid rate of development of socialist 
production. 
10. The past five-year plans had marked a 
period of rapid development of Soviet science and 
technology, but quicker progress in that sphere 
remained one of the principal aims. A great 
deal had been done in Byelorussia towards laying 
the proper foundations for improving scientific 
and technical standards in many spheres of 
production. There were now 176 scientific 
institutions employing 22 000 scientists, a number 
which had increased by 7000 during the past five 
years alone. At the present time one scientist 
in four was a Candidate (Master) or a Doctor of 
Science. 

11. In giving practical form to the directives 
of the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union and the Twenty-third 
Congress of the Communist Party of 
Byelorussia, Byelorussian scientists had 
achieved substantial successes in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. At present a large 
number of institutes, medical centres, 
2 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 


enterprises and institutions were using atomic the production of electricity by nuclear means 
energy for peaceful purposes. was a necessity for the country. Since 1968 a 
153-MW(e) power station of the pressurized


12. Based on the results of work carried out water reactor type had been m operation. 
during the past few years, a paper had been 
presented at the Fourth Geneva Conference about 
a new idea for the use of dissociating gas as a 
coolant in atomic power stations with fast-breeder 
reactors; there were grounds for hoping that the 
innovation would considerably improve the 
technical and economic characteristics of such 
power stations. 

13. Highly qualified workers in nuclear physics 
and nuclear power were being systematically 
trained in Byelorussia. Ten to twelve 
Candidates (Masters) of Science graduated each 
year from the Nuclear Power Institute of the 
Byelorussian SSR Academy of Sciences alone. 
14. At the present time work was proceeding 
in Byelorussia on the radiosterilization of 
medical instruments. Work had started and 
would continue on seed irradiation before sowing 
aimed at increasing yields and improving the 
quality of agricultural products, and on the 
irradiation of food commodities for purposes of 
improved preservation. Work was in course on 
the modification of materials through radiation. 
15. Byelorussia was taking part in international 
exchanges of experience gained in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. During the past year 
scientists and technicians from Hungary, Poland, 
the United States and other countries and the 
Agency had visited the Nuclear Energy Institute 
of the Byelorussian SSR Academy of Sciences. 
16. Byelorussia was taking an active part in the 
carrying out of many activities in the Agency's 
programme. During the past year experiments 
had been completed at the Nuclear Energy 
Institute of the Byelorussian SSR Academy of 
Sciences under a cost-free contract with the 
Agency in the field of medical radiology. Work 
was proceeding on a cost-free contract concerning 
the development of technical control facilities 
for the Department of Safeguards and Inspection. 
Representatives of Byelorussia were taking part 
in the collection and evaluation of nuclear data. 

17. All that was clear proof that Byelorussia 
regarded the peaceful uses of atomic energy as a 
powerful means of achieving technical progress 
in the spheres of power, medicine, agriculture 
and many other sectors of the economy. 
18. He hoped that the Agency would successfully 
deal with the vast problems facing it and assured 
the General Conference that Byelorussia would, 
to the best of its ability, promote the favourable 
outcome of the Agency's efforts. 
19. Mr. de LOJENDIO (Spain) said that the 
industrialization in progress in Spain in recent 
years had resulted in a substantial increase in 
the number of electric power stations installed. 
As the sources of hydroelectric power would soon 
be exhausted, and Spain was short of fossil fuels, 
20. In 1969 a National Electricity Plan had been 
drawn up, in connection with which forecasts of 
power requirements had been made for the coming 
years. The plan envisaged a total installed 
capacity of 41. 6 million kW in Spain in 1980, of 
which 8 million kW would be nuclear capacity. 
The corresponding figures for 1983 had been 
54. 8 million kW total capacity and 14 million kW 
nuclear capacity. The plan was revised every 
two years. The revision recently carried out had 
increased the figures for 1983 to a total capacity 
of 60. 6 million kW and 18. 2 million kW of nuclear 
capacity; according to the latest forecast, 30% 
of the electricity-generating capacity in Spain in 
1983 would be of the nuclear type. 
21. That meant that as from 1972 contracts 
would be placed for some 1500 MW(e) annually in 
nuclear power stations, representing an annual 
sum in excess of $300 million, 
22. In its programmes the Nuclear Energy 
Board had emphasized the following sectors: the 
fuel cycle, reactor technology, water desalination 
and isotopes. 
23. With respect to prospecting for radioactive 
source materials, a development procedure had 
been followed that was similar to that of other 
countries. The main emphasis had been placed 
on prospecting for deposits where promising 
results had been obtained previously. Activities 
had been increased in aerial prospection, which 
was regarded as a fast and selective method, and 
other techniques, such as geophysical and 
geochemical methods, radon-content prospecting, 
etc,, had been reviewed and developed. During 
the past year aerial prospecting had been carried 
out over an area of 41 200 km2. 
24. Minehead leaching installations had 
continued to treat 36 000 tons of mineral annually. 
The Andujar uranium plant was still producing 
concentrates at a rate of 60 tons of U^Og annually. 
25. The M-l reprocessing plant had treated 
fuel from the Swiss reactor Saphir under subcontract 
for Eurochemic; the operation had been 
completed at the end of 1970. 
26. Experimental work was being continued in 
the JEN-1 and JEN-2 reactors, both of the 
swimming-pool type, and in the CORAL-1 fast 
reactor. The project for increasing the capacity 
of JEN-1 to 10 MW was in the process of being 
implemented. 
27. With regard to water desalination, work 
was being continued in experimental flash 
distillation and electrodialysis plants, with very 
positive results. Because of their experimental 
nature, the plants concerned were very flexible. 
-3 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 


28. The number of users of isotopes in 
December 1970 was 844, involving a total of 
333 facilities. The figure for utilization of 
isojtopes, as at the same date, had reached 
13 858.82 curies. Comparison of that figure 
with those for previous years showed that the 
utilization of isotopes was increasing in Spain at 
an annual rate of more than 25%. A large 
percentage of the radioisotopes and also of stable 
isotopes produced by the Nuclear Energy Board 
was exported. In Spain, the main applications 
were research, industry, medicine and 
agriculture and, in particular, food irradiation, 
which would assume great importance once 
official authorization was given for the consumption 
of irradiated potatoes. 
29. The Institute of Nuclear Studies had continued 
to devote attention to basic research. It had 
also provided training for fellows from the Agency 
and various Spanish institutions. The total 
number of fellows now catered for by the Institute 
of Nuclear Studies varied between 80 and 90. 
30. In the matter of nuclear power production, 
mention should be made of the commissioning 
and integration into the grid of the nuclear power 
station of Santa Maria de Garona, a power 
station of the boiling-water reactor type having a 
capacity of 460 MW(e). It was at present the 
largest light-water nuclear power station in 
Europe. 
31. The first refuelling of the "Jose Cabrera" 
Nuclear Power Station had been carried out. 
32. The construction of the Vandellos Nuclear 
Power Station, at Tarragona, which belonged to 
the Spanish-French company HIFRENSA, was 
proceeding normally, and it was hoped it would 
be commissioned at the end of the current year. 
33. The nuclear power stations at Lemoniz 
(two units of 850 MW), Almaraz (two units of 
850 MW), Zorita (one unit of 500 MW), Asco 
(two units of 850 MW) and Irta (one unit of 
500 MW) were in various stages of construction. 
34. Among the matters before the General 
Conference there was one that his country had 
always considered to be of particular importance, 
namely technical assistance. That form of 
assistance was of great value in extending the 
benefits of nuclear energy to those regions of the 
world which were most in need of rapid economic 
and technological development. The Spanish 
delegation, which the previous year had been in 
favour of an increase in the target for voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund, had noted 
with satisfaction that the Board had approved a 
proposal to raise the target to $ 3 million for 
1972. [3] Spain would contribute $28 500. 
35. In examining the draft budget, the Spanish 
delegation noted with satisfaction that while the 
total budget would increase by some 18% in 
{3] See document GC(XV)/460, para. 1.11. 

comparison with that of the previous year, technical 
assistance would be increasing at a somewhat 
faster rate of 20. 1%, which showed that Spain's 
concern was shared by the Board and the Director 
General. Nevertheless, the percentage of the 
budget devoted to technical assistance would still 
be lower than it should be. 

36. The cost of safeguards would increase by 
some 38. 6% in comparison with the corresponding 
appropriation during the past year, thus 
increasing from 10.25% to approximately 12% of 
the total budget. Spain hoped that the adoption of 
new safeguards methods would make possible a 
significantly lower rate of increase under that 
item during the coming years. For that reason 
his country had collaborated with the Agency in 
studying methods that could yield greater 
savings in safeguards costs while maintaining the 
same level of effectiveness. 
37. He wished to express his delegation's 
satisfaction that it had in the end been possible to 
readjust the salaries of the Agency's staff in the 
Professional category. The staff which, under 
the leadership of the Director General, was 
pursuing with efficiency and zeal the objective 
of introducing nuclear energy in Member States, 
merited the esteem of the international community. 
Unfortunately, the limitations in budget growth 
had restricted the increase in order to achieve 
a strict balance between the available resources 
and the wishes of the Agency's governing bodies. 
38. Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) said he shared 
the fervent hope of all developing countries that 
more could be done to accelerate the peaceful 
application of atomic energy, especially in the 
developing areas of the world. His delegation 
had consistently expressed its concern at the 
inadequacy of the Agency's technical assistance 
programme to meet the growing needs of the 
developing countries. It appreciated the value 
and effectiveness of technical assistance on the 
basis of its experience as a recipient and was 
aware of the difficulties the Agency had to 
overcome in financing its technical assistance 
programme. For that reason he would appeal to 
the more affluent Member States to increase 
their voluntary contributions to the Agency so as 
to enable it to be more responsive to the expanding 
needs of the developing countries in regard to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

39. His Government, for its part, had been 
offering fellowships to other developing 
countries through the Agency and would continue 
to do so if that venture were successful. 
40. His Government fully recognized the benefits 
of the Agency's technical assistance to his 
country, whose nuclear energy activities had, to 
a great extent, been developed with such assistance. 
Moreover, that assistance had largely 
contributed to the enactment of "The Atomic 
Energy Regulatory and Liability Act of 1968", 
which governed the licensing and regulation of 
the construction and operation of nuclear power 
stations. 
-4 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 


41. His country had endeavoured to make 
optimum use of the assistance so that it would 
have a positive impact on its economic, social 
and cultural development. He hoped that the 
positive effects of such assistance would extend 
beyond the national boundaries. 
42. He was pleased to inform the Conference 
that his country, as a direct consequence of its 
policy and programme and of the sympathetic 
attitude of the Agency, had some modest 
achievements to its credit. The scientific 
community there had recognized the high research 
capabilities of the Philippine Atomic Research 
Centre and the ability of its nuclear scientists. 
The application and utilization of radioisotope 
techniques had spread extensively and were 
widely accepted. The Philippines was now able 
to conduct national training courses, 
particularly in radioisotope techniques and the 
uses of radioisotopes in agriculture, industry 
and medicine, in which scientists from 
neighbouring countries had participated. The 
Agency's scientific and technical staff and 
experts included Filipinos, and as a result of the 
Agency's assistance in initiating and executing 
projects in atomic energy research and 
development, his country was now in a position 
to undertake collaborative projects on a 
regional basis. 
43. The fact that similar situations obtained in 
most of the other developing countries could, 
however, lead to an erroneous appraisal of the 
adequacy of the technical assistance so far 
provided. Considering the effectiveness of 
assistance, it might reasonably be expected that 
there should eventually be a gradual reduction in 
dependence on assistance from the Agency. 
However, developments usually came about as a 
result of earlier assistance and they, in turn, 
gave rise to new requirements which developing 
countries were not able to meet immediately. 
That was particularly true of the introduction of 
nuclear power in developing countries. Several 
developing countries had already conducted 
comprehensive feasibility and preinvestment 
studies on the introduction of nuclear power, 
which had brought to the fore the problem of 
financing. Whereas the relevant investigations 
and organizational work could be carried out by 
the countries concerned, outside assistance had 
to be sought for financing the projects. The 
General Conference had requested the Director 
General to make a comprehensive study of the 
subject, [4] and the resulting estimates, based 
on available data, of nuclear power demands in 
developing countries and related foreign capital 
requirements, confirmed that the great majority 
of the developing countries expecting to commission 
their first nuclear plant between 1975 and 
1980 could not absorb the large units 
(600-1100 MW(e)) now offered by manufacturers. 
Since nuclear power reactors of the small and 
medium range (100-500 MW(e)) were less 
competitive than the larger-sized ones, one 
would have to wait till the grid systems expanded 
[4 ] By Resolution GC(XIII)/RES/256. 
sufficiently to absorb them, or accept nuclear 
power in the system at a relatively higher cost. 
It was therefore necessary for the Agency, under 
Article XI. B of the Statute, to assist Member 
States in securing the required financing on the 
most favourable terms to carry out such projects. 

44. He suggested that more emphasis be 
placed on supporting studies on reducing the 
costs, increasing the availability and improving 
the competitiveness of nuclear power reactors 
of the size range which could currently be used 
in the grids of developing countries. The market 
for such reactors was very small, but it must be 
borne in mind that each additional and relatively 
more economic megawatt of capacity installed in 
a developing economy would have a greater 
impact than in highly developed ones. It was not 
enough to prove technical and economic 
feasibilities; the suppliers' decisive role in the 
nuclear power programmes of developing States 
should be studied and even guided. 
45. It was disconcerting for potential newcomers 
in the field of nuclear power that, although over 
300 reactor-years of experience in the design, 
construction and operation of plants with a 
capacity below 500 MW(e) were available, 
manufacturers were moving over to 
increasingly larger sizes for economic reasons. 
Although manufacturers in the United States 
evinced a limited interest in power reactors with 
a capacity below 500 MW(e), countries like the 
Federal Republic of Germany, Sweden, Japan, 
Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands might soon 
become the major suppliers of intermediatesize 
nuclear plants. 

46. Suggesting that the Agency undertake action 
aimed at drawing attention to that important 
aspect of introducing nuclear power in developing 
countries, he urged all potential suppliers to 
extend their maximum support and co-operation 
to such activities of the Agency as the coordinated 
programme of research on technical and 
cost assessment of intermediate-size nuclear 
power reactors and comprehensive and detailed 
market studies. He was sure that the Agency 
would continue to be the effective catalyst in 
bringing together potential users, suppliers and 
lending organizations. 
47. Supporting the increase in the target for 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund to 
$3 million for 1972, he expressed concern at 
the understanding of many Members of the 
Board that that target should remain unchanged 
until 1974, especially since the Director General 
had confirmed that the target of $ 3 million for 
technical assistance was equivalent only to the 
1962 level for such assistance, which clearly 
indicated that the Agency had failed to carry out 
one of its principal functions under 
Article III. A. 2 of the Statute. In that connection 
he expressed the hope that the current 
international monetary problems and the 

measures taken or to be taken by developed 
countries in that regard would not, in any way, 
aggravate the already stringent situation 

-5 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 

concerning the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. 

48. The year 1971 was a memorable year for 
the Agency not only as a result of the entry into 
force of NPT but also because of the beginning of 
the United Nations Second Development Decade. 
Article IV of NPT specifically urged all parties 
to it to promote the further development of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy, with due 
consideration for the needs of the developing 
areas of the world. Resolution 2626 (XXV) of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations, relating 
to the International Development Strategy for the 
Second United Nations Development Decade, called 
on all Governments and international organizations 
to join in a concerted effort to assist the 
developing countries in attaining the levels of 
development indicated in the resolution. The 
Agency should accordingly draw up a 
programme of action to enable it to play a concrete 
role in its area of competence. The Agency's 
programme for 1972 and the following years 
should be restructured in a manner that would 
enable the Agency to participate actively in the 
international strategy for the Second Development 
Decade and meet the requirements of Article IV 
of NPT. The 1972 programme, in his opinion, 
was inadequate, since the Agency's non-safeguards 
activities would remain static, if they were not 
indeed considerably decreased. He urged that 
remedial measures be taken in order to ensure 
a balance between the growth in the safeguards 
and non-safeguards activities of the Agency. In 
that connection, he requested the Member States, 
particularly the more affluent ones, to make 
additional resources available to the Agency so 
that it could discharge its principal functions 
under the Statute, conform to the spirit of 
Article IV of NPT and fulfil the objectives of the 
international strategy for the Second 
Development Decade. 

49. Commending the successful work of the 
Board's safeguards committee in formulating 
material for the safeguards agreements to be 
concluded in connection with NPT and in reaching 
agreement on arrangements for financing the 
safeguards activities of the Agency, he said that 
those arrangements [5 ] took into account the 
concern of developing countries with regard to 
the increasing financial responsibilities which 
might devolve upon them as a result of the growth 
in safeguards activities and, at the same time, 
provided a stable source of funds for such activities. 
50. Since the Asian region had achieved 
significant progress in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy and now carried out a greater volume of 
activity involving the use of radioactive materials, 
his Government considered that the introduction 
of health and safety measures against radiation 
accidents, within the framework of regional 
co-operation, should receive greater attention. 
51. Referring to the current preoccupation 
with problems related to the environment, he 
[5 ] See document GC(XV)/462. 
stressed that the Agency's nuclear techniques 
and know-how in investigating and ultimately 
reducing the pollution caused by industrial 
operations should be utilized to the maximum in 
the universal effort to combat environmental 
pollution. The Agency should also review from 
time to time its health and safety standards 
covering every type of activity in which nuclear 
energy was used for peaceful purposes, 
particularly its Regulations for the Safe 
Transport of Radioactive Materials [6 ], to 
ensure that the use of nuclear energy did not 
further aggravate the already serious problem of 
environmental contamination. 

52. In conclusion, he wished to inform the 
Conference that the Philippines was 
substantially raising its voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund. 
53. Mr. PASECHNIK (Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic), recalling that reference had 
already been made by delegates to several 
aspects of the Agency's work since the last 
session of the General Conference, said that 
many important events had taken place during 
that period. For the Ukrainian people as for 
other peoples of the Soviet Union the past year 
had been marked by the adoption of the new 
five-year plan by the Twenty-fourth Congress of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The 
new plan constituted a scientifically-based 
programme of further economic and social 
development aimed at improving the well-being 
of the peoples of the USSR. 
54. Mankind could not remain indifferent to the 
diversion of enormous resources to the nuclear 
arms race - according to United Nations figures 
over $200 000 million were being spent annually. 
Naturally the peoples of the world were concerned 
at the unremitting growth in the stockpile of 
nuclear weapons in the world. Clearly, the 
prohibition of nuclear armaments would release 
enormous sums of money which could be used to 
improve standards of living everywhere, and if 
those quantities of nuclear materials now being 
allocated to military purposes could be fashioned 
not into weapons of destruction but into 
instruments of production, that would constitute 
a solid foundation for the faster development of 
nuclear power. 

55. For that reason it was particularly 
important to implement the decisions already 
taken by States to prevent the spread of atomic 
weapons throughout the world, which in turn 
depended largely on the Agency discharging its 
functions effectively, 
56. His delegation fully endorsed the action 
being taken by the Board and the Agency's 
Secretariat to institute the Agency's control 
system as quickly as possible. 
57. Referring to the use of atomic energy in the 
Ukrainian economy, he said that an extensive 
[6] STI/PUB/148 (1967 Edition). 
-6 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 


programme for the construction of nuclear power 
stations was being carried out, and those stations 
would play an increasing role in meeting power 
requirements. 

58. A high rate of industrial development 
naturally called for a rapid increase in power 
generation, and indeed the rate of electric power 
production in the Ukraine was very high. During 
the past 25 years power production had doubled 
every six to seven years and in 1970 had reached 
138 million kWh. The "conventional" sources 
of energy were no longer adequate to meet 
requirements, and Ukrainian power engineers 
were constantly concerned to draw systematically 
upon new sources of power. At present nuclear 
power stations with water-moderated and cooled 
reactors and with uranium-graphite reactors of 
large unit capacity were being planned and 
constructed in the Ukraine. The design, 
construction and operation of nuclear power 
stations with reactor units of 1000 MW and over 
were planned. The proportion of power output 
represented by nuclear stations was expected to 
rise to 10% during the present decade. That 
period should also see the attainment of full 
power and full operational status by the Chernobyl 
nuclear station. In addition, there were plans in 
hand for the first reactors at further nuclear 
stations with a design capacity of 2000-4000 MW, 
Design studies for large, high-efficiency dualpurpose 
units generating electricity and supplying 
water for irrigation of arid areas were being 
carried out in various regions of the Ukraine. 

59. Considerable success had been achieved 
in the industrial uses of isotopes and radiation 
sources. Radioisotope facilities were being 
most widely used in the coal, metallurgical, 
engineering, chemical and other branches of 
industry. In a number of towns, specialized 
isotope laboratories were developing and 
introducing new types of radioisotope equipment. 
Promising radiation-induced mutants of many 
plants had been obtained, as well as highlyproductive 
bacteria. Radioisotope laboratories 
were operating at medical institutions where the 
diagnosis and treatment of different organs was 
being carried out and the functional condition of 
the organism and problems of metabolism were 
being studied. 
60. Along with the practical utilization of 
atomic energy in the national economy, considerable 
attention was being given to scientific 
research in that field, which was being carried 
out at various institutes of the Academy of 
Sciences and at universities. Ukrainian nuclear 
centres were strengthening their contacts with 
foreign research centres, and arrangements had 
been made for the systematic exchange of 
information on nuclear data with the Agency. 
Input was being prepared for INIS. 
61. The Ukraine was becoming, more and 
more, a venue for scientific conferences and 
meetings. Two international conferences on 
high energy physics and a symposium on 
radiation biology had taken place in Kiev. In a 
few days' time a conference on plasma theory 
would start its deliberations, and the Ukraine 
was prepared to act as host to a panel on neutron 
physics and nuclear data. 

62. Referring to the programme of technical 
assistance for developing countries, which to 
some extent encouraged work on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in those countries and 
thereby contributed to their general economic 
development, he said that his delegation had some 
criticisms regarding both the way in which such 
assistance was allocated in its different forms, 
which was not always sufficiently rational, and 
the choice of countries to which the assistance 
was given. 
63. The international exchange of scientific and 
technical information, which had received great 
impetus through the inauguration of INIS, and the 
programme of scientific conferences, symposia 
and panels were very important. That aspect of 
the Agency's work helped to speed up scientific 
research in developing countries, contributed 
to the efficient exchange of scientific and 
technical information between countries with an 
advanced atomic industry, and strengthened 
international co-operation among scientists, as 
demonstrated recently during the Fourth Geneva 
Conference. 
64. In speaking of the Agency's activities from 
a practical standpoint, mention should be made of 
its financing and particularly its budget. He 
considered that the rate of budgetary increase 
was excessive and unjustified. 
65. The Agency was in its very essence clearly 
a universal organization, and as laid down in the 
Statute any State could become a member which 
affirmed its willingness to collaborate with the 
Agency and respected the purposes and principles 
of the United Nations. Such universality was one 
of the fundamental prerequisites of the Agency's 
efficient operation. Unfortunately, the principle 
had not yet been fully applied and consequently 
some sovereign States could not become members 
of the Agency. He had in mind the German 
Democratic Republic, whose peaceful foreign 
policy fully accorded with the purposes and 
principles of the United Nations and which had 
made great progress in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. As a sovereign State, the German 
Democratic Republic could and should become a 
Member of the Agency in accordance with 
Article IV. B of the Statute, and his delegation 
hoped that the question of that State's membership 
would be settled in a positive manner. 
66. Finally, he emphasised once again that the 
Agency's main task was to further the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and to develop and 
strengthen the spirit of international co-operation. 
The Agency could make a significant contribution 
to the relaxation of international tension. Its 
activities should be directed towards finding the 
most effective means of carrying out that noble 
task. 
-7 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 

67. It was vitally important for the Agency to 
discharge the obligations laid upon it by NPT in 
regard to safeguards functions. A major aspect 
of that activity should be the prompt conclusion of 
safeguards agreements between States and the 
Agency. 
68. Mr. REITBAUER (Austria) said that at the 
outset he would like to thank the Director General 
and all the members of the Secretariat for their 
excellent work during the past year. The work 
load of the staff had been extremely heavy during 
that period, since in addition to the normal 
activities relating to technical assistance, 
safeguards and panels and symposia, the staff of 
the Agency had participated in the preparation of 
the Fourth Geneva Conference. As all knew, the 
discussions in the Board's safeguards committee 
had entailed additional work especially for the 
Department of Safeguards and Inspection and the 
Legal Division. It was therefore a pleasure to 
express his delegation's sincere appreciation for 
the excellent services rendered by the Secretariat. 
69. The Board had been right to place the 
problems connected with NPT and the 
achievements of its safeguards committee first 
in its annual report to the Conference. [7 ] His 
Government had warmly welcomed the setting up 
of that committee in April 1970 and was pleased 
that it had successfully accomplished a task of 
great legal and technical complexity. As the 
Director General had already mentioned in his 
opening statement, Austria had signed a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency in 
connection with NPT [8 ] some days previously. 
When Parliament reconvened after the forthcoming 
elections, the agreement would be one of the 
first topics to be dealt with, and it was hoped 
that it would enter into force before the 
beginning of March 1972. 
70. As the Foreign Minister, Dr. Kirchschlager, 
had said on the occasion of the signing of the 
agreement, neutral Austria had always welcomed 
initiatives and steps towards disarmament and 
greater international security. It had therefore 
been among the first States to sign and ratify 
NPT, because it regarded the conclusion of NPT 
as an event of unique significance, which should 
enhance the security of the world, give new 
impetus to international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and further 
efforts towards disarmament. However, NPT, 
like many other international agreements, would 
remain ineffective without instruments for its 
implementation. Adhering as usual to the basic 
principle of scrupulous respect for obligations 
accepted, Austria had entered into negotiations 
with the Agency on the agreement as early as had 
been possible. Although Austria believed in 
principle that it was up to States and the Members 
of the Agency to decide for themselves about when 
to enter into negotiations with the Agency and to 
conclude a safeguards agreement in connection 
with NPT, it hoped that its example would be 
followed by other States. His delegation therefore 
welcomed the official announcement by the delegate 
of Italy that the Council of Ministers of the 
European Communities had given a mandate to the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
to negotiate with the Agency an agreement in 
order to enable five of the EURATOM States to 
implement their obligations under Article III of 
NPT. [9] It was convinced that the announcement 
would give new momentum to the negotiation of 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. 

71. The Fourth Geneva Conference had offered 
an excellent opportunity for scientists, 
administrators and economists from all over the 
world to examine progress and programmes in the 
field of the peaceful application of nuclear energy 
and their impact on the human environment. The 
Austrian delegation very much hoped that the 
results of the discussions during the Conference 
would be taken up and further developed by future 
Agency panels and symposia, 
72, As many delegates probably knew, Austria's 
first nuclear power plant, a 700-MW(e) boilingwater 
reactor unit, was to be constructed at 
Zwentendorf on the Danube, some 40 kilometres 
west of Vienna. Preparations were already 
being carried out on the site and it was expected 
that construction would be started early in 1972 
and that the plant would be operating in the second 
half of 1976. 

73, As in other countries, the announcement of 
the decision to build a nuclear power station had 
aroused objections from people who were without 
doubt inspired by honest motives. But despite 
the fact that leading scientists had found nuclear 
power plants "cleaner" than fossil-fuelled ones 
and less harmful to the human environment, 
despite the fact that the Agency had published 
numerous scientific papers in which the same 
conclusion was reached, Austria was encountering 
the psychological phenomenon of the average 
citizen still ridden by fears which associated 
atomic energy with mass destruction; a lot of 
work would be required to convince him of the 
advantages and benefits of that new source of 
energy and to remove his anxieties. 

74. The Austrian delegation believed that the 
moment had come when the Agency should not 
only continue its scientific work on the 
improvement of radiation protection standards 
and on the possible environmental effects of 
atomic power plants, but should also aid Member 
States in their efforts to inform the public 
objectively about the nature of atomic energy, of 
its advantages and possible dangers. An Agencysponsored 
information campaign for leaders of 
opinion, for journalists, teachers and people 
active in adult education in the various countries 
could very well contribute to removing the 
overall attitude of distrust towards the atom and 
could lead to discussions on the advantages and 
[7 ] See document GC(XV)/455, paras 1-7. 
[8 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/156. [9] See document GC(XV)/OR. 145, para. 33. 
-8 



disadvantages of atomic energy on a more 
objective basis. 

75. Although the Austrian delegation attached 
the greatest importance to the implementation of 
NPT through safeguards, it wished to emphasize 
that the original aims of the Agency, namely "to 
encourage and assist research on, and development 
and practical application of, atomic energy 
for peaceful uses throughout the world", must 
remain as important as the new task the Agency 
had assumed in connection with NPT. It would 
therefore support the draft resolution proposing 
to raise the target for voluntary contributions by 
Member States for the purpose of technical 
assistance from $2.5 million to $ 3 million in 
1972. [10] At the same time it realized that the 
latter sum would not fully meet the expectations of 
the developing countries, but it certainly 
represented an improvement on previous years. 
Subject to parliamentary approval, the Austrian 
authorities envisaged a corresponding increase 
in Austria's contribution to the General Fund; in 
that sense, a pledge had already been made. 

76. That led him to the proposed budget for 
1972 and to the two draft resolutions concerning 
the increase in the appropriation for the Regular 
Budget expenses in 1971 by reducing the level of 
the Working Capital Fund. [11 ] The Austrian 
delegation was aware of the financial 
difficulties of the Agency caused by salary 
increases for the staff, the general increase of 
costs, and problems encountered in the world's 
monetary market. It would vote for the two 
draft resolutions, as well as for the draft 
resolution relating to the new method of 
contribution to the Regular Budget in connection 
with the application of safeguards. [12 ] 
77. However, his delegation fully comprehended 
the concern expressed by the Director General in 
his opening statement about the budgetary situation 
of the Agency. [13 ] The fact that there was no 
room for programme increases in the budget while 
staff costs and the budget figure continued to rise 
was obviously a matter for worry. His 
delegation therefore appreciated any steps taken 
or envisaged to rationalize the work of the Agency 
through redeployment of staff or any other 
measure. 
78. He was able to report further progress in 
regard to the planning and construction of the 
Agency's permanent headquarters. On 
18 December 1970, members of the Federal 
Government and the City Council of Vienna, 
under the chairmanship of the Federal 
Cahncellor, Dr. Bruno Kreisky, had decided, 
[10] See document GC(XV)/460, Annex VII, 
draft resolution B. 1. 
[11 ] See draft resolutions A and B set forth in 
document GC(XV)/457. 
[12 ] See the draft resolution set forth in 
document GC(XV)/462. 
[13] GC(XV)/OR. 144, paras 31 and 32. 
GC(XV)/OR. 148 


after intensive consultations with both the Agency 
and the United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO) and after reaching an 
understanding about certain modifications, to 
choose the project of the Austrian architect 
Johann Staber for execution. On 16 February 1971, 
an agreement on the size of the project and the 
termination of Austria's obligations with respect 
to the Agency had been reached between the 
Foreign Minister and the Director General of 
the Agency, which had come into force by an 
exchange of letters of 8 June 1971. On 
3 May 1971, the Federal Government and the City 
of Vienna had established a joint stock corporation 
with the task of executing the project in the most 
efficient way and in the shortest possible period. 

79. Immediately after the conclusion of the 
aforementioned agreement, the Agency had been 
invited to submit a study relating to functional 
requirements within the mutually agreed space 
programme. Shortly afterwards, the Agency had 
responded to that request, and had made 
available all pertinent details, thus providing 
basic data for detailed planning. 
80. On behalf of the Austrian Government, he 
wished to express gratitude to all those in the 
Agency, and in particular to the Director General, 
Dr. Eklund, and his Deputy, Dr. Hall, who had 
contributed so much, in a spirit of mutual 
understanding and through efficient collaboration, 
to advance progress in that vast project. 
81. On previous occasions his delegation had 
stressed the importance of the Agency as the 
centre and principal international forum for 
discussions on the application and the 
development of the peaceful uses of the atom. 
Although in the past the Agency had been 
unchallenged in that role, the trend towards 
commercialization of nuclear power and 
increasing trade in nuclear materials would 
certainly have an impact on the activities and 
perhaps also on the position of the Agency, 
Vigilance and careful attention to those developments 
would be required if the Agency was to 
maintain its co-ordinating role in the field of the 
peaceful application of nuclear energy. 
82. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said that 
the Conference was that year losing 
Dr. Glenn Seaborg, who had been one of its most 
outstanding delegates and Chairman of the 
United States Atomic Energy Commission. 
Dr. Seaborg had the Argentine delegation's 
gratitude and best wishes in his future tasks. 
83. Argentina was continuing to implement its 
nuclear plan at a good rate and within the time 
limits foreseen. The basic objective of that plan 
was to contribute to the well-being and safety of 
the population. 
84. Steady progress was being made in the 
building of a nuclear power station, using natural 
uranium. That project would be followed shortly 
by a second station, for which the type of 
reactor had not as yet been determined. A third 
-9 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 


plant, possibly with a capacity of 1000 MW, was 
expected to be in operation by the end of the present 
decade. 

85. The work being done by the Agency during 
the current year and also the Board's annual 
report were highly satisfactory. Much of the 
credit was due to the Board which, under the admirable 
chairmanship of Mr. Trivedi, had worked 
to good effect, and also to the Secretariat and 
the Director General, whose competence, hard 
work and diplomatic tact were vital factors. 
86. Argentina had had the satisfaction of 
welcoming Dr. Eklund on a vist that year; the 
visit had proved highly useful in improving 
co-operation between the Agency and his country. 
87. Argentina was to be the venue for two 
important international meetings organized in 
collaboration with the Agency: the Regional 
Training Course on the Use of Radiation in 
Sterilization and Treatment of Biomedical 
Products and the Latin American Regional 
Seminar on Input Preparation for INIS, 
88. He was pleased to state that he was 
authorized by his Government to announce that 
Argentina would make a voluntary contribution to 
the General Fund corresponding to its fixed 
percentage for 1972. 
89. The advances in nuclear energy activites 
made in Argentina over the past few years had 
been made possible largely by the help received 
from international sources and in particular from 
the Agency. He accordingly felt bound to express 
once again his gratitude for that support, 
90. Mr. MARIKO (Niger) said that his country, 
which was a producer of uranium, could not fail to 
take an interest in the activities of the Agency and 
the specialized agencies in the United Nations 
family. The inadequate development in the case 
of the great majority of the world's population 
was such a disquieting fact that the sum total of 
human endeavour, knowledge and intelligence 
should be mobilized in order to combat it in all 
its manifestations. 
91. Bilateral technical and financial assistance 
had fortunately been supplemented over the past 
decade by aid from the United Nations, the 
specialized agencies, and the Agency. The 
Republic of the Niger, which was a beneficiary 
of development aid provided by the United 
Nations organizations, wished to express its 
gratitude to the Director General of the Agency 
and all those who had assisted him for the work 
they had done. 
92. Because of its distance from the shores of 
the Atlantic and the Mediterranean, which greatly 
increased shipping costs for imported fossil fuels, 
and the serious difficulties created by its climate 
and the vast areas of desert covering most of the 
national territory, the Republic of the Niger set 
great hopes on assistance from organizations in 
the United Nations family. More specifically, 
prospecting for ores, irrigation, cattle breeding, 
and the training of personnel, especially in 
scientific work, were activities that occupied a 
prominent place in all plans for economic and 
social development. 

93. He was convinced that the peaceful use of 
atomic energy had important implications for 
economic development programmes relating to 
such diverse matters as agriculture, cattle 
breeding, medicine, and electricity production 
both for urban consumption and as a motive force 
in irrigation and industry. His country urged 
that the assistance programmes worked out for 
the developing countries should be directly 
related to the development plans of the countries 
themselves. 
94. The various forms of development aid 
reinforced the efforts being made by those 
countries to improve living conditions. But that 
aim would never be universally attained while 
South Africa and Portugal still practised racial 
discrimination against the African populations of 
South Africa and Namibia in the first case, and 
those of the Cape Verde Islands, Guinea-Bissao, 
Angola and Mozambique in the second case. 
95. Mr, SAHINBAS (Turkey) said that his 
delegation considered the Fourth Geneva Conference 
to have been a success and to have provided a 
valuable contribution to the progress of nuclear 
science and technology. A conclusion to be drawn 
from it was that the atom would be the major 
source of energy during the forthcoming decades, 
constituting a lesser pollution hazard to man and 
his environment than conventional fossil energy 
sources. It had also become evident that the 
nuclear sciences would acquire wider applications 
in medicine, agriculture, industry, hydrology and 
mineralogy during the years ahead. Further, 
the atom would constitute the major energy source 
for the conversion of sea-water into fresh water. 
All the developments mentioned indicated that 
nuclear science and its ever-increasing 
applications would become an integral part of the 
daily life of all the world's inhabitants within the 
next few decades. 

96. In view of the rapid rate of development of 
nuclear science, it was the belief of the Turkish 
delegation that the Agency would have intensive 
and extensive work to do, and not only in the 
exchange of information and control of the 
diversion of nuclear material to non-peaceful 
purposes. It would have to facilitate the 
introduction of nuclear technology in wider areas 
of the world and the establishment of a world-wide 
nuclear law system, and would be called upon to 
play at least the role of a catalyst in the 
financing of nuclear projects. 
97. It was not possible to speak of the 
increasing role to be played by the Agency without 
also paying due regard to the budget. Turkey 
shared the Director General's view that a 
situation in which programmes remained static 
while costs continued to increase was not a 
healthy one. 
- 10 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 


98. It was important that a balance be 
maintained between the Agency's various 
activities. Turkey therefore welcomed the 
increase in contributions to the General Fund 
foreseen the previous year. Nevertheless, the 
Agency was still a long way from striking a 
balance between expenditure on its positive 
activities, represented first and foremost by 
technical assistance, and its purely safeguarding 
activities; a proper balance would perhaps show 
an emphasis on the former. 
99. With regard to the safeguards agreements 
to be negotiated with the Agency pursuant to 
Article III of NPT, the Turkish Government had 
expressed its views on certain principles and 
considerations in a document submitted to the 
Board's safeguards committee. During that 
committee's meetings, the Turkish delegation 
had also expressed its views on the 
apportionment of safeguards costs. It would be 
inspired and guided by those views during the 
negotiations with the Agency on such matters, 
particularly in view of the consultative role of 
the committee. 
100. The Turkish Government had recently 
completed the formalities with regard to the 
ratification of the amendment of Article VI of 
the Statute [14 ], and Turkey could therefore be 
included in the list of countries having ratified it. 
101. He paid tribute to Dr. Glenn Seaborg, to 
whom nuclear science and the Agency owed much, 
and wished him continued success in the new 
stage of his academic life. 
102. U VUM KO HAU (Burma) said he shared 
the optimism expressed by the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations in his message to the 
General Conference concerning a complete ban 
on nuclear tests and the cessation of the nuclear 
arms race. [15 ] He considered that the 
statement of the Director General and the 
statements by Dr. Glenn Seaborg [16 ], who had 
prophesied makind's future up to the year 2000, 
Mr. I. D. Morokhov [ 17 ] and others were of 
particular importance to developing countries, 
which were solely interested in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. It was encouraging that 
atomic energy would be immensely useful for 
agricultural and industrial purposes. 
103. During the decade and a half since the first 
General Conference in 1957, considerable progress 
had been made in harnessing the atom for peace 
and for the progress and happiness of mankind, and 
his delegation had derived great benefits from the 
Agency's experience during the period. 
104. Being a country in whose economy 
agriculture and forestry predominated, Burma 
[14 ] Set forth in Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272. 
[15] Reproduced in document GC(XV)/OR. 144, 
para. 4. 
[16] Ibid., paras 37-63. 
[17 ] Reproduced in document GC(XV)/OR. 145. 
had started late in atomic and scientific fields. 
Nevertheless, its young sons had taken an active 
part in world affairs as international civil servants. 

105. Since the programme and objectives of the 
Agency were mainly technical and of a peaceful 
character, his Government would prefer its 
membership, as well as that of other similar 
international organizations engaged in technical 
and humanitarian work, to be universal and not 
restricted by the political status of countries. 
106. Although his country's voluntary 
contribution to the General Fund would remain 
unchanged in the current year, that by no means 
implied a lack of interest in the Agency or 
unwillingness to co-operate with it. 
107. Mr. MUTUALE (Democratic Republic of 
the Congo) said that, in 1972, his country 
expected to commission its new research reactor 
which would have a capacity of 1000 kW in steadystate 
operation and 1500 MW in pulsed operation. 
The reactor would be an integral part of the 
TRICO Nuclear Centre which the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo was making available to the 
countries of Central Africa as a regional training 
centre. 
108. Completion of the reactor would be possible 
thanks to additional assistance from the Agency 
and, through it, from the United States Atomic 
Energy Commission. 
109. As far as the operation of the Agency and its 
assistance to the developing countries was 
concerned, he thought that the staff reduction of 
more than 20% which the Agency had been able to 
make in the technical assistance section should 
also be made in other sections, thus making 
possible very considerable savings of funds 
which could be used to advantage in providing 
more effective assistance to the developing 
countries. It would also be desirable that the 
experts which the Agency sent to his country 
should be better provided with equipment and that 
such equipment should be supplied more rapidly, 
together with the documentation necessary for its 
use. 
110. The Agency's requirements in respect of 
staff recruitment were understandable but even 
though it was natural to maintain the criteria of 
scientific and technical qualification, it was 
discriminatory towards young countries, such as 
those of Africa, to require 10 years' experience 
in the work concerned: that amounted to the 
exclusion of those countries from participating at 
present in the building up of the Agency's staff. 
111. Although the production of nuclear power 
was "cleaner" than generation by fossil fuel 
stations, it was quite evident that the production 
of electric power from hydraulic installations was 
even "cleaner". Hence it was regrettable that 
many African countries, and in particular the 
Congo, should have at their disposal an enormous 
hydroelectric capacity (30 000 MW for the Inga 
site alone) and yet not have enough customers, 
- 11 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 

despite the fact that the price of electricity 
could go as low as 3 mills per kilowatt/hour. 

112. The Congo would be glad to welcome largescale 
consumers of electricity, such as the 
electro-chemical, electro-metallurgical and 
gas-diffusion industries. 
113. In conclusion he wished once again to 
express his surpise that South Africa should have 
a permanent seat on the Board as a representative 
of Africa. That country was not entitled to 
represent Africa in any respect whatsoever: 
that was the definite and explicit view of his 
country and of the Organization of African Unity. 
114. Mr. QUARTEY (Ghana) remarked that the 
current session of the General Conference was a 
quiet one in the sense that there had been few 
controversial or bitterly fought issues. At the 
same time, it would probably come to be seen, 
in retrospect, as a most significant landmark in 
the Agency's history. Among the subjects of 
greatest significance, NPT and the Agency's 
technical assistance programme were 
outstanding. 
115. The Agency itself, as such, was not a 
party to NPT. Irrespective of the short-term 
effect of NPT, its really historic importance in 
the long term was likely to be that it marked the 
point in time at which various States with 
differing ideologies and divergent approaches to 
the materialistic world came together to achieve 
the common purpose of preserving the very 
existence of the human species. That was a 
matter of conjecture, however, and there might 
be little profit in pursuing that particular line of 
thought too far. But it was a matter of fact that 
the Agency was on the point of commencing 
safeguards operations in connection with NPT, 
subject to approval of the budgetary 
appropriations and particularly of the arrangements 
proposed for the financing of that work. 
116. All were familiar with the safeguards 
duties assigned to the Agency under NPT. 
Clearly the effective discharge of those duties 
was vital to the implementation of the Treaty. 
All were agreed that the Agency was competentand 
particularly well-qualified to discharge the 
technical duties involved. In that sense, therefore, 
it was in a position to render a unique service to 
mankind. Paradoxically, and for precisely that 
reason, there was more than a possibility that the 
Agency might now signally fail a large number of 
its Member States in another area of activity. 
117. In his statement in the plenary meeting, the 
Director General had referred to the regional 
training course which had recently taken place in 
Ghana. [18 ] The success of the course was a 
source of great pride to Ghana and his 
Government wished to record its sincerest thanks 
to the Agency for the invaluable assistance given 
in its running. The course had brought about a 
considerable change in thinking in certain 
[18] GC(XV)/OR. 144, para. 20. 
relevant governmental and scientific circles, 
both in Ghana and in a number of the other 
participating countries. His Government was 
anxious that that type of course should become a 
regular feature of its Atomic Energy 
Commission's programme, both at the national 
and regional levels. Assistance of that kind 
contributed immeasurably in providing the 
prerequisites for rapid and meaningful scientific 
and technological development in the developing 
countries. Ghana greatly appreciated the 
assistance given by the Agency in that respect. 

118. In view of the importance it attached to that 
kind of assistance, one of Ghana's main interests 
in the Agency was its technical assistance 
programme. In that connection, it was a matter 
for regret that offers of technical assistance made 
by certain countries through the Agency, much 
as they might otherwise have been welcomed, 
were not being utilized because the domestic 
policies of those countries were morally 
unacceptable to by far the greater part of humanity. 
The Agency's own programme now appeared to 
be receiving a somewhat lower priority than 
other activites. Technical assistance was still 
dependent on voluntary contributions from 
Member States. The new target of $ 3 million 
represented only approximately the level that 
the Agency had expected to reach in about the 
mid-1960s, although the number of developing 
countries among its membership had increased 
considerably, and their needs in technical 
assistance even more rapidly. Yet voluntary 
contributions had hardly ever reached even the 
modest levels set. His Government had again 
decided to give a larger voluntary contribution 
than the minimum expected of it by the Agency, 
as a mark of its determination to support the 
Agency to the maximum extent possible in its 
technical assistance work. 
119. Ghana, as a developing country, was faced 
with problems in education, in medicine and in 
agriculture, problems that the more advanced 
countries might regard as relatively ordinary. 
But that was precisely why there now appeared to 
be a possibility of danger to the Agency. If the 
Agency now apportioned the major part of its 
financial resources to safeguards in connection 
with NPT and proportionally reduced its 
technical assistance activites, it might run the 
risk of diminishing its importance to the 
developing countries. Activities in connection 
with NPT were admittedly important in creating a 
safe world; but that objective was a comparatively 
long-term one, and for the developing countries 
by far the more important problem was the shortterm 
one of present survival. In those 
circumstances, it was surely not unreasonable to 
ask the major Powers, nuclear as well as nonnuclear, 
to fulfil the expectations which they had 
raised, both explicitly and implicitly, during the 
negotiations leading up to NPT, i. e. that they 
would undertake, as part of NPT, to increase 
scientific and particularly nuclear assistance to 
the developing countries, and that NPT would be 
so devised as to operate without the developing 
countries incurring additional financial burdens. 
- 12 



GC(XV)/OR. 148 


120. His Government was confident that the considerable help, particularly advice from such 
Agency would ensure, in discharging its duties in organizations as UNIDO and the Agency. 
connection with NPT, that a balance would be 
maintained between funds for safeguards and 
technical assistance so that the operation of NPT 
would not involve additional financial burdens for 

Ghana, particularly at the present time; and on 
that basis it had already started negotiations with 
the Agency with a view to concluding a safeguards 
agreement. 

121. In conclusion, his delegation wished to 
express its confidence in the continued existence 
and increasing usefulness of the Agency. And, 
bearing in mind that it was not unlikely that the 
next session of the General Conference would take 
place elsewhere, his delegation would like to take 
the present opportunity to thank the host country, 
Austria, for its unfailing hospitality. 
122. Mr. ZEILINGER (Costa Rica) said he 
wished, on behalf of his Government, to commend 
the Director General and his collaborators for 
their highly capable and successful conduct of 
the Agency's affairs. 
123. Costa Rica was a small country with a 
population smaller than that of the city of Vienna, 
and it was taking its first tentative steps in the 
unfamiliar atomic energy age. Its industries 
were in the development stage, and they needed 
124. A factor of great importance was public 
health and the raising of health standards to 
obtain a better expectation of life. His country 
had recently acquired a cobalt bomb for 
therapeutic purposes, and it was intended that 
cured patients should be enabled to return to 
productive life. The way ahead was admittedly 
very long but at least a start had been made. 
There was still much in the way of experience to 
be acquired and it was hoped to have experts 
assigned for that purpose under the Agency's 
technical assistance programme. It was of 
particular importance to have the services of 
experts in dosimetry since more harm than good 
might be done if dose measurements were 
inaccurate. His delegation had learned also of the 
dosimetry service for checking dose measurements, 
organized by the Agency in collaboration with the 
World Health Organization. That was a 
service that would be very welcome in Costa 
Rica. 

125. Lastly, he would wish the Director General 
and all his collaborators great success in their 
future work. 
• The meeting rose at 1. 5 p.m. 
- 13 



GC(XV)/OR.149 
2 August 1972* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 24 September 1971, at 3. 20 p.m. 

President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 

Item of 
the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

9 General debate and 1 - 13 
report of the Board of 
Governors for 1970-71 

Statement by the 
delegate of Switzerland 1-1 3 

3 Credentials of delegates 14 - 24 
to the fifteenth (1971) 
regular session 

(b) Report of the 
Credentials Committee 
11 Arrangements for the 25 - 26 
sixteenth (1972) regular 
session 

19 The Agency's annual 27 - 28 
reports to United Nations 
organs 

21 Elections to the Agency's 29 - 30 
Staff Pension Committee 

17 The Agency's accounts 31 - 32 
for 1970 

18 The Agency's relations 33 - 36 
with intergovernmental 
organizations 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 1 October 1971. 
** GC(XV)/469. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 149 


THE RECORD 


GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT OF THE 
BOARD OF GOVERNORS FOR 1970-71 
(GC(XV)/455, 466) 


1. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency's mission for peace 
throughout the world was confirmed by the central 
role it would henceforth be called upon to play in 
the implementation of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [1 ]. His 
delegation wished to stress once again the 
importance the Swiss authorities attached to the 
Agency and its objectives. 
2. The results of the work of the Board's 
safeguards committee were very valuable to the 
Swiss Government, since it could not have hoped 
to obtain the necessary parliamentary approval of 
NPT without first informing the Federal 
Parliament and the population about the way the 
Agency's safeguards system would work. His 
delegation was pleased to have participated in the 
drawing-up of an effective and simple safeguards 
system which would not hamper economic 
development, 
3. No system of control could, of course, be 
perfect, because of limitations of a technical and 
financial nature. Although the system ensured a 
very high degree of confidence on the technical 
plane, it was no less essential to supplement that 
technical effort by a human effort directed towards 
improving the climate of trust among all States. 
4. The system of safeguards that had been 
adopted was adequate to its purpose, but it would 
be necessary to improve its effectiveness on a 
continuous basis, since the rapid development of 
nuclear energy production would entail a steady 
increase in the amount of nuclear materials 
possessed by States. Thus, with a view to 
economizing on manpower and to reducing the future 
cost of safeguards to a minimum, it seemed 
desirable to strengthen automatic means of 
surveillance and administration as much as possible 
and, accordingly, to support the Agency in that 
sense from now on. 
5. The contribution of nuclear energy was 
assuming particular economic significance in 
Switzerland. In fact, the era of large-scale 
hydroelectric power was practically at an end; 
and since the future would belong to thermal 
power, the Federal authorities and industry had 
opted for nuclear energy because of its two clear 
advantages: environmental protection and 
reliability of supply. Thus, with its first three 
power stations - Beznau I and II and Muhleberg giving 
an aggregate output of 1000 MW(e), the 
Swiss nuclear industry would, from the end of 
1971, meet about a quarter of the national 
electricity requirements. An estimate of future 
needs put requirements in nuclear electric power 
round the year 2000 at approximately 10 000 MW(e). 
[1 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
6. The Swiss authorities were particularly 
grateful to the Agency for organizing the 
Fourth International Conference on the 
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy at Geneva. 
Since the Third Geneva Conference in 1964, a 
considerable number of nuclear power stations 
had gone into service in many countries. 
Moreover, the activities of fuel element 
fabrication and processing plants had grown and 
new plants had been established. The construction 
and operation of those facilities had enabled a 
considerable amount of experience to be 
accumulated, in technology and economics as 
well as in matters of safety. It was proving very 
useful to assess the implications of that 
experience for the future of nuclear energy, all 
the more so as the expediency of developing 
nuclear power based on fission had been strongly 
contested during the last few years in many 
countries, including Switzerland. Such 
assessments were unquestionably necessary at 
regular intervals in areas of rapid technical 
development. Because of the responsibilities 
assumed by the Federal authorities for the 
safety of nuclear facilities and for the protection 
of the environment, they were particularly 
interested in the exchanges of knowledge and 
experience the Agency had organized and would 
organize in regard to those subjects; they would 
like such exchanges to take place at more 
frequent intervals. 
7. In that connection, he would draw attention 
to three important aspects of Swiss activities 
since the last session of the Conference. In the 
first place, the first year of operation of the 
first commercial nuclear power station, Beznau I, 
had demonstrated that releases of radioactivity 
into the air and rivers had entailed an additional 
radiation dose to the population of less than 1% of 
the natural radiation dose, thus fully bearing out 
hopes in respect of the protection of the 
environment. With regard to the fire the previous 
July in one of the two turbines of the second 
commercial nuclear power station, Muhleberg, 
which was equipped with a direct-cycle boilingwater 
reactor, the perfect functioning of the 
automatic safety measures for stopping the chain 
reaction, for closing the reactor isolating valves 
and for bringing the shut-down cooling system 
into play should be mentioned. 
8. It should also be mentioned that the work of 
dismantling the Lucens reactor, which had been 
seriously damaged in January 1969, was now 
complete. It had recently been possible to 
remove the fuel element responsible for the 
incident, or more precisely its fragments, and 
they were being examined. The Investigation 
Commission would soon be in a position to complete 
its report, which would then be communicated to 
the Agency. 
9. As far as the overall protection of the 
environment was concerned, the Swiss 
delegation supported the efforts of the Agency to 
establish a central register of data on amounts 
and concentrations of radioactivity in the 
atmosphere and the hydrosphere. It was obvious 
-2 



GC(XV)/OR. 149 


that international solidarity in that area was 
imperative and required the services of the 
Agency. 

10. Although Switzerland had given up the idea 
of producing complete reactor units, it 
manufactured a great variety of reactor components, 
which it used in its own nuclear power 
plants and also exported in large quantity. 
Switzerland was also engaged in the design and 
equipping of large nuclear electric power plants, 
some of which were intended for the developing 
countries. Consequently, it was important that 
Swiss experts should keep up to date with all 
problems relating to the development of more 
efficient reactor systems, 
11. Switzerland was very interested in the 
scientific research being carried out in physics, 
chemistry, medicine, food science, agriculture 
and biology, in all of which disciplines atomic 
energy had numerous applications. Several of 
its laboratories were actively engaged on work in 
those sectors in which a contribution of science 
to the well-being of mankind had become 
imminent, 
12. The volume of knowledge in all those 
spheres of activity, without mentioning the socalled 
"advanced" sciences, like thermonuclear 
fusion, had become so large that it could not be 
used rationally without an elaborate system of 
documentation. That extremely important 
problem had also been tackled by the Agency, 
which had introduced the International Nuclear 
Information System. 
13. The Swiss delegation approved the budget 
for 1972 [2 ] and also the increase to $3 million 
in the target for voluntary contributions from 
Member States [3 ]. That increase would enable 
activities for the developing countries to be 
strengthened and, in particular, would help such 
countries to prepare for the production of nuclear 
power to satisfy their needs for electricity. 
Switzerland hoped that the greatest possible 
number of developing countries would be able to 
make use of nuclear power plants, to as great an 
extent as possible, in the near future. However, 
it attached importance to having nuclear energy 
requirements defined in such a way as to make 
standardization of the means of production 
possible in the countries concerned, so that use 
could thus be made of the advantages of mass 
production. Furthermore, programmes should be 
closely co-ordinated amongst the different 
United Nations organizations, in particular with 
the United Nations Development Programme and 
the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development which, when the time came, might 
finance projects. 
[2 ] GC(XV)/460. 
[3] Ibid., para. 1.11. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE 
FIFTEENTH (1971) REGULAR SESSION 

(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE (GC(XV)/473) 
14. The PRESIDENT drew the attention of the 
Conference to the draft resolution in paragraph 8 
of the report of the Credentials Committee 
(GC(XV)/473) which the Committee recommended 
for adoption. 
15. Mr. TONA (Albania) strongly protested 
against the recommendation that the credentials 
of representatives of the Chiang Kai-shek clique 
be recognized as valid. That clique had usurped 
the seat which belonged to the People's Republic 
of China, whose representatives were the only 
ones entitled to speak on behalf of the Chinese 
people. The refusal to accord the People's 
Republic of China its rightful place in the Agency 
was a grave injustice to the Chinese people and 
deprived the Agency of the valuable contribution 
which the People's Republic of China could make 
towards solving the major problems of the age. 
16. The People's Republic of China was making 
great progress in all spheres and particularly in 
science and technology. Moreover, it had 
become a nuclear Power capable of making a 
valuable contribution to the Agency in atomic 
energy matters. 
17. Mrs. HOSSAIN (Pakistan) said that her 
delegation did not recognize as valid the 
credentials of persons claiming to represent the 
Chinese people, and considered that the People's 
Republic of China was the only Government 
entitled to do so. 
18. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania) recalled that the 
Romanian delegation had consistently objected to 
the anomalous situation constituted by the 
refusal to allow the People's Republic of China to 
occupy its rightful seat in the Agency. That 
country was in a position to make a valuable 
contribution to the Agency's work by reason of 
its immense potential and its impressive 
technical achievements, particularly in the atomic 
sphere. Taiwan was an inalienable part of 
Chinese territory and it would therefore be 
wrong to contemplate a double representation in 
international bodies. The presence of the Chiang 
Kai- shek clique was a flagrant violation of the 
legitimate rights of the People's Republic of 
China. He formally challenged the validity of 
the credentials of the representatives of Taiwan 
and of South Viet-Nam. In addition, he 
contested the claim of the South Korean 
delegation to represent all the Korean people. [*] 

* The President wishes to record that he was 
subsequently informed by the delegate of the 
Republic of Korea that the delegate had wished to 
refute this statement, had sought the opportunity 
to do so, but had been unable to obtain the floor. 
-3 



GC(XV)/OR. 149 

19. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) recalled that in the general debate the 
Soviet delegate had emphasized that the Agencymust 
respect the principle of universal 
representation. [4 ] That principle had gained in 
importance now that the Agency was required to 
apply safeguards, the efficacy of which would 
depend on the way in which the principle was 
observed. 
20. All States which so desired should be 
allowed to be represented in the Agency but that 
right was being denied to the German Democratic 
Republic which, in a statement, [5 ] had declared 
its legitimate wish to participate in the Agency's 
work on an equal footing with all Member States. 
Since its establishment, the German Democratic 
Republic had unceasingly worked for peace, and 
its achievements in the realm of nuclear science 
were known throughout the world. It attached 
great importance to NPT, and being anxious to 
further the implementation of the latter it had 
declared its willingness to initiate negotiations 
with the Agency with a view to placing its nuclear 
materials and installations under the Agency's 
control. 
21. Mr. LIU (China) protested against the 
ungracious comments made about his country's 
representation at the General Conference. They 
did violence to the spirit of courtesy that ought to 
prevail in all international organizations. 
22. The Credentials Committee had discharged 
its task with impartiality and had recognized his 
delegation's credentials as valid. However, if 
the question raised by the previous speakers was 
not one of credentials but of representation, he 
considered that it should not be examined by a 
member of the United Nations family like the 
Agency, but by the United Nations itself. 
23. Nor could his delegation accept the 
objections raised regarding the validity of the 
credentials of the Republic of Korea and the 
Republic of Viet-Nam. 
• 24. The draft resolution in 
document GC(XV)/473 was adopted. 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE SIXTEENTH (1972) 
REGULAR SESSION 

25. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee had been unanimous 
in recommending acceptance with appreciation of 
the Mexican Government's invitation to hold 
next year's session in Mexico City (GC(XV)/453); 
the Committee had further recommended that the 
session open on 26 September 1972. In the 
Committee's name he accordingly invited the 
Conference: 
[4 ] 
See document GC(XV)/OR. 145. 
[5 ] 
Reproduced in document GC(XV)/INF/134. 
(a) 
To accept the invitation of the Mexican 
Government to hold its sixteenth (1972) 
regular session in Mexico City, and to 
decide that the session shall begin on 
Tuesday, 26 September 1972; and 
(b) 
To request the Director General to inform 
the Mexican authorities accordingly, to 
conclude with them the necessary 
agreement on behalf of the Agency and to 
convey to them the Conference's 
appreciation of the Mexican Government's 
offer to act as host to the Conference next 
year. 
• 
26. It was so decided. 
THE AGENCY'S ANNUAL REPORTS TO UNITED 
NATIONS ORGANS (GC(XV)/467) 

27. The PRESIDENT drew attention to 
document GC(XV)/467 in which the Board of 
Governors recommended the Conference to adopt 
the draft resolution on the Agency's annual 
reports to United Nations organs presented at the 
end of the document. 
• 28. The draft resolution in 
document GC(XV)/467 was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 

29. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members 
and two alternates elected by the General 
Conference. The two members were 
Mr. Bittencourt (Brazil) and Mr. Tachibana 
(Japan) and the alternates were Mr. Lamb 
(Australia) and Mr. Pahr (Austria). However, 
he had learned that Mr. Tachibana had left 
Vienna and could therefore no longer serve on the 
Committee, so that a new member would have to 
be elected. He suggested that the new member 
should be Mr. Fodor (Hungary). 
• 30. Mr. Fodor (Hungary) was elected a 
member of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1970 
(GC(XV)/471) 

31. Mr. FABIAN (India), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the Agency's 
accounts for 1970 (GC(XV)/471). 
• 32. The draft resolution in 
document GC(XV)/471 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 

(GC(XV)/472) 

33. Mr. FABIAN (India), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced 
-4 



GC(XV)/OR, 149 


the Committee's report on the Agency's relations 
with intergovernmental organizations 
(GC(XV)/472). 

34. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
consider the two draft resolutions in 
document GC(XV)/472. The first dealt with a 
co-operation agreement between the Agency and 
the League of Arab States and the second with 
the representation of intergovernmental 
organizations at the Conference's regular 
session in 1972. 
35. Mr. FREIER (Israel), referring to the 
draft resolution concerning the co-operation 
agreement between the Agency and the League 
of Arab States, said that it was to be noted 
that problems would arise if the Agency's 
technical assistance were to be given to the 
League rather than to its individual Member 
States because of the lack of unity, either 
political, economic or scientific, in the 
relations between those States. 

• 36. The draft resolutions in 
document GC(XV)/472 were adopted. 
• The meeting rose at 4. 20 p. m. 
-5 



GC(XV)/OR. 150 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
2 August 1972* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

FIFTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 21-27 SEPTEMBER 1971 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Monday, 27 September 1971, at 10. 40 a.m. 


President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 


Item 
of the 
Subject Par agraphs 
12 Election of Members to 
the Board of Governors 
1 21 


13 
The Agency's budget 22 -24 
for 1971 

14 
The Agency's budget 22, 25 -26 
for 1972 

15 
Assessment of Members' 22, 27 -28 
contributions towards the 
Agency's administrative 

expenses 

16 
Financing of nuclear 22, 29 -30 
power in developing 
countries 

20 
Appointment of the 31 -34 
External Auditor 

22 Voluntary contributions to 35-3 7 
the General Fund 

23 
Closing of the session 38-4 5 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 5 October 1971. 
** GC(XV)/469. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XV)/INF/133/Rev. 2. 


GC(XV)/OR. 150 


THE RECORD 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XV)/470) 


1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
report of the General Committee in 
document GC(XV)/470, in paragraph 1 of which 
the Committee notified the Conference that seven 
Members had to be elected to the Board of 
Governors. In paragraph 2, the Committee 
specified the geographical areas in respect of 
which elections were required, and in the final 
paragraph drew attention to the fact that the 
elections had to be conducted with due regard to 
equitable representation on the Board as a whole 
of the Members in the geographical areas 
specified in Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. 
At the end of that paragraph the Committee had 
appended, for the Conference's guidance, a list 
of Members that had already been elected by the 
Conference or designated by the Board to serve 
on the Board after the end of the current session. 
He reminded the Conference that Rule 79 of the 
Rules of Procedure provided that the elections to 
the Board should be by secret ballot and that 
there should be no nominations. 
• 2. At the invitation of the President, a 
•r of the Iraqi delegation and a member of 
membe 
the Italian delegation acted as tellers. 

3. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Latin America. 
• 4. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 75 
Invalid votes: 5 
Abstentions: 5 
Valid votes: 65 
Required majority: 33 

Votes obtained: 
Colombia 63 
Mexico 1 
Panama 1 

• 5. Having obtained the required majority, 
Colombia was elected a Member of the Board. 
6. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Eastern Europe. 
• 7. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 77 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 73 
Required majority: 37 
Votes obtained: 

Romania 73 

• 8. Having obtained the required majority, 
Romania was elected a Member of the Board. 
9. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect two Members from the area of Africa and 
the Middle East. 
10. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Members to be elected: 2 
Ballot papers returned: 78 
Abstentions: 9 
"Valid votes: 147 
Required majority: '37 
Votes obtained: 

Arab Republic of Egypt 72 
Democratic Republic 69 
of the Congo 
Gabon 5 
Israel 1 

• 11. Having obtained the required majority, 
the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo were elected Members of 
the Board. 
12. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of South Asia. 
• 13. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 78 
Invalid votes: 5 
Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes: 64 
Required majority: 33 

Votes obtained: 
Ceylon 63 
Burma 1 

• 14. Having obtained the required majority, 
Ceylon was elected a Member of the Board. 
15. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of the Far East. 
16. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 78 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 30 
Valid votes: 47 
Required majority: 24 
Votes obtained: 

China 37 
The Philippines 10 

• 17. Having obtained the required majority, 
China was elected a Member of the Board. 
18. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
fill the remaining vacant seat on the Board. 
• 19. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 79 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 1 
Valid votes: 77 
Required majority: 39 
Votes obtained: 

Greece 74 
Mexico 2 
Bulgaria 1 

• 20. Having obtained the required majority, 
Greece was elected a Member of the Board. 
-2 



GC(XV)/OR. 150 


21. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Article VI. D of the Statute, the Members just 
elected to the Board would hold office from the 
end of the fifteenth regular session of the General 
Conference until the end of the seventeenth 
regular session. He congratulated the Arab 
Republic of Egypt, Ceylon, China, Colombia, the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Greece and 
Romania on their election and thanked the tellers 
for their work. 
THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1971 

THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1972 

ASSESSMENT OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS 
TOWARDS THE AGENCY'S ADMINISTRATIVE 
EXPENSES 

FINANCING OF NUCLEAR POWER IN 
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 

22. Mr. SIAZON (Philippines), Rapporteur of 
the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
said that, after comprehensive discussion of the 
matters at issue in the four items of the agenda 
that were referred to it [1 ], the Committee had 
decided without voting to recommend the 
Conference to adopt the draft resolutions 
contained in its reports on the Agency's budget 
for 1971 (GC(XV)/474), on the Agency's budget 
for 1972 (GC(XV)/475), on the assessment of 
Members' contributions towards the Agency's 
administrative expenses (GC(XV)/476) and on the 
financing of nuclear power in developing countries 
(GC(XV)/477). In thus introducing the Committee's 
reports, however, he wished to draw attention to 
the fact that, to meet the wishes of some 
delegations, their objections or reservations 
concerning draft resolution B in 
document GC(XV)/474, draft resolution A in 
document GC(XV)/475 and the two draft 
resolutions in document GC(XV)/47 6 were 
mentioned in the reports covering those draft 
resolutions. 

The Agency's budget for 1971 (GC(XV)/474) 

23. The PRESIDENT directed the Conference's 
attention to the two draft resolutions in the 
report of the Programme, Technical and Budget 
Committee on the Agency's budget for 1971 
(GC(XV)/474) - draft resolution A on a reduction 
in the level of the Working Capital Fund and 
draft resolution B providing for a supplementary 
budgetary appropriation for 1971. 
• 24. The draft resolutions were adopted in 
turn. 
The Agency's budget for 1972 (GC(XV)/475) 

25. The PRESIDENT asked the Conference to 
take up the three draft resolutions attached by 
the Committee to its report on the Agency's 
budget for 1972 (GC(XV)/475). 
[1 ] See document GC(XV)/COM. 1/114. 
• 26. Draft resolution A (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1972), draft resolution B 
(Operational Budget allocations for 1972) and 
draft resolution C (Use of the Working Capital 
Fund in 1972) were adopted in turn. 
Assessment of Members' contributions towards 
the Agency's administrative expenses 
(GC(XV)/476) 

27. The PRESIDENT requested the Conference 
to consider the two draft resolutions in the 
Committee's report on the assessment of 
Members' contributions towards the Agency's 
administrative expenses (GC(XV)/476). 
• 28. The two draft resolutions, dealing 
respectively with further principles for the 
assessment of Members' contributions towards 
the Agency's administrative expenses and the 
scale of assessment of Members' contributions 
for 1972 were adopted in turn. 
Financing of nuclear power in developing 
countries (GC(XV)/477) 

29. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
adopt the draft resolution on the introduction, use 
and financing of nuclear power in developing 
countries which the Committee had recommended 
in its report on the financing of nuclear power in 
developing countries (GC(XV)/477). 
• 30. The draft resolution was adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

31. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference 
that the Agency's External Auditor, who was 
Auditor General of the Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic, had been appointed by the Conference 
to audit the accounts for the years 1970 and 
1971 [2] . It was accordingly necessary for the 
Conference to appoint an External Auditor to 
audit the Agency's accounts for subsequent years. 
32. He had been informed that the Auditor 
General of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic 
was willing to continue to serve as the Agency's 
External Auditor, and also that the Czechoslovak 
Government was willing to make him available 
for that task. He proposed, therefore, that the 
Auditor General of the Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic should be appointed to audit the Agency's 
accounts for the years 1972 and 1973. 
• 33. The President's proposal was accepted. 
34. The PRESIDENT said he was sure the 
Conference would wish him to convey its gratitude 
to the External Auditor for the capable and 
thorough work which he and his staff had done in 
the past, and its appreciation of his willingness 
to continue to serve the Agency. Thanks were 
[2] See document GC(XIII)/Resolutions (1969), 
Other Decisions, decision number GC(XIII)/DEC/8. 
-3 



GC(XV)/OR. 150 

likewise due to the Czechoslovak Government for 
continuing to place its Auditor General at the 
Agency's disposal. 

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL 
FUND (GC(XV)/464 and GC(XV)/465/Rev. 4) 

35. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
suggestion in relation to voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund made by the Director General 
in document GC(XV)/464, in which he pointed out 
that application of the further principles just 
established for the assessment of Members' 
contributions towards the Agency's administrative 
expenses [3 ] would require that certain steps be 
taken if the existing basis on which Members 
contributed to the Fund each year were to be 
preserved. That basis had been provided by 
Resolution GC(V)/RES/100, paragraph 2, 
adopted in 1961. The Director General was 
accordingly recommending a small amendment to 
that paragraph, which was set out in the draft 
resolution in document GC(XV)/464. 
• 36. The draft resolution was adopted. 
37. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the 
voluntary contributions pledged to the General 
Fund for 1972 by 5 p. m. on 24 September had 
been tabulated by the Director General in 
document GC(XV)/465/Rev. 4. Since then, three 
more Members - Iran, Madagascar and Turkey had 
pledged contributions of $5000, $1000 and 
$8000 respectively. Thus, 55 Member States 
had so far pledged a total of $ 1 256 045. That 
sum was only about 41% of the $3 million target. 
However, there was some comfort to be drawn 
from the fact that several Members that had 
usually made large contributions were not yet 
in a position to announce their pledges. There 
accordingly appeared to be reasonable grounds 
for confidence that by the end of 1971 the 
situation would have improved. Nevertheless, the 
prospects of reaching the target were not bright, 
and he accordingly thought it proper to address a 
plea to each Member State to reconsider the 
situation and see whether it could not make some 
additional contribution, however small, towards 
the funds that were so badly needed if the Agency 
was to respond adequately to the appeals of the 
developing world. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

38. Mr. UNGERER (Federal Republic of 
Germany) thanked the President on behalf of the 
delegations of the Western European Members for 
the fine way in which he had conducted the 
business of the session. He (Mr. Ungerer) was 
[3] See para. 28 above. 
particularly glad to have been asked to convey 
those thanks in view of the traditional friendly 
relations existing between the peoples of Spain 
and Germany and their close co-operation in 
science and technology. The harmonious spirit 
that had prevailed throughout the session, leading 
to important decisions without disputes or 
confrontations, had been largely due to the 
President's wisdom, friendly attitude and able 
guidance of the deliberations. 

39. Mr. GAONA (Chile), speaking on behalf of 
the Latin American and North American 
delegations, congratulated the President and 
thanked him for his able and effective leadership 
of the Conference. The high expectations placed 
in the President's qualifications and experience in 
science and the work of the Agency had been 
more than exceeded. 
40. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) said it was a 
great honour for him to express, on behalf of the 
Eastern European Members, their gratitude to 
the President for his wise and able guidance. He 
also thanked the Director General and the 
Secretariat for their excellent support and 
organization. 
41. Mr. MENDOUGA (Cameroon), on behalf of 
the African States, expressed wholehearted 
appreciation to the President for his contribution 
in guiding the Conference to important decisions 
in an atmosphere of harmony and serious-minded 
application. He also thanked the Director General 
and his staff for their admirable work and 
support. Delegates were leaving the session in 
the growing hope that nuclear energy would soon 
be making an even greater contribution to 
progress throughout the world. 
42. Ide ANAK AGUNG Gde AGUNG (Indonesia) 
said that delegates could leave the session with 
the satisfying knowledge that fruitful decisions 
had been made in record time. That 
accomplishment was due not only to the cooperative 
spirit displayed among the participants 
but also, perhaps primarily, to the President's 
wisdom and ability in leading the deliberations. 
On behalf of the Asian countries, he thanked him 
sincerely. 
43. The PRESIDENT said that the session now 
ending had given rise to fewer problems than 
any other in his experience to the person 
responsible for guiding its deliberations. The 
community spirit displayed by the participants, 
which had been instrumental in the speedy taking 
of decisions on many complicated matters, was 
exemplary of the close co-operation that existed 
throughout the world in science, a co-operation 
that was deepening from day to day. His task 
had been further eased by the support received 
from the Chairmen of the Main Committees and 
from the Director General and his staff. He 
sincerely thanked all the participants for their 
co-operation. 
44. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited delegates to observe one 
-4 



GC(XV)/OR. 150 


minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 45. The PRESIDENT then declared the 
meditation. fifteenth regular session of the General 
Conference closed. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. • The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m. 

-5 



