GC(XVI)/OR.151 
20 March 1973* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Tuesday, 26 September 1972, at 4.35 p.m. 

Temporary President: Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) 
President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 

Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

1 
Opening of the session 1-5 

2 
Election of the 6-1 5 
President 

Address by the 16-30 
President of the United 

" 

Mexican States 

3(a) 
Appointment of the 31 - 32 
Credentials Committee 

4 
Election of the Vice-33 - 38 
Presidents 

5 
Appointment of the 39 - 42 
General Committee 

6 
Applications for 43 - 52 
membership of the 
Agency 

Statement by the 53 
Representative of the 
Secretary-General of 
the United Nations 

Communication by the 54 - 62 
delegate of France 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 29 September 1972. 
** GC(XVI)/478. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC(XVI)/OR.151 

THE RECORD 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared 
the sixteenth regular session of the General 
Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited the delegates to observe a 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
• 3. All present rose and stood in silence 
for one minute. 
4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT drew 
attention to the fact that the sixteenth regular 
session was special in the sense that the 
Conference, contrary to its usual custom, was 
meeting in Mexico City rather than in Vienna. 
That would enable delegations to acquaint 
themselves with a very ancient and outstanding 
civilization symbolized by the Plaza de las Tres 
Culturas, which was full of history. 
5. At the outset of the session he wished to 
express the Conference's gratitude for the great 
efforts that had been made to provide such an 
admirable setting and for arrangements which 
would certainly contribute in no small measure 
to the session's success. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

6. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President of the 
Conference. 
7. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) nominated 
Mr. Horacio Flores de la Peña, the delegate of 
Mexico. He recalled the high offices held by 
Mr. Flores de la Peña in the Mexican administration, 
chiefly at the Ministry of Finance, and 
his university appointments as Director of the 
National School of Economics and professor of 
economics. He also mentioned Mr, Flores de la 
Peña's numerous activities abroad, more 
particularly as economic adviser to the United 
Nations and representative of his country at a 
large number of international conferences. 
Mr. Flores de la Peña was at the present time 
President of the Board of Mexico's National 
Institute of Nuclear Energy, 

8. Mr. MANZ (Austria), Mr. DARUSMAN 
(Indonesia) and Mr. ORLANDO RODRIGUEZ (Cuba) 
supported the nomination. 
• 9. Mr. Flores de la Peña (Mexico) was 
elected President of the General Conference for 
its sixteenth regular session by acclamation. 
• 10. Mr. Flores de la Peña (Mexico) took 
the chair. 
11. The PRESIDENT thanked the General 
Conference for the great honour it had accorded 
both his country and himself; he regarded his 
election as a tribute to Mexico and to its 
unabating efforts to ensure that nuclear energy 
would be used for purely peaceful purposes, so 
that the risk of war would be banished and world 
peace secured. 

12. It was no easy task to preside over the 
deliberations of a body which, by virtue of its aim 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
had to concern itself with many branches of 
scientific knowledge that were in process of 
continuous development. The task would be 
facilitated, however, by the spirit of co-operation 
which was sure to permeate the work of the session. 
Mexico had always championed the cause of the 
broadest freedom of opinion and the only limitation 
on freedom of expression was respect for the 
convictions of others, 
13. All countries would have to work more and 
more closely together in order to solve the 
problems created by the effects of radiation and 
pollution of the environment, which were a 
threat to the very existence of civilized man. 
Extending far beyond the realm of science, those 
problems encompassed relationships between 
human beings; inasmuch as man, by applying his 
intelligence, had discovered ways of utilizing all 
the sources of energy in the universe, it was also 
up to him, through the exercise of moral 
principles, to bring all peoples together and 
thereby strengthen world peace and security. 
14. Meetings such as the General Conference 
should help to narrow the gap between the 
experimental and social sciences so that human 
beings could learn to live in peace with what they 
had themselves created. 
15. In conclusion, he paid tribute to his 
predecessor, Mr. Otero Navascues, the delegate 
of Spain, who had guided the deliberations of the 
fifteenth session with the authority natural to a 
man of such great erudition. 
ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED 
MEXICAN STATES 

16. The PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED 
MEXICAN STATES welcomed the delegates of all 
Members represented at the session and recalled 
that it was of universal interest that the Agency 
should attain the lofty aims with which it had been 
invested at the time of its creation. 
17. Mexico had always supported the cause of 
countries seeking to banish the threat of an atomic 
conflict. The fruits of contemporary technology 
should serve to further the progress of humanity 
and not to destroy it. Mexico desired a peace 
based on justice rather than on mutual fear and 
suspicion. 
18. The risk of nuclear war would not be 
eliminated by vague suggestions, but by definite 
and clear-cut action; he therefore urged those 
States that had not yet done so to become parties 
-2 



GC(XVI)/OR. 151 


to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons [1 ] and the Treaty for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the 
Tlatelolco Treaty) [2 ]. It was gratifying to see, 
in that connection, that the United States and the 
United Kingdom had ratified Additional Protocol II 
to the Tlatelolco Treaty and that the Netherlands, 
like the United Kingdom, had ratified Additional 
Protocol I. Equally heartening was the statement 
made by the People's Republic of China in support 
of the creation, by Mexico and other States, of a 

denuclearized zone in Latin America. 

19. But stopping the spread of nuclear weapons 
was not enough - there was also a need to destroy 
those already in existence; so that, while 
disarmament was mainly the responsibility of the 
Great Powers, all countries without exception 
should assist in the realization of that aim. 
20. The population explosion and industrial 
growth were depleting natural resources and 
disrupting the ecological balance. Rational use 
of nuclear energy was essential to preserve life 
and the basic structures of human civilization. 
21. Environmental pollution arising from the 
use of conventional energy sources created the 
need for substitute technologies; hence the 
contribution that nuclear energy could make in 
that respect was inestimable. 
22. There was an urgent need to channel the 
enormous resources currently being wasted 
towards the solution of social problems. If the 
existing mechanisms of solidarity and fair 
distribution were to break down, human 
coexistence would be seriously threatened. 
23. Nuclear energy might well become the most 
productive source of power which had ever been 
available to man, but the exclusive enjoyment of 
the fruits of scientific progress by those countries 
which had attained the highest level of industrial 
development would be at variance with the 
universality of human culture. Current hegemonic 
tendencies amounted in fact to technological 
colonization and it was therefore essential to 
fight against all selfish appropriation of knowledge 
and to encourage resolutely a democratization of 
the yield of human effort. 
24. The international community should recognize 
the right of all peoples to develop and should bear 
in mind that tensions could be reduced only when 
the great nations renounced their excessive 
concentration of political and economic power and 
when they realized that the best guarantee of their 
own security and progress lay in recognizing the 
rights of the weaker nations. Mexico had spoken, 
before other forums, in favour of a charter relating 
to the economic duties and rights of States which 
would justly regulate international economic life 
[1 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[2 ] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
and respect the desire of all peoples to enjoy on 
an equitable basis the benefits of scientific and 
technological progress. 

25. Mexico acknowledged the considerable part 
played by the Agency in striving for a better 
distribution of the benefits of the nuclear age and 
hoped that it would be able to count on its 
technical assistance in the implementation of the 
country's projects in the nuclear field. Among 
such projects was the construction, starting in 
197 6, of Mexico's first high-power reactor. 
26. Despite inevitable ideological differences, 
all nations were united by the common wish to end 
for all time the age of armed conflict. That goal 
would be reached only after long and arduous 
efforts, and it would be necessary to act 
decisively in order to overcome the many 
opponents of change. However, both within and 
beyond Mexico's borders there were numerous 
forces at work in an effort to restore the dignity 
of man. 
27. The lessons of their past had made Mexicans 
firm believers in the use of peaceful means as the 
only way of resolving disputes, for war could be 
avoided if the differences dividing the international 
community were made the subject of dialogue and 
negotiation. Mexico, which was by tradition a 
peace-loving nation, had always respected the 
rights of others. It desired a form of peace which 
was rooted in liberty, which would not limit the 
possibilities of progress, which would not entail 
the victory of force over the spirit, and which 
would enable man to attain cultural enrichment and 
to regain mastery over his destiny. 
28. The present gulf between scientific progress 
and ineffective social systems was making it 
impossible to derive the fullest benefit from 
man's cultural heritage. Each nation should, in 
its own way, overhaul its ancient structures and 
try to achieve true development based on a better 
organization of labour and an optimum distribution 
of income. 
29. Faced with the rapid advance of science and 
technology, man should pause and reflect for a 
moment. The technological capacity of man to 
transform nature would turn to his detriment 
unless he revised his fundamental values and 
clearly defined his historic aims. 
30. For the peoples of the "third world", the 
end of the arms race would not on its own ensure 
security and stability. It would have to be 
accompanied by a renunciation of the politics of 
hegemony by the Great Powers and by a fair 
international distribution of the world's wealth. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS 

COMMITTEE 

31. The PRESIDENT proposed, in accordance 
with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, that a 
Credentials Committee should be appointed 
consisting of the following nine Members: 
-3 



GC(XVI)/OR. 151 

Colombia, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, 
Romania, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 
the United States of America and the Republic of 
Zaire. 

• 32. The proposal was accepted. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

33. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under 
Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference 
was required to elect its Vice-Presidents after 
the election of the Chairmen of the two Main 
Committees. He therefore proposed to suspend 
the plenary meeting for a short time to enable the 
two Committees to elect their Chairmen. 
• 34. The meeting was suspended at 5. 25 p.m. 
and resumed at 5. 35 p. m. 
35. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President of the Conference. 
36. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) nominated the delegates of Australia, 
Canada, France, Ghana, India, Japan, Poland 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
37. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) seconded 
those nominations. 
• 38. The delegates of the Members 
nominated were elected to the eight Vice-
Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

39. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference 
was required to elect four additional members to 
the General Committee. He invited nominations. 
40. Mr. FODOR (Hungary) nominated the 
delegates of Czechoslovakia, Lebanon, the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland and the United States of America. 
41. Mr, RAZAFINDRATANDRA (Madagascar) 
seconded those nominations. 
• 42. The delegates of the Members 
nominated were elected to the General Committee, 
which was thus duly appointed in compliance with 
the provisions of Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY (GC(XVI)/479) 

43. Mr. SETHNA (India) said that he wished to 
sponsor the application of the People's Republic 
of Bangladesh for membership of the Agency 
which was the subject of document GC(XVI)/479. 
He recalled that the Board of Governors had 
considered the application on 21 June and had 
recommended that the Conference approve 
Bangladesh for membership; such approval 
would be in conformity with the provisions of 
Article IV. B of the Statute, and Bangladesh, 
which was already a Member of specialized 
agencies such as the International Labour 
Organisation and the World Health Organization, 
had diplomatic relations with 91 States. 
Bangladesh was performing very valuable work in 
fundamental research on nuclear physics at the 
Dacca Centre and there were countless instances 
of peaceful applications of nuclear energy within 
its borders, 

44. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) recalled the 
bonds which had long existed between the peoples 
of Bangladesh and the United Kingdom, both of 
which countries were members of the 
Commonwealth. The United Kingdom had officially 
recognized Bangladesh as soon as it had gained 
independence and had established close and cordial 
relations with it; the United Kingdom had also 
helped Bangladesh in the difficult task of 
reconstruction after the ravages of war. 
Bangladesh was a young nation and had a right 
to belong to the international community and to be 
admitted to membership of the United Nations and 
the specialized agencies. His delegation therefore 
supported the application of Bangladesh for 
membership of the Agency and felt sure that the 
representatives of that country would play an 
active part in the life of the Agency. 

45. Mr, KHAN (Pakistan) said he had no 
intention of reverting to the tragic events of 1971 
and that he did not want to oppose the application 
for membership contained in the draft resolution 
in document GC(XVI)/479. 
46. Nevertheless, he thought it would be 
premature for the General Conference to take a 
decision before the United Nations itself had 
taken a stand in the matter; he considered that 
the conditions laid down in Article IV. B of the 
Statute were not as yet fulfilled and that General 
Assembly Resolution 2793 (XXVI) of 
7 December 1971 and Security Council 
Resolution 307 had not yet been implemented. 
The problem should be solved only with the 
utmost good will and at the appropriate moment; 
if the Conference decided to vote, the delegation 
of Pakistan would abstain. 
47. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said he was in favour of the admission 
of Bangladesh, which had taken its place in the 
community of nations as a result of a national 
liberation movement; by admitting it to membership 
of the Agency, the Conference would in 
fact be strengthening the principle of universality, 
and the participation of Bangladesh in the Agency's 
activities would help to improve international 
co-operation in the utilization of atomic energy 
for peaceful purposes, 
48. Mr. SUDARSONO (Indonesia) recalled the 
religious and historic ties which united Indonesia 
and Bangladesh and said he supported the 
admission of that country to membership. 
-4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 151 


49. Mr. KABBANI (Saudi Arabia), like the 
delegate of Pakistan, believed that the Conference 
should not discuss the question until the General 
Assembly of the United Nations had taken a 
decision; if the matter were put to the vote, his 
delegation would abstain. 
50. Mr. ELMEHRIK (Libyan Arab Republic) 
also considered it preferable to postpone discussion 
of the question, and said that if a vote were taken 
he would abstain. 
51. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference 
wished to adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XVI)/479. 
• 52. It was so decided. 
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS 

53. Mr. KUTAKOV (Representative of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations) said 
that he had been instructed to read the following 
message from the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, to the 
Conference on the occasion of its first session in 
Latin America, cradle of one of the great 
civilizations: 
(1) "As the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
convenes in Mexico City for its sixteenth 
session, to review the Agency's activities 
and to lay the ground for further advances 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, it 
gives me great pleasure to convey sincere 
wishes of success to all its participants. 
(2) "I find it both significant and auspicious 
that the General Conference has chosen to 
meet in Mexico City, where, on 
14 February 196V, the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America was signed - a treaty establishing 
the first nuclear-weapon-free zone for an 
inhabited portion of the world, as well as an 
effective system of control in which the 
International Atomic Energy Agency is to 
play a central role. 
(3) "For many years, I have been 
personally associated with the Agency's 
efforts to develop the positive and peaceful 
potentialities of the atom and, to this end, 
to provide an effective system of safeguards 
against diversion of fissile material from 
peaceful to military uses. I view with great 
satisfaction the continuing progress that the 
Agency is making in these fields, thereby 
implementing its statutory goals and 
responding to the vital needs of a rapidly 
changing world. In this connexion, I wish 
to pay a special tribute to the Director 
General, Dr. Eklund, for his able guidance 
of the Agency's activities. 
(4) "The International Atomic Energy 
Agency has now negotiated safeguards 
agreements with many States in accordance 
with the provisions of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The 
most recent achievement in this respect is 
the Agreement between the five non-nuclearweapon 
States concerned, the European 
Atomic Energy Community and the Agency, 
which your Board of Governors has just 
approved. In my view, this represents a 
very significant advance and it is my hope 
that such progress will be further accelerated 
in the months ahead, in a way that will 
contribute to the consolidation of the nonproliferation 
regime. 
(5) "The International Atomic Energy 
Agency continues to be engaged in activities 
designed to fulfil a number of recommendations 
concerning the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy made by the Conference of 
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, which was 
held in 1968 under United Nations auspices. 
The annual reports of the Agency clearly 
show the close co-operation between the 
United Nations and the Agency in this field, 
as indeed in any other field of common 
interest, including the human environment. 
(6) "It is gratifying to note that the total 
resources of the Agency for technical 
co-operation activities have grown in recent 
years. This should help to promote the 
further development of the applications of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, 
especially in the developing countries, and 
thus contribute to fulfilling the basic goal 
of the Agency which, in the words of its 
Statute, is to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world. 
No doubt, still further efforts will be needed 
in the years to come in order to realize this 
goal in the most effective manner. 

(7) "I believe that the International Atomic 
Energy Agency can look back with 
satisfaction to the work it has accomplished 
since the first session of the General 
Conference, held fifteen years ago. During 
this brief period, the Agency has grown 
from an inspiration to an effectively working 
international organization. It is my 
conviction that the Agency's activities and 
programmes will continue to grow and that 
its share in the progress of mankind will 
become ever more significant. " 
COMMUNICATION BY THE DELEGATE OF 
FRANCE 


54. Mr. GIRAUD (France) congratulated the 
President on his election and thanked him for 
having allowed him, at the suggestion of the 
Director General, to make a statement which was 
not envisaged in the provisional agenda for the 
session. 
-5 



GC(XVI)/OR. 151 

55. He had asked to speak in order to inform 
the Conference of a scientific discovery that had 
been announced several hours previously at the 
Academie des Sciences in Paris under the 
patronage of Mr. Albert Bernard Bongo, 
President of the Gabon Republic. As the 
discovery concerned the territory of that country, 
he wished to associate the Gabon delegation with 
his statement. 
56. In June 1972 the control laboratories of the 
Commissariat a l'energie atomique (French 
Atomic Energy Commission) had found, in a 
sample of uranium hexafluoride produced from ore 
concentrates, uranium-235 contents that were 
abnormal in relation to the accepted concentration 
for natural uranium, which was always of the order 
of 0.720%, with variations involving only the 
fourth decimal place. 
57. Subsequent analyses had discounted the 
possibility of accidental contamination by uranium 
originating from a reprocessing plant where the 
isotopic content would have been changed, and had 
proved that the anomalies could be attributed to a 
particular area of the Oklo deposit, in the 
Haut-Ogoue region of Gabon, which had been 
worked for the past two years. 
58. There was thus no doubt that "non-natural" 
uranium had been found in nature. Analyses 
carried out on a large number of batches, each 
comprising several tons of uranium hexafluoride 
and all produced from ore originating in Gabon, 
had shown uranium-235 concentrations ranging 
from 0.621 to 0.640%. Other ore samples had 
exhibited a slight enrichment - of up to 0. 730% in 
uranium-235. Analyses carried out on random 
samples of ore, each representing several hundred 
grammes of uranium, had yielded surprising 
results: the uranium-235 concentration dropped 
as low as 0.440%. The uranium-235 concentrations 
appeared to be low in proportion as the overall 
uranium contents of the ore were high; the latter 
exceeded 10% locally. 

59. Only two hypotheses seemed adequate to 
explain the cause of the anomalies: either an 
isotopic separation process occurring in the 
course of the ages, or a chain reaction taking 
place very long ago. The chemists and physicists 
of the Commissariat a. l'energie atomique had 
adopted the latter hypothesis: in the case of ore 
samples having the lowest uranium-235 contents, 
analysis of the isotopic composition of some of 
their elements in the middle of the periodic table 
gave quite abnormal percentages that could only 
be explained by the presence of stable isotopes 
produced at the end of fission chains. That had 
been true of cerium, samarium, europium, 
neodymium and dysprosium, for which considerable 
discrepancies had been found in relation to the 
isotopic composition of the natural elements. 

60. The age of the deposit, which was contained 
in Pre-Cambrian sediments, had been calculated 
to be approximately 1700 million years, and it 
should be noted that at that remote epoch the fissile 
isotope content - thanks to the more rapid natural 
radioactive decay of uranium-235 by comparison 
with uranium-238 - had been about 3%, i. e. the 
same as that of present-day light-water reactors. 
It therefore appeared that critical conditions 
could have been produced naturally as a result of a 
suitable combination of parameters, which did 
not seem to be incompatible with the characteristics 
of the part of the Oklo mine concerned. The 
following favourable factors had been encountered 
there simultaneously: an old deposit, high uranium 
content and large dimensions, low concentrations 
of neutron-absorbing elements and the very likely 
presence of water at the time in question. 

61. In addition, the presence in the ore of 
uranium slightly enriched in uranium-235 might 
be explained by the migration of plutonium-239 
formed during the chain reaction; the plutonium 
had disappeared in the course of time, leaving 
its decay product uranium-235. 
62. In view of the scientific importance of the 
discovery, the company responsible for operating 
the mine, after consulting the President of the 
Gabon Republic, had been good enough to 
interrupt the working of the section in question, 
which contained several hundred tons of uranium, 
until scientists could collect samples and make 
all the measurements necessary to understand the 
essential features of the phenomenon. If the 
phenomenon were observed in places other than 
Gabon, it would cast doubt on the concept of 
"natural uranium". The practical consequences 
would be that isotopic control of ore concentrates 
would be required in the uranium industry. 
• The meeting rose at 6. 30 p.m. 
-6 



GC(XVI)/OR.152 

International Atomic Energy Agency 21 March 1973* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Wednesday, 27 September 1972, at 10.50 a.m. 


President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 
later: Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) 


Item 
of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
8 Adoption of the agenda 
and allocation of items 
for initial discussion 
1 2 
7 Statement by the 
Director General 
3 40 
9 General debate and 
report for 1971-72 
41 124 
Statements by the 
delegates of: 
United States of America 
South Africa 
Indonesia 
Netherlands 
Brazil 
42647993108 
63 
78 
92 
107 
124 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 29 September 1972. 
** GC(XVI)/490. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC(XVI)/OR. 152 

THE RECORD 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION 
OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XVI)/489) 

1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
report by the General Committee contained in 
document GC(XVI)/489 on its consideration of the 
provisional agenda for the session [1 ]. He 
proposed that the Conference approve the agenda 
for the session as set forth in that document and 
also accept the General Committee's recommendations 
regarding the allocation of items for initial 
discussion. 
• 
2. It was so decided. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

3. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that, in 
view of the role that Mexico had played in arms 
control and disarmament in Geneva, New York 
and at Tlatelolco, it was most appropriate for 
the Agency to hold its second General Conference 
away from Headquarters in Mexico City. The 
Conference would be asked to approve the 
co-operation agreement between the Agency and 
the Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL) [2 ], set up 
under the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (the Tlatelolco 
Treaty) [3 ] which itself was largely due to 
Mexican initiatives. He wished to thank the 
President of the Republic and the Government and 
people of Mexico for their warm welcome and 
hospitality, and for the excellent help and 
facilities they had accorded the Agency in 
overcoming the logistical problems of holding the 
Conference far away from its usual venue. 
4. During the past year, the rapid development 
of nuclear power as a means of meeting growing 
energy needs, coupled with the concern for the 
preservation of public health and environmental 
quality, had led the Agency to focus attention on 
its task of promoting nuclear safety and 
environmental protection. 
5. In March 1972, the Board of Governors had 
decided that one of the Agency's most important 
and urgent tasks, in which it should take the 
leading role in close collaboration with competent 
organs of the United Nations, specialized agencies 
and other international organizations concerned, 
was the elaboration of recommended standards 
of safety concerning the dispersion into the 
environment of radioactive waste resulting from 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 

[1 ] GC(XVI)/478. 
[2] GC(XVI)/481, Annex. 
[3 ] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 

Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 

6. The United Nations Conference on the 
Human Environment held in Stockholm in 
June 1972 had been the first large-scale 
international meeting at which attempts had been 
made to identify the environmental problems of 
the planet. The Board's decision had been 
reported to the Stockholm Conference and echoed 
in two of the Conference's recommendations 
relating to nuclear waste management. [4 ] 
7. The recommendations of the Stockholm 
Conference would be discussed at the current 
session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, It was therefore too early to foresee all 
the implications for the Agency of the decisions 
which the Assembly might take. 
8. The Agency had a statutory obligation to 
contribute to a proper understanding of the 
environmental consequences of large-scale use of 
nuclear power. The Agency had access to the 
advice of the world's leading experts in that field, 
as had so clearly been demonstrated at the 
symposium organized jointly with the United 
States Atomic Energy Commission in 1970 on the 
environmental aspects of nuclear power stations. 
The Agency had considerable experience in dealing 
with regulatory questions, as demonstrated by 
numerous publications in the Safety Series. The 
Agency was actively supporting the International 
Commission on Radiological Protection and 
collaborating with the United Nations Scientific 
Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. 
9. All this being said, it should be understood 
that the Agency itself could only recommend 
standards and codes of practice; the responsibility 
for their implementation lay with Member States, 
although Agency projects required adherence to the 
Agency's basic health and safety standards. The 
Agency intended to take a more active role in 
advising Member States on health and safety 
conditions in existing facilities, and one advisory 
mission was already in the field. 
10. The nuclear industry had, throughout its 
existence, been extremely successful in achieving 
a safety record which was probably unique in the 
history of industrial development. However, with 
the anticipated enormous expansion of installed 
nuclear capacity from 27 000 MW in 1972 to some 
190 000 MW in 1978, it would certainly be wise to 
start facing the problems which that increase 
would involve. That would be the only way to 
ensure solution of the much greater problems 
associated with the further gigantic increase in 
nuclear capacity to some 3 000 000 MW at the end 
of the century. 
11. Bearing in mind those problems and provided 
that the necessary funds would be made available, 
some additional and expanded activities could be 
considered for 1973 and 1974, which might 
include: 
(a) 
Methods of establishing the capability of 
various sectors of the environment to accept 
radioactivity; 
[4 ] See United Nations document A/CONF. 48/14, 
Part one, II. B., Recommendation 75 (a) and (b). 
-2 



(b) 
Study of critical radionuclides and their 
environmental transfer mechanisms; 
(c) 
Establishment of working limits for releases 
of radionuclides from a nuclear facility; 
(d) 
Assessment of the environmental impact of 
nuclear power programmes; 
(e) 
Study of appropriate environmental 
surveillance around nuclear installations; 
(f) 
Research on the fate and behaviour of 
radioactive materials released to the 
environment, and other data necessary for 
establishing limits for such releases; 
(g) 
Research on cost-benefit analyses of 
environmental controls; and 
(h) 
Estimation of population dose from radioactive 
contaminants present in the environment. 
12. That additional programme had recently 
been worked out by the Agency's Secretariat and 
he would welcome comments from the General 
Conference on it. He had also convened a panel 
of experts from outside the Secretariat early in 
November 1972, and its report would be submitted 
as a special item to the Board's Scientific 
Advisory Committee when it met in Vienna at the 
beginning of December. The extra costs for the 
expanded programme were estimated at $100 000 
for each of the years 1973 and 1974, which would 
also permit a certain expansion of the work on 
marine pollution of the International Laboratory 
of Marine Radioactivity at Monaco. 
13. New initiatives of the kind he had described 
might also be supported by the Environmental 
Fund if the latter were established by the General 
Assembly. The Agency's environmental 
programme should also give the Agency a sound 
basis for intensified public information activity 
regarding nuclear energy. He was convinced that 
the general public, if presented in an unbiased 
manner with the alternatives available to cope 
with a future power shortage, would understand 
the advantages offered by nuclear power in terms 
of minimal detrimental effects on the environment. 
14. He wished to remind the Conference that the 
theme of the human environment would be dealt 
with by the panel to be held at the Salazar Nuclear 
Centre on 2 October, and he hoped that as many 
delegates as possible would attend. 
15. Nuclear desalting had been on the Agency's 
programme for some time, although specific 
activities during the last few years had been 
running at rather a low level. Still, the report 
of the joint United States/Mexican Working Group 
under the chairmanship of a consultant, the former 
Deputy Director General of the Agency, 
Mr. Balligand, had been issued and the recommendations 
made were now being studied by the 
two Governments concerned. The results of the 
Oak Ridge study on the application of large water-
GC(XVI)/OR. 152 

producing energy centres in the Middle East, in 
which the Agency had participated with expert 
services, had recently been issued in draft form 
and the Secretariat had been asked to give its 
comments thereon by the end of the year. 

16. The Shevchenko fast-breeder reactor in the 
Soviet Union to generate 250 MW(e) and to furnish 
125 000 m^ of desalted water per day was now near 
completion. It was expected that the reactor 
would be loaded at the end of 1972 and power runs 
started. He had had the opportunity of visiting the 
reactor site about two months earlier and it had 
been an unforgettable experience, in that arid 
area near the Caspian Sea, to see how modern 
technology could defeat unfriendly natural 
conditions and create in a desert acceptable 
conditions for the construction of a modern city 
with a population of over 80 000 people enjoying 
cost-free water supplies - on the average, half a 
cubic metre per person per day. That experience 
represented a vision of what could be achieved for 
the benefit of the peoples of the Middle East if the 
results of the Oak Ridge study on large agroindustrial 
complexes could be turned to practical 
use. 
17. The quest for additional power continued, the 
steady increase in demand slowing down to some 
extent only in certain countries where temporary 
economic recessions had occurred. The changeover 
from thermal reactors to commercial fast 
breeders obviously could not be expected to take 
place until well into the 1980s. 
18. As regards nuclear power for developing 
countries, the market survey initiated in 1971 by 
the Agency had now covered six countries out of 
the 14 to be included, and the information derived 
therefrom would be placed before the Conference 
at its seventeenth session. Such studies might 
have to be continued in the future, since they were 
beneficial to Member States, to the nuclear industry 
and to the financing organizations which would have 
to be called upon for help when a good case could 
be made for implementing the recommendations 
of a survey. Towards the cost of the survey, now 
estimated at about $250 000, the Agency had 
received cash contributions from the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development and 
other financial institutions and Member States, 
apart from the services of experts free of cost. 
Booklets outlining the results of the survey would 
be published in 1973. 

19. The implementation of the Agency's 
commitments arising out of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [5 ] 
was proceeding, though at a somewhat reduced 
pace. Hitherto, 98 States had signed NPT and 
74 had ratified or acceded to it. Negotiations on 
agreements between States party to the Treaty and 
the Agency had been completed in 30 cases, which 
was not a very impressive number, considering 
that a large part of the world's nuclear activity 
remained outside the scope of NPT. For example, 
[5 ] 
Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-3 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 

out of the 44 nuclear power reactors with a total 
generating capacity of some 10 500 MW operating 
in 13 non-nuclear-weapon States, only seven, 
accounting for about 2000 MW, were covered by 
the agreements in connection with NPT already in 
force. However, half of the remaining reactors 
were subject to Agency safeguards under non-NPT 
arrangements, the other half being in non-nuclearweapon 
States Members of the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM). 

20. NPT would receive a fresh impetus from 
the agreement reached between the Agency, the 
non-nuclear-weapon States Members of EURATOM 
and EURATOM itself which had been approved by 
the Council of Ministers of the European 
Communities and by the Board of Governors. The 
precondition for ratification of NPT by the five 
non-nuclear-weapon States Members of EURATOM 
had now been met, and it was to be hoped that the 
ratification procedures would be completed as 
rapidly as possible. 
21. In 1973 the world would celebrate the tenth 
anniversary of the Moscow Partial Test Ban 
Treaty banning nuclear weapons tests in the 
atmosphere, in outer space and under water, and 
it was surely not too early to consider completing 
the work with an agreement on a total test ban. 
That would be a positive step towards the 
fulfilment of Article VI of NPT, under which each 
of the parties undertook to pursue negotiations on 
effective measures relating to the cessation of the 
nuclear arms race at an early date. 
22. A total test ban treaty would undoubtedly 
make some provision for the use of nuclear 
explosive devices for peaceful purposes. Observers 
from the Agency could be present at such 
detonations and report to the international 
community on their findings. Indeed, the Board 
had already prepared guidelines for the international 
observation, by the Agency, of nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes. Those 
guidelines had been transmitted to the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, which, recognizing 
the Agency's role in that field, had in the 
past year requested it, inter alia, to study ways 
and means of establishing a service for nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes under appropriate 
international control. [6 ] 
23. The Agency had continued to develop its 
safeguards system during the past year so that the 
existing staff could be utilized more efficiently 
and manpower requirements (a source of alarm 
for some) reduced. The full utilization of the 
material in the "Blue Book" [7 ] would depend, to 
a great extent, on the national systems of accounting 
for and control of nuclear material established 
in States with which the Agency had concluded, or 
was to conclude, agreements. The Agency was 
willing to assist them by providing advice on the 
establishment and operation of such systems, as 
it had offered to do previously. 
[6] See General Assembly Resolution 2829 (XXVI). 
[7] INFCIRC/153. 
24. Preparations for an increase in the Agency's 
verification activities were closely related to 
arrangements for obtaining the services of national 
laboratories to carry out analyses on samples of 
nuclear materials taken during safeguards 
inspections. The Agency would have its own 
laboratory to make periodic assessments of the 
limits of error in the results of analyses performed 
by a network of national laboratories. The 
Austrian authorities had been most helpful in 
offering to rent to the Agency premises for the 
laboratory at Seibersdorf, near Vienna, and in 
agreeing to build facilities at Seibersdorf for the 
laboratories now located at Headquarters. 
25. On 1 January 1973 the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) would complete its 
expansion to full subject scope. As a result of 
that expansion (carried out on a voluntary basis) 
the number of items of input had almost doubled, 
the monthly issues of ATOMINDEX now covering 
more than 2000 items on an average. A service 
providing up-to-date information on topics of 
interest to the INIS customer had been initiated 
on an experimental basis. A report on the 
progress of INIS during 1972-1974 would be 
submitted to the Board, as it had requested, in 
1975. The new IBM 370/145 computer installed 
in mid-July would provide the additional capacity 
required for the expansion of INIS and other Agency 
programmes, apart from meeting the requirements 
of UNIDO. 
26. All the proceedings of the Fourth 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy held in 1971 in Geneva (the Fourth 
Geneva Conference) had now been published. 
27. The increasing number of large-scale 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
projects executed by the Agency reflected the 
growing contribution of nuclear energy to 
industrial development and economic growth in 
developing countries. The trend towards larger 
projects in the nuclear field was particularly 
evident in the Latin-American region, which 
accounted for three such projects ranging from 
the development of uranium resources through the 
establishment of a nuclear research centre to the 
organization of a centre for non-destructive 
testing techniques. 
28. It was to be regretted that the Agency's 
technical assistance programme still suffered 
from a lack of adequate financing. The 
technically sound requests which could not be met 
for lack of funds, along with the decreasing real 
value of the material assistance given, represented 
lost opportunities for the developing countries. 
The current target of $3 million for voluntary 
contributions, if met, would finance a regular 
technical assistance programme with a purchasing 
power approximately equal to $2 million in 1962, 
the target set for that year. Accordingly, he 
wished to urge Member States to increase their 
voluntary contributions, since it was through those 
untied cash contributions that the most flexible 
and effective technical assistance programme 
could be implemented. 
-4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 


29. The six-year programme [8 ] which the 
General Conference had before it had been 
prepared with a view to adapting the Agency to the 
new circumstances brought about by the changing 
requirements of Member States. The purpose of 
the new format of the programme document was 
to assist Member States in evaluating the Agency's 
planned activities. The programmes had been 
broken down into about a hundred components and 
an attempt had been made to relate the various 
activities, such as technical assistance, research 
contracts and laboratory work, in order to give 
a picture of the overall effort involved in each 
activity. Although it was realized that the 
number of components should be reduced by phasing 
out some, the selection of those would be easier 
in the coming year when the cost of at least the 
most important programme components would be 
known. The Agency would appreciate the views of 
Member States as to how the present diversification 
of the programme could be limited and the Agency's 
efforts concentrated for the greater benefit of all. 
30. As regards the budgetary situation, the 
proposed budget for 1973 unfortunately represented, 
for the first time in the Agency's history, a small 
overall programme decrease in comparison with 
the previous year: the increase of 8. 8% over 
1972 was more than balanced by a 9. 9% price 
increase, so that a programme decrease of 1.1% 
was the result. That trend must be broken, 
especially if the Agency was to maintain a dynamic 
programme which took account of the needs of 
Member States. It had been a sense of realism, 
not a dearth of ideas for new initiatives, that had 
compelled the Agency to present a reduced 
programme in circumstances which, one could 
only hope, would prove exceptional. The point 
had now been reached where automatic cost 
increases resulting from inflation or currency 
fluctuations could no longer be absorbed without 
detriment to the programme. 
31. The Agency was doing its utmost to effect 
savings and keep expenses down. What many 
Member States might not realize was that serious 
and not entirely unsuccessful efforts were being 
made to increase revenues, and in fact revenues 
in 1972 were likely to be about 20% greater than 
in 1971. 
32. Earlier in the year a raising of the level of 
the Working Capital Fund from $1.7 to 
$2. 5 million in order to alleviate the strains on 
the Agency's cash liquidity caused mainly by 
currency fluctuations had been recommended to 
the Board. Instead, some Members had offered 
to pay their assessed contributions more promptly. 
If all commitments were met according to the 
schedule that had been drawn up, a Working 
Capital Fund of $ 2 million would, it was hoped, 
be adequate for 1973. [9] Although in 1957, when 
the Working Capital Fund had been established, it 
had been adequate to cover the Agency's 
expenditures for six months, at its present level 
[8] GC(XVI)/485. 
[9] Ibid., Annex V, draft resolution C. 
the Fund would cover expenditures for only one 
and a half months and should therefore be increased 
in 1974. 

33. The developments taking place within the 
United Nations system, especially as regards 
the salary system, now under review by the 
General Assembly, would affect the Agency as well. 
The fact that the Assembly's Special Committee 
for the Review of the United Nations Salary System 
had been unable to reach a unanimous agreement 
demonstrated the complexity of the problem of 
revising the United Nations salary structure. 
Nevertheless, the Committee's majority had been 
able to make constructive suggestions for a 
revised salary structure and should be congratulated 
for its efforts. 
34. The progress made by the United Nations 
in achieving universality of membership would 
undoubtedly be reflected in the Agency too. 
35. With regard to the co-ordination of 
programmes within the United Nations family, 
the environment problem, especially the practical 
implementation of the recommendations of the 
Stockholm Conference on institutional arrangements, 
would require attention in the coming few 
years. Existing resources must be fully utilized 
to avoid duplication of effort, however; 
co-ordination must not become an end in itself. 
36. More and more attention was being paid by 
leading scientists and statesmen to the overall 
problem of finding adequate energy sources for 
future generations. Nuclear power should be 
considered as one possible solution, in 
combination with other, more conventional energy 
sources. Thermal reactors would give the world 
a breathing space until fusion and perhaps other 
energy sources were developed to relieve the 
strain on the earth's non-renewable natural 
resources. 
37. The Stockholm Conference had recommended 
that a study be carried out in collaboration with 
the Agency and other appropriate organizations on 
"available energy sources, new technology, and 
consumption trends, in order to assist in providing 
a basis for the most effective development of the 
world's energy resources, with due regard to the 
environmental effects of energy production and 
use". [10] The Pugwash Conference on Science 
and World Affairs, discussing the same problem 
some weeks earlier, had also suggested the 
establishment of an international energy institute. 
The Agency should take an active role in that 
area, in collaboration with other international 
organizations, especially as the national 
authorities in many countries might find it 
advantageous, for public information purposes, to 
refer to the findings of an international body. 
38. The composition of the Board's Scientific 
Advisory Committee had been enlarged by a decision 
taken in June. He wished to put on record 
[10 ] United Nations document A/CONF. 48/14, 
Part one, II. B., Recommendation 59. 
-5 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 

his gratitude to former members who had now 
left the Committee. Warm thanks were due 
especially to Professor Rabi, who had served on 
the Committee since its establishment. 

39. He took pleasure in welcoming a new Member 
to the Agency, Bangladesh, whose instrument of 
acceptance of the Statute had been received by 
the Depositary Government. 
40. In conclusion, he wished to thank the 
Austrian Government and authorities for their 
co-operation during the year. That co-operation 
had, as usual, been marked by a readiness to 
assist the Agency in every possible way. An 
additional word of thanks, as all would agree, was 
due to the Government of Mexico, the generous 
hosts of the Conference at its sixteenth regular 
session. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1971-72 
(GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr. 1 and 3, 488) 

41. The PRESIDENT, recalling that the annual 
report for 1971-72 had been circulated as 
document GC(XVI)/480, pointed out that Annex E to 
that document, dealing with the financial status of 
the Agency as at 30 June 1972, had been superseded 
by document GC(XVI)/488 which contained financial 
statements brought up to date as at 22 September. 
He then invited delegates to participate in the 
general debate. 
42. Mr. SCHLESINGER (United States of 
America) extended his warmest congratulations 
to Mr. Flores de la Peña upon his election as 
President, and expressed his delegation's 
gratitude to the Government of Mexico for serving 
as host to the Conference in such a beautiful setting 
and for providing other courtesies. 
43. He then read the following message from the 
President of the United States: 
(1) "it is a pleasure to send my warmest 
greetings through Dr. Schlesinger to those 
who attend the Sixteenth General Conference 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
and to express appreciation on behalf of the 
United States delegation to our southern 
neighbour, Mexico, for hosting this 
important meeting. 
(2) "All those who value the development and 
application of the enormous potential of the 
atom for improving the well-being of all 
mankind recognize the significance of this 
annual meeting and applaud the important 
position of leadership which your organization 
has taken to facilitate international cooperation 
in the safe and peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
(3) "The International Atomic Energy Agency 
has undertaken the critical responsibility 
of carrying out the safeguards provisions 
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, and we look forward to the 
early conclusion of appropriate safeguards 
agreements. It has given positive direction 
to environmental protection programmes, 
and especially to the question of management 
of radioactive wastes. 

(4) "in these and many other endeavours, this 
highly important world body has contributed 
knowledge, guidance and skill and provided 
the necessary impetus to closer collaboration 
among the nations of the world. I wish you 
another successful and productive session. " 
44. As President Nixon's message indicated, 
the Agency had made important contributions to 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In reviewing 
its proposed programme for 1973-78 and budget 
for 1973, he (Mr. Schlesinger) had been impressed 
by the range and depth of its activities, and the 
relatively modest budget and staff with which 
those were being carried out. Among the functions 
that he had particularly noted was that relating 
to assistance rendered to developing Member 
States in the introduction of nuclear power. The 
Agency intended to place more emphasis on that 
activitiy, and he believed it to be a significant 
area of activity for the Agency, with a number of 
very important features. The United States was 
deeply impressed by the Director General's 
statement regarding plans for increased 
environmental protection programmes. 

45. One of the principal issues currently being 
approached in the United States was the broad 
one of energy and public policy. It was necessary 
to predict, to the extent possible, anticipated 
energy requirements over the next 30 or so years 
and to specify alternative means of meeting them. 
That involved careful analysis of the availability 
and costs of various energy sources, such as 
uranium, coal, oil, natural gas and water on the 
one hand, and possible energy demands on the 
other. Other factors, such as the economic impact 
of alternative energy policies, and the biomedical 
and environmental effects associated with the 
recovery, conversion, transport and utilization of 
various energy sources, must also be given 
careful consideration. On the basis of such 
studies, many of which were already being 
undertaken by various organizations, it was hoped 
to make increasingly rational energy choices in 
the future. 
46. It had become quite clear that nuclear energy 
must be one of the major energy sources in the 
United States in future years in view of the 
availability of nuclear fuel materials and the 
economy of scale in nuclear plants. While there 
were clear environmental advantages to nuclear 
power, there were also potential environmental 
problems associated with its large-scale 
development, as in the case of new energy 
resources of any form. The United States 
believed nuclear electric power could be produced 
with less insult to the environment. 
47. On the other hand, it would be short-sighted 
not to recognize that some problems in the 
environmental field were unavoidably linked to the 
-6 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 


use of nuclear fission as an energy source. Close 
international co-operation would be required in 
working towards the necessary solutions. 

48. The problem of future energy needs and the 
desirability of dealing with them systematically 
and constructively was not, of course, confined 
to the United States. It was an issue that all 
nations, both developed and developing, faced in 
varying degrees. Those who responded to the 
problem at an early stage and developed a coherent 
energy policy would benefit over those who waited 
until a crisis was upon them. 
49. Whatever help the Agency could supply to 
Member States in considering the nuclear power 
alternative in national or regional energy studies 
would be a major service. In fact, the Agency 
might wish to consider ways in which it could 
make the most effective contribution towards such 
studies. 
50. In that connection it should be noted that the 
Stockholm Conference had adopted a recommendation 
calling on the Secretary-General - working 
with international bodies such as the Agency and 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development - to undertake a comprehensive study 
of available energy sources, new technology, and 
consumption trends. The purpose of the study 
would be to assist in providing a basis for the 
effective development of the world's energy 
resources, with due regard to the environmental 
effects of energy production and use. The first 
report was due by 1975. The results of the 
Agency's present market survey of nuclear power 
needs in developing countries should provide a 
timely input to the more broadly based study called 
for by the Stockholm recommendation. 
51. When a country had made a decision to move 
ahead seriously with the nuclear power alternative, 
there were some specific services the Agency 
should be in a position to provide readily. Such 
services could include in-depth reactor siting 
evaluations, as well as assistance in the 
development of appropriate regulatory-type 
licensing procedures and of adequate health and 
safety standards and procedures. The Agency 
already provided services in those areas to some 
extent. However, with the growing number of 
nuclear power plants being installed or on order 
around the world, the Agency would face a real 
challenge in meeting the predictable needs for 
those services that would arise, and were already 
arising, 
52. As all were aware, increasing international 
attention was being given to environmental 
protection and to the related areas of health and 
safety. The Agency had already made a good 
start in programmes in those vital fields by 
issuing its basic health and safety standards, safe 
transport regulations, and numerous codes of 
practice covering safe operating procedures, as 
well as management of radioactive wastes. 
Additionally, the Agency had made important 
contributions to the safe use of nuclear energy by 
sending missions to assist Member States in 
dealing with safety and environmental problems, 
including nuclear power plant siting as well as 
research and training programmes. 

53. The United States fully supported the 
emphasis the Agency was placing on research on 
health, safety, waste management and environmental 
protection. In that connection, a recent 
independent re-examination of the Agency's 
programmes and objectives, carried out by a 
group of distinguished American scientists and 
educators at the request of the Secretary of State, 
had concluded that the Agency's work was of 
continuing importance in the interest of international 
scientific advancement. 
54. There was a distinct need for clear advance 
planning to develop the most effective means of 
tackling problems in those areas. The Agency's 
basic health and safety standards document [11 ] 
should be kept under continuous review and updated 
whenever necessary. In addition, the Agency 
could well undertake studies and analyses that 
would enable it to forecast major problems that 
would require attention in the broad areas of 
health and safety, 
55. One of the important areas to which the 
Agency was now addressing itself was the longterm 
management of high-level radioactive wastes. 
The volume of such wastes would grow as nuclear 
energy became a more important source of 
electrical power in both developed and developing 
nations. The Agency now had an unusual opportunity 
to help define the international scope of the 
waste-management task and to develop and 
recommend standards and criteria for waste 
management, handling, storage and monitoring. 
The Agency's panel of experts was to meet in 
November to assess that problem. The panel's 
work should provide a basis for identifying 
criteria to be applied in the search for possible 
storage sites and in the provision of assistance to 
nations in regard to the effective management of 
high-level wastes. Such action was consistent 
with the recommendation adopted at the Stockholm 
Conference, which called on Governments to 
support and expand co-operation on radioactive 
waste problems with the guidance of the Agency 
and other appropriate organizations. 
56. With respect to safeguards, many States 
had negotiated or were in the process of 
negotiating appropriate safeguards agreements 
with the Agency pursuant to NPT. It was 
particularly noteworthy that EURATOM and the 
Agency had been able to negotiate a complex and 
important agreement involving the nuclear 
programmes of the European Community and its 
Members. It was hoped that the Board's action in 
approving that agreement would bring about the 
early ratification of NPT by the participating 
Governments, and the active implementation of 
safeguards. Possibly other signatories which 
had not done so would now both ratify NPT and 
undertake the negotiation of safeguards agreements 
with the Agency pursuant to it. 
[11] INFCIRC/18. 
-7 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 

57. His Government wished to reiterate its 
strong commitment to the objectives of NPT. 
The United States which, for obvious reasons, was 
not required by NPT to accept non-proliferation 
safeguards, had commenced talks with the Agency 
on an agreement pursuant to its offer to place its 
nuclear activities, other than those of direct 
national security significance, under Agency 
safeguards at an appropriate time. That offer 
had been made to demonstrate that the United 
States sought no commercial advantage from NPT 
and that it was confident that the application of 
safeguards in connection with it would not entail 
an onerous burden. 
58. The responsibility which agreements under 
NPT placed on the Agency raised the question as 
to what was foreseen in the future development of 
the Agency's safeguarding capabilities. Both 
records-accountability and inspection activities 
would need to be continually reviewed and modified, 
and expanded when necessary, to enable the 
Agency to fulfil its increasing responsibilities as 
the use of nuclear power became more widespread. 
In addition, it appeared to be essential for the 
Agency to have a strong in-house capability to use 
and evaluate technical developments resulting 
from safeguards research all over the world. 
Inspection procedures must be kept up to date, 
and the cost effectiveness of the Agency's 
safeguards must be maintained. Both the 
experimental research on safeguards techniques 
at the Seibersdorf Laboratory and the systems 
analysis research at Agency Headquarters 
constituted important elements of the safeguards 
activity. 

59. The proposed programme for the Agency 
for 1973-78 and the budget for 1973 appeared to 
have been developed with care and with cost 
restraints in mind. They would have the support 
of the United States delegation. 
60. The operational, or technical assistance, 
programme and budget, which were of direct 
importance to the majority of the Agency's 
Members, deserved special mention. The United 
States fully supported the technical assistance 
activities and believed they must remain in balance 
with other parts of the Agency's programme. To 
do so, they would require adequate financial 
support. His Government had clearly demonstrated 
its support by contributing to the target 
at a percentage equal to its base rate of assessment 
and by additional in-kind contributions. A 
number of other Governments had contributed in 
a similar way. Participation by all Members at 
their percentage base rates of assessment would 
afford equitable and satisfactory sharing of the 
responsibilities for a healthy and effective 
operational programme. 

61. He was pleased to note that the amendment 
to Article VI. A-D of the Statute which the 
Conference had approved in 1970 [12 ] had been 
accepted by 46 Member States, including the 
United States. The Agency was two thirds of the 
[12] By Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272, para. 1. 
way towards bringing the amendment into force, 
making possible an expanded representation of 
many areas of the world on the Board of 
Governors, and he wished to urge those Members 
that had not as yet done so to accept the 
amendment. 

62. As part of the in-kind contributions 
mentioned earlier, the United States Government 
was pleased to renew its pledge, for the fourteenth 
consecutive year, to donate up to $50 000 worth 
of special nuclear material for use in Agency 
projects in research and for medical therapy. The 
United States would also continue to make 
available, on a cost-free basis, the services of 
experts, training opportunities, and items of 
equipment, to the extent possible. 
63. It was his hope that those contributions 
would serve to underscore the continuing support 
that the United States extended to the Agency and 
to its programmes. 
64. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) likewise extended 
his delegation's congratulations to the President 
on his election and wished to convey its sincere 
thanks to the Mexican Government and people 
for their generosity and hospitality in acting as 
host to the Conference. 
65. The Conference, he was sure, was deeply 
aware of the void caused by the passing away of 
Dr. V.A. Sarabhai, the Indian delegate to the 
General Conference during the previous six years. 
In particular, he would be remembered for the 
competence and dignity with which he presided 
over the fourteenth regular session of the 
Conference. There was one aspect of 
Dr. Sarabhai1 s ideals to which he wished to draw 
particular attention, namely his confidence in the 
future of nuclear power. Dr. Sarabhai had been 
imbued with the conviction that nuclear energy 
was essential not only for maintaining the standards 
of economically advanced nations but also for 
enabling the developing nations to achieve greater 
economic prosperity, 
66. He (Mr. Roux) considered it only fitting 
himself to elaborate on that theme and to point 
out the responsibilities that the Agency would have 
to shoulder in the immediate future. 
67. Accompanying an exploding world population 
were the spectres of poverty, depletion of natural 
resources, inadequate food supplies and pollution 
of the environment. The enormity of the situation 
became apparent when one stopped to consider 
that in the year 2000 the planet would have to 
house, feed and clothe an estimated 6500 million 
people. 
68. One could not but agree with the late 
Dr. Sarabhai that in nuclear energy lay the key to 
the solution of many of the world's problems, but 
there was very little time for preparing to face 
the future. The world's nuclear generating 
capacity was expected to reach a figure of 
330 000 MW(e) by 1980 and a more than tenfold 
increase could be expected in the following 
-8 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 


20 years, reaching 3. 8 million MW by the year2000. Proved reserved of low-cost uranium,
amounting to approximately 1 million tonnes, weresufficient to satisfy uranium requirements onlyuntil the end of the 1970s, assuming an eight-year 
forward reserve. In addition, it was estimated 
that requirements of low-cost uranium up to the 
year 2000 could only be met if the present 
reserves were increased by some 1. 5 million 
tonnes. Clearly, one should not underestimate 
the formidable task not only of much more than 
doubling present reserves, but also of providing 
the necessary production capacity in a 
relatively short space of time. 

69. It was therefore essential that very serious 
note should be taken of the warnings sounded at 
the Fourth Geneva Conference and of the stress 
that had been placed on the need for increased 
uranium prospecting, improved methods of oreprocessing 
(especially low-grade ores), the 
development and improvement of enrichment 
technology and a solution to the problem of 
pollution. South Africa was fully aware of its 
responsibilities in those fields, and vigorous 
programmes for meeting them were making very 
satisfactory progress. 
70. While the construction of the small-scale 
enrichment plant was still proceeding according to 
plan, recent advances in improving the efficiency 
of the process and the degree of its economic 
competitiveness had far exceeded expectations. 
The stage had been reached, therefore, where 
serious consideration was to be given to the 
exploitation of the process on a broader front within 
the general framework of the South African Prime 
Minister's announcement a little over two years 
previously. 
71. Turning to the Agency's activities, he felt 
that the past year had been a period that could best 
be characterized as one of consolidation in 
preparation for the many new and challenging tasks 
which lay ahead. That applied to matters as 
divergent as the negotiation of safeguards 
agreements required in connection with NPT, 
where much experience had been gained, and the 
Agency's internal housekeeping operations. 
72. His delegation wished to offer its 
congratulations to all concerned on the successful 
conclusion of the Agency-EURATOM negotiations, 
which had culminated in the safeguards agreement 
between Belgium, the Federal Republic of 
Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, 
EURATOM and the Agency in connection with NPT. 
73. It was also gratifying to note the efforts 
which had been made by the Director General and 
the Secretariat to economize wherever possible no 
easy matter in a period where the ravages of 
inflation were eroding every effort to effect 
savings. Savings and economies had been effected, 
for instance, in the form of no increase in the 
numbers of Professional staff for 1973 - indeed, 
there was a reduction in the overall number of 
posts. His delegation further welcomed the 
conscious effort being made to phase out projects 
which had served their purpose and to allocate 
priorities corresponding to the needs of the day. 
South Africa hoped that that welcome trend would 

 continue, 

74. With regard to the problem of environmental 
pollution, his delegation welcomed the emphasis 
which the Agency's programme placed on action to 
protect the environment in relation to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy generally, and the disposal 
of radioactive waste in particular. That was a 
field of growing activity for the Agency - and he 
said "Agency" advisedly, for it was the organization 
which, in his delegation's view, should bear the 
responsibility for co-ordinating international 
efforts relating to the effects on the environment 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was 
most important that the Agency should play the 
paramount role in a field for which it was so 
admirably suited. In that context the expansion 
of the Agency's public information activities 
concerning protection of the environment was to 
be welcomed. 

75. On the subject of co-operation with other 
international organizations, he was somewhat 
concerned at the extent to which certain research 
projects were conducted by the Agency primarily 
on behalf of other international bodies, but were 
financed largely from the Agency's own resources. 
He had particularly in mind the research 
activities in the agricultural and medical fields 
which the Agency continued to undertake on behalf 
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO) and the World Health 
Organization. If, as he had every reason to 
believe, those research programmes remained 
of importance to the two organizations concerned, 
then it was only right that the costs involved 
should be borne at least on a fifty-fifty basis. 

76. Having expressed the satisfaction of his 
delegation at the Agency's thorough review of its 
affairs in preparation for the new tasks ahead, 
he felt obliged to turn to a matter which gave 
somewhat less cause for satisfaction. Technical 
assistance was one of the most important 
components of the Agency's programme - indeed, 
in the eyes of many Member States, the most 
important. It was therefore disappointing that 
perhaps no more than 75% of the $3 million target 
for voluntary contributions would be reached in 
1972. South Africa had always contributed to the 
General Fund on the basis of its assessed 
percentage, in the hope and expectation that other 
States would do likewise. That expectation 
remained unrealized, and it was only natural that 
States which had made it a moral obligation to 
match their assessed contributions and fulfil 
their pledges should consider it unacceptable when 
others did not give the Agency whole-hearted 
support. Not surprisingly, two major contributors 
to the General Fund had recently found it 
necessary to warn that they might be unable to 
maintain the present level of their voluntary 
contributions if a more satisfactory response 
from certain Member States were not forthcoming. 
77. He wished, therefore, to appeal to all 
Member States which were in a financial position 
-9 



GC(XVI)/OR.152 

to do so, to make their full contributions to the 
General Fund, in order to avoid a situation which 
none would welcome and which could have serious 
consequences for the future of the technical 
assistance programme. It was also to be hoped 
that a greater number of Member States might 
consider providing assistance on a bilateral basis 
in respect of projects which the technical 
assistance programme was unable to finance. In 
1972 South Africa had once again been able to 
assist a fellow Member State in the Africa and the 
Middle East region in that manner, and it would 
continue to consider requests for bilateral 
assistance in the future. 

78. The Agency existed to accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world. It 
was, however, the developing countries that needed 
the lion's share of that contribution if they were 
to satisfy their rightful hunger for the benefits of 
modern technology as a means of promoting 
education, medical care and economic advancement. 
It was the task of all Member States - developing 
as well as advanced - to tackle the difficult tasks 
which lay ahead with diligence, enthusiasm, 
perseverance and, above all, good neighbourliness. 
79. Mr. DARUSMAN (Indonesia) said that he 
wished to associate himself with the previous 
speakers in congratulating the President on his 
election to his high office. He was confident 
that under the President's able leadership and wise 
guidance the General Conference would achieve, 
at its sixteenth session, the important objectives 
reflected in its agenda. 
80. His delegation had been pleased to read the 
annual report for 1971-72 and to note the many 
achievements which the Agency had to its credit 
during that period, in spite of the numerous 
difficulties of financing. The positive results 
obtained in the field of nuclear power deserved 
special mention. Moreover, scarcely a year 
after the draft resolution on the financing of nuclear 
power in developing countries had been adopted by 
the Conference [13 ], the first surveys were 
already being conducted in more than ten 
countries. That testified to swift and efficient 
action, and all concerned should be congratulated. 
81. Indonesia favoured the Board's action in 
adopting guidelines for the observation by the 
Agency of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
(PNE), in order to ensure that obligations 
undertaken under NPT or other international 
agreements were not violated. The opportunity 
to observe such explosions would also help the 
Agency to gain experience and collect comprehensive 
information on the applications and technology 
of PNE, information which, it was to be hoped, 
would be passed on to Member States without 
delay. As PNE could in certain cases speed up 
development, they would be very important to 
Member States in the execution of their development 
programmes. Member States wishing to use 
PNE should be able to profit by the services of 
[13] GC(XV)/RES/285. 
the Agency, not only as an observer but also as a 
purveyor of information about the safety aspects 
of such projects; neighbouring countries could 
then rest assured that they would be exposed to 
no danger. 

82. In spite of the existing partial test ban treaty, 
atomic weapons tests were still being conducted 
in certain areas of the world, even in the face of 
strong objections by countries directly affected 
through atmospheric pollution and otherwise. 
His Government could only express its regret in 
that regard and request that the tests be 
discontinued. 
83. With regard to the programme for 1973-78 
and budget for 1973, his delegation wished to 
congratulate the Director General and the 
Secretariat on their excellent work. Indonesia 
well realized that with its limited resources the 
Agency by no means had an entirely free hand in 
planning and implementing its programmes, and 
considered the programme now being proposed as 
optimal. However, the technical assistance 
programme was in a serious plight, for even if the 
present target of $ 3 million was reached, that 
money would have a purchasing power, in 1972, 
equal to only $2 million in 1962 (the target set for 
that year); and since in fact only 75% to 80% of 
the target had been reached, those resources 
were in real terms roughly equal to what had been 
available in 1959. Many were tempted to take a 
drastic approach in endeavouring to solve the 
Agency's financial problems, and favoured a 
sizable increase in the target for the General 
Fund. That would mean larger individual 
contributions. The target had in fact been raised 
from $2. 5 to $3 million the previous year, [14] 
an increase which the Board had agreed to 
recommend to the Conference on the condition 
that there would be no further increase for at 
least three or four years. 
84. His delegation was convinced that the 
programme for 1973-78 and the budget for 1973 
had been prepared very carefully, but wondered 
whether a dead point had not in fact been reached 
if further shifts in the budget were no longer 
possible so that the Working Capital Fund could 
be increased without a rise in individual 
contributions. Because of budgetary limitations 
and reliance on voluntary contributions, it seemed 
that the Agency could not satisfactorily achieve its 
statutory aims. Yet the safeguards budget for 
1973 stood at $2 868 000 and was certain to mount 
very rapidly in the years ahead. His delegation, 
although fully aware of the advantages of having a 
laboratory for safeguards work, was nevertheless 
concerned, in view of the difficult financial 
position, about the pace at which the project was 
being carried forward. Every decision in that 
matter should be taken only after very careful 
consideration. 
85. At the same time, serious consideration 
should be given to the possibility of making the 
technical assistance budget part of the Regular 
[14] Resolution GC(XV)/RES/281, para. 1. 
- 10 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 


Budget. The technical assistance programme 
should be a "regular programme" not only in name 
but also in fact. Although that would imply an 
amendment to the financial provisions of the 
Statute, it was a proposal which should, 
nevertheless, receive serious consideration by 
Member States. A reasonable balance should be 
struck between the safeguards budget and the 
technical assistance budget; in fact a standard 
correlation between the two might even be 
considered. 

86. Expansion of the programme on radiation 
safety and environmental protection was very 
important and his delegation could also appreciate 
why increased funds had been allocated for 
research contracts, in view of the valuable results 
they had yielded. However, the financing of the 
activities of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of 
Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture and of the 
related work done in Seibersdorf was a point 
which should be examined more closely. The 
Division's programme was of great value to 
developing countries, and yet FAO did not 
appear to attach much importance to its work. 
Whereas the Agency had spent well over $1 million 
on those activities during the previous year, 
FAO - a much larger organization - had spent 
only about 30% of that amount. Could FAO not be 
persuaded to increase its share and allow the 
Agency to use the money thus released for other 
programmes, such as research contracts? 

87. In many instances the assistance extended 
by the Agency to Indonesia had been beneficial. 
Nine of the most important isotopes needed in 
medicine, agriculture and hydrology were now 
being produced routinely in the Bandung Reactor 
Centre, and 16 others were available on request. 
The TRIGA Mark II reactor in Bandung, after 
having been upgraded, was now operating at 1 MW 
and the nuclear medicine clinic in Bandung had 
been working satisfactorily since February 1970. 
The applications of isotopes in hydrology were 
now very popular among hydrologists in 
governmental departments and there was a steadily 
increasing demand for isotopes among sedimentologists 
as well. Isotopes were also finding 
their way into industry and mining, especially in 
the search for oil. The uses of radiation in 
mutation breeding, the application of the sterile male 
technique and food preservation by radiation 
were receiving the full attention of Indonesia's 
scientists. In October 1972 the Agency was to 
hold a panel meeting on tracer techniques in 
tropical animal production studies, in Jakarta. 
In an attempt to improve personnel dosimetry, 
intercalibrations with the Agency and the Bhabha 
Atomic Research Centre in India had been 
established, and to facilitate control of the use of 
radiation and radioactive isotopes the Government 
was now considering the promulgation of 
regulations on the protection of radiation workers 
and on the transport of radioactive materials. 

88. During the past two years, 39 licences had 
been granted to Government authorities, 
institutions and hospitals. 
89. The survey for uranium ores which was at 
present being conducted in collaboration with the 
French Government on Kalimantan, one of the 
major islands of Indonesia, looked promising and 
the relevant bilateral agreement had just been 
extended for another two years. 
90. * The Indonesian Atomic Energy Agency had 
now finally conceived a master plan, which in due 
course would be endorsed by the Government, to 
give sound direction to its basic aims. Under 
that plan it was anticipated that the first nuclear 
power plant in Indonesia would not be feasible 
before 1985. A second point was that one research 
centre was considered to be more convenient than 
three or four separate ones: it would prevent 
duplication of work and instrumentation and keep 
total operational costs at a minimum. Therefore, 
the existing centres, whose location made them 
suitable for integration with universities, would 
eventually be handed over to those universities. 
Construction of the proposed single centre, to be 
located in the vicinity of Jakarta, was expected to 
start in 1975. 
91. His delegation wished to express its thanks 
to the Agency and to the Government of the 
United States of America for their willingness to 
deliver fuel for the reactor in Bandung for a 
period of five years beginning in 1972. 
92. Finally, he wished to express, on behalf of 
the whole delegation of Indonesia, heartfelt thanks 
to the Government of Mexico for the generous 
hospitality which the Conference was enjoying. 
93. Baron van BOETZELAER (Netherlands) 
recalled that during the fifteenth session of the 
Conference he had announced that the Commission 
of the European Communities, of which the 
Netherlands was a Member, had been given a 
mandate to start negotiations with the Agency 
aiming at the conclusion of an agreement which 
would enable Member States of the Communities 
that had signed NPT to meet their obligations 
under Article III thereof. [15] His Government 
was among those which had made ratification of 
NPT conditional on the reaching of such an 
agreement. 
94. The negotiations between a delegation of 
high officials of the Agency's Secretariat and 
another delegation, led by officials of the 
European Commission and including 
representatives of the Member States concerned, 
were concluded in July 1972, The negotiations 
were the first that had been held in respect of 
such an agreement with a group of States, as 
distinct from a single State. As a consequence, 
new ground had to be broken and legal, 
technical and administrative problems of great 
complexity had to be solved. 
95. EURATOM had already developed a 
safeguards system that operated independently of 
the Governments of its Member States, and 
attuning that system to the Agency's system 
[15] See document GC(XV)/OR. 146, para, 67. 
- 11 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 

involved problems that were extremely delicate, 
both technically and politically. 

96. His delegation wished to pay tribute to the 
negotiators on both sides, whose inventiveness 
and perseverance had led to the conclusion of the 
agreement. Special thanks were due to the Agency 
negotiators, led by Mr, Fischer of the Secretariat. 
However the agreement, which had been reached 
in July 1972, had still needed approval by the 
Agency's Board of Governors and, on the 
EURATOM side, by the Council of Ministers of 
the European Communities and the national 
parliaments of the States concerned. 
97. He now had great pleasure in confirming 
(as stated by the Director General [16 ]) that the 
agreement had been approved the week before, 
both by the Council of Ministers of the European 
Communities and by the Board of Governors of the 
Agency. Ratification by the States concerned was 
still required. He could assure the Conference of 
the intention of his own Government to seek 
parliamentary approval of the agreement at the 
earliest possible date. 
98. His delegation hoped that many States which 
had signed NPT would proceed to negotiate and 
conclude the safeguards agreements required by 
NPT and would avail themselves of the facilities 
for information and guidance offered by the 
Director General at the current session of the 
Conference. 
99. The Agency's safeguarding activities should 
not compromise its important promotional tasks. 
The annual report for 1971-72 rightly stressed 
the importance of the Agency's functions of 
providing assistance to developing countries and 
in relation to environmental problems. His 
Government had again decided to seek 
parliamentary approval for a voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund in excess of the 
assessed rate proportion. 
100. The Board had decided to recommend to the 
Conference that the level of the Working Capital 
Fund be raised and his Government supported 
that recommendation; cash availability 
difficulties had been eased by various offers to 
pay assessed contributions earlier. It would 
greatly help the Director General if in coming 
years offers of that kind were made at an early 
date. 
101. The effect of nuclear energy on the 
environment had rightly received an increasing 
amount of attention from the Director General. 
His Government thought the idea of registering 
the disposal of nuclear waste should not be 
abandoned and also wanted to draw attention to the 
problems created when nuclear installations had 
to be closed and to the safety of radiological including 
repair - workers. A comparative study 
of existing national regulations on those subjects 
might prove useful. 
[16 ] Para. 20 above. 
102. His delegation found the new format of the 
Agency's programme for 1973-78 most satisfactory 
and welcomed the Director General's intention to 
provide information on cost estimates of individual 
programme components in future programme and 
budget presentations. The document directed 
itself to world-wide problems such as food and 
water supply, health, environmental problems and 
energy supply. 
103. His delegation welcomed the Agency's 
contacts and co-operation with other members of 
the United Nations family, and with regional 
organizations such as EURATOM. Many useful 
contacts already existed with EURATOM and they 
should be further stimulated by a formal 
co-operation agreement between the Agency and 
EURATOM. 
104. Both in the annual report and in the Agency's 
programme for 1973-78, attention was also given 
to the problem of satisfying the increasing demands 
for fissionable material for nuclear power plants. 
In that respect he wanted to draw attention to two 
international industrial projects in which the 
Netherlands was participating. The first project 
was related to fast-breeder development and 
aimed at the operation of a 300-MW prototype 
reactor in the course of 1979. The latter type of 
advanced reactor would be self-supporting as far 
as feed material was concerned. The second 
international project would increase the 
possibilities for obtaining enriched uranium; it 
was a gas ultra-centrifuge project, carried out by 
the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of 
Germany and the Netherlands. To implement that 
project two joint industrial enterprises had been 
created, one for the development and construction 
of centrifuge plants and one for their operation. 
Pilot plants were being built in the Netherlands 
and in the United Kingdom. The results of the 
joint development work indicated that the 
centrifuge method was an economic way to produce 
enriched uranium. 
105. His Government had supported the action 
taken by the Board of Governors in December 1971 
regarding the representation of China in the Agency. 
It was to be hoped that the People's Republic of 
China would soon take a decision as to its 
participation in the work of the Agency. 
106. During the past year the amendment of 
Article VI.A-D of the Statute had been accepted by 
a number of Governments. His Government 
hoped a sufficient number of Members would 
accept the amendment to bring it into force. 
107. In conclusion, he thought the Agency could 
look back upon a successful year and his 
delegation considered that the Director General 
was to be highly commended for his endeavours 
to meet problems and make clear and comprehensive 
plans for the future. 
• Mr. Andrzejewski (Poland) took the Chair. 
108. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil), congratulating 
the President on his election, said that it was a 
- 12 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 


recognition of Mexico's role in the peaceful 
applications of atomic energy. Mexico was not 
only one of the technologically most advanced 
countries in Latin America, but also - as 
demonstrated by the Tlatelolco Treaty - a country 
dedicated to the search for peace. He was 
grateful to the Government of Mexico for having 
invited the General Conference to meet in a 
Latin American country for the first time since 
the establishment of the Agency. 

109. During 1972 two important decisions 
concerning the development of nuclear energy in 
Brazil had been taken. The first related to the 
establishment of a joint enterprise - the 
Brazilian Company for Nuclear Technology - in 
which both the Government and private industry 
would participate. As a subsidiary of the National 
Nuclear Energy Commission of Brazil, the new 
enterprise would have as its main objective the 
creation of favourable conditions for the development 
of a national nuclear industry based on a 
potential market of at least 1000 MW per year from 
1980 onwards. The Brazilian Government would 
guarantee an annual subsidy, starting at 
$10 million, to be used, together with private 
funds, in promoting the manufacture of reactor 
components and solving fuel technology problems. 

110. The second decision concerned the 
allocation of increasing funds for uranium 
prospecting, the sum allocated in 1972 amounting 
to $11 million. The funds would be employed by 
a similar joint enterprise, possessing the 
necessary capacity for large-scale mineral 
prospecting. Thanks to the joint enterprise's 
experience the National Nuclear Energy 
Commission of Brazil had reached a high level of 
efficiency in uranium prospecting and several 
areas with geological characteristics suggesting 
the existence of substantial uranium deposits had 
been discovered. 
111. Construction work on the 626-MW (net) 
nuclear power plant at Angra dos Reis was well 
under way, all preparatory work at the site having 
been completed. The financing agreement between 
the electrical utility company and the Eximbank, 
involving an amount of $138 million, had been 
signed in January, while the commercial 
agreement with Westinghouse for the purchase of 
equipment and fuel elements had been signed 
recently. 
112. During the previous week, the Brazilian 
Congress had ratified both a new Agreement for 
Co-operation in the Civil Uses of Nuclear Energy 
between Brazil and the United States of America 
and a related agreement amending a Safeguards 
Transfer Agreement between the Agency, Brazil 
and the United States [17 ], thereby demonstrating 
once again Brazil's readiness to act in 
accordance with the Agency's safeguards system 
and its appreciation of the Agency's work in the 
field of safeguards, despite the fact that it did not 
[17 ] The latter two agreements are reproduced 
in documents INFCIRC/110/Mod. 1 and 
INFCIRC/110 respectively. 
agree with the philosophy underlying NPT. To 
help the Agency fulfil its safeguards obligations 
in connection with NPT, the Brazilian Government 
had decided to contribute to the costs of meeting 
those obligations although Brazil had not signed 
NPT. 

113. The Brazilian Government had ratified the 
Tlatelolco Treaty and would comply with its 
provisions - and consequently become an effective 
member of OPANAL - when all extra-continental 
and continental Powers which had, de jure or de 
facto, international responsibilities in respect of 
territories located within the area of application 
of the Treaty or which possessed nuclear weapons 
signed the respective additional protocols. 
114. The conflict between the Agency's 
promotional and control functions was becoming 
increasingly acute and giving rise in Brazil to 
deep concern regarding the future of the Agency. 
The major Powers appeared to be attaching more 
importance to safeguards and the maintenance of 
the political status quo than to the Agency's task 
of making available the benefits of nuclear energy 
to the developing countries. Due to inflation and 
the international monetary crisis, the level of the 
technical assistance programme for 1973 was the 
same in real terms as that of the programme for 
1959. Moreover, if the budget for 1973 was 
approved there would be a decrease in real terms something 
which had not happened before in the 
history of the Agency. 
115. It should be clearly stated that for the 
developing countries the technical assistance 
programme was of paramount importance among 
Agency functions, including its control functions. 
Despite that fact, only about 40% of the requests 
for experts and equipment would be met in 1973. 
It should be understood that developing countries 
could not take a very great interest in the 
prohibition of nuclear weapons, which they were in 
any case not in a position to fabricate, but they 
were extremely interested in the development of 
their potential with respect to the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. 
116. The only bright spot was the constant 
dedication of the Director General and his 
associates in their endeavours to improve 
conditions in that sector. His delegation 
particularly commended their efforts to attract 
the attention of private organizations in Member 
States to the plight of the Agency in its technical 
assistance programme. It was gratifying to see 
that some resources were being provided by 
private institutions. 
117. He wished, on behalf of the Brazilian 
Government, to compliment UNDP on the 
structural changes in its technical assistance 
policy and on the significant increase in the funds 
it allocated to technical co-operation in the nuclear 
field. Brazil was now implementing, partly with 
financial resources from UNDP and with Agency 
assistance, a large-scale five-year project for 
the development of agriculture using nuclear 
technology. As a result of the joint efforts being 
- 13 



GC(XVI)/OR. 152 

made the Centre for Nuclear Applications in 
Agriculture would become the most important 
institution in that field in Latin America and 
probably one of the most outstanding in the 
developing world. 

118. A point of major relevance to the Agency was 
the amendment of Article VI. A-D of the Statute. 
Two years had elapsed since the Conference had 
adopted Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272 approving 
the amendment. However, little more than one 
third of Member States had so far accepted it. 
He wished to urge those Members that had not yet 
accepted the text of the Article to do so in the 
very near future, and thereby provide for more 
equitable representation on the Board. 
119. A coming matter of great importance, that 
would be considered by the Board and by the 
Conference, was the appointment of the Director 
General. In view of the outstanding work done 
during past mandates, his delegation felt that a 
continuation of the same administrative leadership 
would be of advantage to the Agency. 
120. Turning to the relationship between development 
and environment, he stressed that for the 
majority of the world's population an improvement 
of conditions would take the form of relief from 
poverty, better nutrition, education, clothing, 
housing, medical care and employment, rather 
than a reduction of atmospheric pollution. At the 
Stockholm Conference the head of the Brazilian 
delegation had pointed out that economic development 
would have to be seen from now on as a 
compromise between the need to raise man's 
productivity in order to ensure his well-being and 
dignity and the need to minimize the predatory 
aspects that progress had had in the past. Only 
through economic growth could mankind stem 
environmental deterioration, i. e. soil erosion 
and agricultural and forestry malpractices that 
went far beyond industrial pollution. 

121. Brazil's position at the Stockholm Conference 
had been identical with that of Mexico. 
President Echeverria in his Second Report to 
Congress had summed up the situation by saying 
that in poor countries the improvement of ecology 
lay primarily in economic advances and that no 
preventive or corrective environmental measure 
should be allowed to impair their development or 
foreign trade. 
122. Liability for pollution control should be 
shared proportionally by the countries responsible 
for the pollution. Further, Brazil agreed with the 
position taken by the Board in its report to 
ECOSOC in regard to the impact of nuclear energy 
on the environment (GC(XVI)/480, paragraph 20); 
it seemed evident that no new international agency 
was required. 
123. Pollution hysteria, psychological pollution, 
was sometimes more dangerous to mankind than 
environmental pollution itself. It was also an 
instrument for maintaining the division of the 
world between developed and developing countries. 
Corrective measures based on insufficient 
knowledge were certain to fail. Efforts should 
be concentrated on seeking a solution in time to 
avoid dangers anticipated in the very distant future. 
124. He had faith in the future of the Agency and 
hoped that present difficulties would be surmounted 
in time, with the co-operation of all Member 
States, both developed and developing countries. 
He trusted that the "Spirit of Tlatelolco" would 
inspire the General Conference, as the "Spirit of 
Vienna" had done in the past. 
• The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 

GC(XVI)/OR.153 
6 April 1973* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Wednesday, 27 September 1972, at 4, 25 p.m. 


President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 


Item of 
of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
9 General debate and report 
for 1971-72 (continued) 
1 101 
Statements by the delegates 
of: 
United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern 
1 16 
Ireland 
Australia 
Union of Soviet Socialist 
1733 
32 
55 
Republics 
Japan 
Federal Republic of 
Germany 
Nigeria 
Zaire 
56678187 
66 
80 
86 
101 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 25 October 1972. 
** GC(XVI)/490. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC{XVI)/OR. 153 


THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1971-72 
(GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr. 1 and 3, 488) (continued) 

1. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) wished to 
be associated with the words of appreciation 
addressed to the Mexican Government for its 
gracious and generous welcome. There had been 
great progress in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy since the Agency's inception in 1957. The 
developing countries had consistently expanded 
their knowledge and increased their skills, and it 
was only reasonable, therefore, that the Agency 
should reflect the changing situation in the 
composition of its Board of Governors. With that 
in mind, the General Conference had in 1970 
amended Article VI. A-D of its Statute, [1 ] in which 
the composition of the Board was laid down. That 
amendment, so far ratified by only two thirds of 
the required number of Member States, had not 
yet come into force and the United Kingdom urged 
Member States which had not already done so to 
ratify it without delay. 
2. Public interest in the protection of the 
environment had sharpened as the effects of 
technology - designed to meet the demands of the 
world's growing population - made themselves 
felt. The United Nations Conference on the Human 
Environment held in Stockholm in June had 
considered a vast range of subjects, including the 
important question of pollution, and had recognized 
that nuclear power was a means of satisfying the 
world's demand for energy without detriment to 
environmental safety. The Stockholm Conference 
had accordingly taken a keen interest in nuclear 
power and had been very much aware of the 
Agency's role in connection with radiological 
protection and the management of radioactive 
wastes. 
3. The Agency was studying the possibility of 
international storage of atomic waste and the 
collation of data on that subject. It was to be 
hoped that more and more countries would turn to 
the Agency for advice and help as it would be 
unfortunate not to use the Agency's expertise at a 
time when the new environmental protection 
organization recommended by the Stockholm 
Conference was being set up. The United Kingdom 
would be host to a conference in October designed 
to lead to a convention on the dumping of noxious 
waste at sea, and was glad the Agency would be 
sending an observer. 
4. The United Kingdom had met its 
commitments in respect of both its assessed 
contribution and its voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund, for technical assistance. However, 
it felt that in times of inflation special care had to 
be exercised: it should not be assumed that cost 
increases were inevitable or that Member States 
would always accept a larger budget. It was 
essential that the Agency should regularly examine 
[1] By Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272, para. 1. 
the priorities assigned to its activities and try to 
maintain a balance between short-term and longterm 
projects. The United Kingdom would make 
its full contribution to the 1973 Operational 
Budget but would consider the amount of its 1974 
voluntary contribution in the light of the 
performance of other Member States. 

5. As in previous years, the Government of the 
United Kingdom was ready to accept Agency 
fellows, and the Central Electricity Generating 
Board would again make available places at its 
nuclear power stations, 
6. It was cause for satisfaction that steady 
progress had been maintained in concluding safeguards 
agreements in connection with the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT) [2 ] with non-nuclear-weapon States. The 
Agency had taken the sensible initiative of setting 
up an office during the General Conference for 
the purpose of carrying forward such negotiations. 
A further significant milestone was the conclusion 
of the agreement between the Agency and the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), 
and it was to be hoped that the countries concerned 
would ratify NPT without delay. 
7. It was in order to encourage States to 
ratify NPT that Her Majesty's Government had 
offered, at such time as safeguards were put 
into effect in non-nuclear-weapon States in 
implementation of the Treaty, to submit its nuclear 
activities to Agency safeguards, with the 
exception of those affecting national security, 
8. The United Kingdom and EURATOM would 
consult in the course of the autumn on the system 
of control to be applied in the United Kingdom in 
the light of the provisions of the EURATOM 
Treaty. The United Kingdom would continue 
discussions with the Agency about its stated 
intention to accept Agency verification in the light 
ot its voluntary offer. The timing of the decision 
to put such verification into force in the United 
Kingdom must inevitably take account of progress 
in ratification and implementation of NPT by 
major non-nuclear-weapon States. In accepting 
the application of safeguards to its nuclear 
activities, the United Kingdom was demonstrating 
its strong support for the safeguards system and 
its concern to see the Treaty fully applied. 
9. The introduction of nuclear power in the 
United Kingdom had been motivated in part by a 
desire to reduce imports of hydrocarbon fuels. 
But the British nuclear power programme had 
always been directed towards economic generation 
of electricity. It was clear that the balance was 
swinging steadily in favour of nuclear power. In 
the United Kingdom, as in the rest of the world, 
there had been a constant increase in fossil fuel 
prices, and as the technical characteristics of 
nuclear stations were improved and their costs 
reduced, nuclear power would play an increasingly 
important role in meeting the United Kingdom's 
demand for energy. 
[2 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



10. Nuclear technology was in constant 
evolution, and the United Kingdom had been led 
to consider how its nuclear power resources could 
best be used to meet the needs of the future. 
Accordingly, the British Government, in close 
consultation with the United Kingdom Atomic 
Energy Authority and the nuclear industry, had 
examined both the present industrial structure and 
the reactor development programmes. 
11. The Government's review and the airing of 
opinion it had promoted had resulted in a clearer 
view of future aims, both on the national scene 
and internationally. The previous month, the 
British Government had officially expressed its 
confidence in the United Kingdom fast reactor 
system and had announced an expanded 
programme of engineering development. The 
experimental reactor at Dounreay had been 
operating most successfully since 1960; the 
250-MW fast reactor, also at Dounreay, was in 
its final stages of construction and should be 
completed by the end of the year and operational 
towards the end of 1973. The first commercial 
fast reactor was at present being designed. It 
would have an output in excess of 1000 MW(e), and 
construction would get under way as soon as 
sufficient operating experience had been obtained 
with the prototype. By around 1980 fast reactors 
would account for the major part of domestic 
plant orders. 
12. The Central Electricity Generating Board 
was expected to place another order for a thermal 
reactor at the end of 19V3. Meanwhile, work 
continued to optimize and further improve the 
advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR). The steamgenerating 
heavy-water reactor (SGHWR) was a 
strong contender for future orders, both before 
the introduction of fast reactors and subsequently, 
as a complementary system. Because of its 
flexibility of size, it could be expected to appeal 
to many countries. The British Government had 
therefore announced further support for the 
SGHWR project in view of the four years of 
successful operation of the 100-MW(e) prototype 
at Winfrith. Building upon experience of the 
growing interest in many countries in the hightemperature 
gas-cooled reactor (HTR), the 
United Kingdom hoped that future work on that 
system could be carried out as part of an 
international project. It would also keep a 
watching brief on light-water reactor developments. 
13. Against the background of problems arising 
from the increasing complexity and size of nuclear 
power stations, the British nuclear industry was 
in the process of consolidation into a single 
nuclear company which would pool the resources 
of the two existing companies and would be 
closely associated with the United Kingdom Atomic 
Energy Authority and British Nuclear Fuels, Ltd. 
14. The British Government was also about to 
set up a nuclear power board to bring together all 
parties with a major interest in nuclear power in 
order to provide the Government with concerted 
advice on all aspects of nuclear power policy. 
The nuclear industry had become increasingly 
GC(XVI)/OR. 153 

international and it was clear that the new company 
would be called upon to play its role in many 
international projects. 

15. British participation in international 
ventures relating to the nuclear fuel cycle was 
already well advanced. As far as the United 
Kingdom was concerned, the transport and 
chemical reprocessing of irradiated fuel and the 
enrichment of uranium were already being carried 
out on a multinational basis. Development by the 
United Kingdom of the centrifuge process for 
enrichment of uranium, carried out in conjunction 
with the Netherlands and the Federal Republic of 
Germany, was already well known and continued 
to make good progress. 
16. In short, the trends in the United Kingdom 
were the same as those observed in many 
countries. The changes which were being made 
were aimed at strengthening the nuclear industry 
to meet the increasing demands and to establish 
international links so that maximum benefit 
could be derived from progress in the new 
technology. 
17. Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) wished to extend 
his warm congratulations to the President on his 
election and assured him that the Australian 
delegation would give him every support in 
discharging the duties of his office. Under his 
leadership the sixteenth session of the Conference 
was certain to be crowned with success. He also 
wished to congratulate the Vice-Presidents. 
18. Although it was not the first time that the 
General Conference had been held outside Vienna, 
it was the first time that it was meeting in Mexico. 
Delegates owed a debt of gratitude to the 
President and the Government of Mexico for 
inviting the Conference to hold its session in that 
interesting and colourful city. The holding of a 
session at a place away from the Agency's 
Headquarters made considerable demands on both 
the Secretariat and the host country. His 
delegation was most grateful to all concerned for 
their help. 
19. In the past year, many developments had 
taken place in the field of nuclear energy, both in 
Australia and abroad. In so far as Australia was 
concerned, he wished to comment on a few points. 
First of all, prospecting for uranium in Australia 
had continued with marked success. It was 
estimated that the resources of uranium 
recoverable at less than US $10 per pound of 
U3O8 were about 92 000 tons. About 80% of those 
resources were located in the Alligator Rivers 
uranium field in the Northern Territory. Apart 
from that major field and other well-established 
ones in Queensland, the discovery of significant 
uranium mineralization over a large area in the 
northern part of Western Australia had been 
announced in the current year. Exploration was 
only in the preliminary stages, but the field 
appeared to be very promising. Other discoveries 
had been made near Lake Frome in South 
Australia. That deposit, which was sedimentary 
in nature, was currently being investigated. 
-3 



GC(XVI)/OR. 153 


Considering the size of the deposits already 
discovered and proved, together with other fields 
Which had not yet been fully investigated, it 
appeared that Australia should become one of the 
major uranium producers in the world. 

20. During the past year the Australian 
Government had decided to reconsider the nuclear 
power project proposed for Jervis Bay. Australia 
was not the only country to postpone nuclear 
power projects; it was in a position to do so 
because it possessed abundant high-grade coal 
reserves that were relatively cheap. Natural 
gas had also been discovered recently. The 
electricity companies had by no means lost 
interest in nuclear power and believed that it would 
come into its own in Australia within the coming 
10 or 15 years. 
21. As a producer of low-cost energy and 
uranium, his country naturally took a keen interest 
in initiatives aimed at meeting the world demand 
for enrichment services. It had been noted that 
several major enrichment plants would probably 
be built and put into operation outside the United 
States during the 1980s. His country had 
therefore been happy to have the opportunity of 
studying, during talks with the United States and 
French authorities, the technical and economic 
problems associated with setting up an enrichment 
plant in Australia. It was probable, however, that 
Australia would not need enriched uranium before 
1990, so any large-scale facility in the country 
would be available to meet the needs of overseas 
markets. Enrichment plants required, of 
necessity, major investments and had to be 
operated at maximum capacity if they were to be 
profitable. The start-up of new plants would have 
to be co-ordinated with production requirements, 
so that they could meet the demands of the moment; 
at the same time it would be desirable to ensure 
that the unused capacity was never too great. 
22. Another major event for Australia in the 
course of the past year had been the agreement 
for co-operation in nuclear energy signed with 
Japan. That agreement opened up the way for 
the closest co-operation between Australia and 
Japan, both at governmental and commercial 
level, in the peaceful use of atomic energy, and 
provided an official framework for future 
negotiations with a view to collaborating in 
specific areas of research and commerce. An 
agreement had also been concluded which would 
transfer to the Agency the application of 
safeguards under the bilateral arrangement. [3 ] 
23. Turning to the Agency's programme, he 
said that the Agency had continued to carry out 
its functions in the efficient way expected of it. 
24. The decision to broaden representation on 
the Board of Governors was commendable. The 
necessary amendment to Article VI. A-D of the 
Statute, which increased the size of the Board, 
had been ratified by a number of countries, 
[3 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/170. 
including Australia. It was to be hoped that other 
States would also take steps to ratify the amendment 
so that it could then be put into effect. 

25. It was generally recognized that the Agency 
was one of the most efficient organizations, if not 
the most efficient, in the United Nations family. 
That fact was a credit to the Director General and 
the Secretariat, and, at the same time, it brought 
out the need to ensure that the Agency's 
programme remained geared to the real problems 
of the atomic energy world. It seemed appropriate, 
on the occasion of the Conference's sixteenth 
session, to make a detailed study of the Agency's 
objectives and to establish new priorities in the 
light of the events of recent years. Indeed, it 
would not be realistic to expect the programmes 
and activities embarked on a few years earlier to 
be consonant with the problems of the present day. 
It was therefore heartening to note the Director 
General's comments stressing the need to seek 
new horizons relevant to the needs of the day. [4 ] 
Such an approach was to be welcomed. 
26. As behove it, the Agency had sought to 
fulfil its commitments under NPT and would 
henceforth be called upon to devote an increasing 
share of its resources to activities of that kind. 
27. Nuclear power production had become an 
established branch of industry and under those 
circumstances the Agency's role might easily 
become limited, through financial pressures, to 
safeguards activities and technical assistance. 
He agreed with the Director General that if 
Member States allowed that to happen they would 
be forfeiting the ways and means at the Agency's 
disposal to speed up and enhance the contribution 
of nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. His delegation considered, • 
in particular, that the Agency had an important 
part to play in ensuring that nuclear energy would 
not only not degrade the environment but would 
actually improve it by replacing less acceptable 
forms of power production. It was well qualified 
to deal with the fundamental aspects of 
environmental problems and, inasmuch as it was 
concerned with safety, was also in a position to 
offer appropriate solutions. 
28. The problem of the degradation of the 
environment transcended national barriers, hence 
there would have to be an effort directed towards 
international co-operation to promote the safety of 
nuclear reactors and to protect the environment; 
more particularly it was essential to ensure that 
radioactive waste was disposed of in ways 
protecting the interests of all. By concentrating 
its efforts on such problems the Agency could live 
up to its reputation as an organization that was 
contributing practically and constructively to the 
development of a responsible nuclear industry. 
29. His delegation believed that conditions might 
be favourable at the present time for a more 
effective utilization of technical assistance funds 
[4] See document GC(XVI)/OR. 152, paras 3-40. 
-4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 153 


which would allow the developing countries to 
benefit from the experience gained by other 
countries that had already embarked upon nuclear 
power programmes. The Director General's 
comments on that very important question were 
commendable. From personal experience he 
(Mr. Boswell) knew how useful a report on the 
various contractual arrangements available for 
constructing a nuclear power plant and on different 
ways of inviting tenders for reactors and assessing 
bids could be. 

30. One of the problems that certain countries 
had to tackle was to decide the best way in which 
to acquire the experience in nuclear matters 
necessary to enable them to make wise decisions 
when the time came to plan the installation of 
nuclear power plants. Australia had recently 
assisted the Government of Singapore, under the 
Colombo Plan, by acting in an advisory capacity 
in matters of that kind. There were numerous 
other ways of gearing technical assistance to 
activities that would be useful to several 
developing countries at the same time. 
31. During the Conference's session in 1971, 
his delegation had stated that action was needed 
to ensure that proven small- and medium-size 
power reactors were available to countries that 
needed them. [5 ] The major reactor manufacturers 
were now tending to design very large reactors 
suited to the needs of the most technologically 
advanced countries. For a long time to come, 
however, many States would still have grid 
systems that could only accommodate 100-500 MW 
reactors; hence it was important that reactors 
of that size should be readily available. In that 
context it was reassuring to note the action taken 
by the Director General, in conjunction with the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development and other financial institutions, and 
with Member States, for a world market survey of 
the demand for that type of reactor. [6 ] He looked 
forward to receiving the results of the study in 
due course. 
32. In conclusion he wished to state, on behalf 
of his delegation, how much he had appreciated 
the opportunity of serving on the Board of 
Governors under the chairmanship of 
Baron van Boetzelaer, whose skill and tolerance 
had promoted the success of the Board's work 
during the past year. He had also enjoyed serving 
as Vice-President of the Conference under 
Professor Otero Navascues, President of the 
fifteenth regular session. 
33. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said he would first like to congratulate 
the President on his election and to express his 
appreciation to the Mexican Government for the 
hospitality he had been accorded. For the first 
time in the Agency's history the General 
Conference was meeting in Latin America, in a 
country that took an active part in its deliberations 
[5] See document GC(XV)/OR. 146, para. 19. 
[6] See document GC(XVI)/OR. 152, para. 18. 
and contributed extensively to the reinforcement 
of international security. That fact was a 
reflection of the unflagging attention given by the 
Agency to the problems involved in the utilization 
of nuclear energy in the countries of Africa, Asia 
and Latin America. 

34. More than 15 years had passed since the 
Agency had been established. During that time 
the Agency's international authority, the part it 
played in organizing international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, and the scope 
of its efforts to that end, had been considerably 
enhanced. At the same time, the number of 
Member States had been greatly increased, first 
and foremost through the membership of new 
developing countries. 
35. The present session of the General 
Conference was characterized by a distinct 
reduction in international tension and by greater 
mutual trust. That development indicated that 
the principle of peaceful coexistence between 
countries with different social systems was 
becoming more and more widely accepted. A 
major contribution towards improving the 
international political climate had been made by 
the agreements recently concluded between the 
Soviet Union and the United States of America, 
namely the agreement on the limitation of antimissile 
defence systems and the provisional 
agreement on various measures aimed at 
limiting offensive strategic weapons. Those 
agreements played a major part in banishing the 
threat of nuclear war, slowing down the arms 
race, and opening up new prospects for general 
and complete disarmament. Their conclusion 
was clear evidence of the fact that the Soviet 
Union intended to fulfil the obligations devolving 
upon it under Article VI of NPT. 
36. The desire of States to work together to 
settle international disputes by peaceful means 
created favourable conditions for the application 
of additional measures to strengthen world peace, 
consolidate international security, and eliminate 
sources of tension. All that could not fail to 
stimulate the fruitful activities of the Agency, 
which was called upon to place the achievements 
of nuclear science and technology at the service 
of peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world. 
37. A few days before, the Government of the 
Soviet Union had undertaken a new initiative 
within the United Nations by proposing an urgent 
study of the problem of the use of force in 
international relations, and the permanent banning 
of nuclear weapons. If that problem was to be 
solved, all countries would have to renounce 
categorically the use of force, particularly nuclear 
weapons. There was no doubt that the Agency 
could and should contribute to the attainment of 
such an aim. 
38. The Soviet Union attached great importance 
to NPT, the conclusion of which would help to 
create favourable conditions for solving other 
disarmament problems. NPT would also enable 
-5 



GC(XVI)/OR. 153 

non-nuclear States party to it to benefit broadly 
from the advantages offered by the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. It was for that reason that 
NPT had been so widely accepted. At the present 
time, almost 100 States had signed it and another 
71 had already ratified it, a fact that was 
evidence of the vitality and validity of that 
important international instrument. The States 
which had not yet adhered to NPT should not delay 
in doing so. An increased number of States party 
to NPT would further the interests of international 
peace and security. 

39. The Soviet delegation had had frequent 
occasion to stress that the conclusion of NPT and 
the assignment to the Agency of the safeguards 
activities envisaged in it had increased the 
Agency's authority and responsibility on the 
international scene. At the present time 33 nonnuclear-
weapon States had completed their 
negotiations with the Agency and almost as many 
were actively engaged in such negotiations. He 
was gratified to see that all the socialist States 
party to NPT had already concluded the negotiation 
of safeguards agreements and that the latter had 
been approved by the Board of Governors. 
40. It was a very important fact that, on the 
eve of the opening of the current session of the 
General Conference, the Board had approved a 
safeguards agreement with the five non-nuclearweapon 
States that were members of EURATOM, 
namely Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, 
Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. It was 
to be hoped that those States would soon ratify 
NPT, and that Japan and other States would follow 
suit. It was also heartening that the Board had 
approved the safeguards agreement between the 
Agency and Mexico, a country which had always 
attached great importance to the application of 
nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes. 
Other countries, not only in Latin America but also 
in other parts of the globe, would do well to follow 
that example. 
41. The Secretariat and the Director General 
had played an active part in the conclusion of the 
safeguards agreements in connection with NPT, 
and were constantly striving to improve upon 
safeguards techniques. His Government supported 
the suggestion that, whenever necessary, the 
Secretariat should send representatives to the 
countries concerned to negotiate safeguards 
agreements on the spot. The Agency could 
discharge its functions much more efficiently if 
the principle of universality, one of the most 
important tenets in the activities of any 
international organization, were systematically 
applied. Under the terms of the Statute, all 
States subscribing to the objectives of the Agency 
and willing to fulfil their obligations should enjoy 
an opportunity of taking part in its work. 
42. He was happy to see that the General 
Conference had approved the new Republic of 
Bangladesh for membership of the Agency, [7 ] 
since that decision would help to strengthen 
international co-operation in the peaceful use of 
atomic energy and to cement the Agency's ties 
with all the countries of the world. The Agency's 
task would also be facilitated if the German 
Democratic Republic could take part in its 
activities. The German Democratic Republic, 
which counted as one of the most highly developed 

countries of the world and had to its credit 
major achievements in the peaceful use of atomic 
energy, was eminently suited for membership of 
the Agency with all the rights accruing therefrom. 
As one of the first countries to conclude a 
safeguards agreement in connection with NPT, it 
was actively assisting in implementing that Treaty. 
The matter of membership should be settled 
without delay, 

43. His delegation endorsed the favourable 
response that had been evoked by the Agency's 
programme for 1973-78 [8 ]. It provided for 
activities in almost all aspects of the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy of interest to both advanced and 
developing countries. Taken all round, it 
appeared to be adequately balanced and in keeping 
with the interests of States Members of the Agency. 
Finally, it took into consideration such pressing 
problems as protection of the environment, nuclear 
power development, including the technology of 
reactors and nuclear power stations, thermonuclear 
reactor design, and improvement in safeguards 
techniques. It provided for a further extension 
and improvement of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), which had been 
operating satisfactorily for several years and 
had promoted international collaboration in the 
exchange of scientific information. 

44. It was important for the Agency to take a 
more active part in dealing with the problems 
connected with protecting man and his 
environment against the harmful effects of nuclear 
radiation and the various pollutants discharged by 
industry. In the Soviet Union a great deal of 
importance was attached to that matter. At a 
recent session, the Supreme Soviet had taken 
steps to improve the protection of nature and to 
utilize natural resources more rationally. The 
world's biosphere was an indivisible whole, and 
international co-operation was therefore of 
particular importance. As Mr. L. I. Brezhnev 
had pointed out at the XXIV Congress of the Soviet 
Communist Party the Soviet Union was willing to 
take part in joint international action for the 
protection of nature and more rational exploitation 
of natural resources. 
45. As a multinational country, the Soviet 
Union was following with interest the progress made 
by the countries of Africa, Asia and Latin 
America in the social and economic spheres. 
During the 50 years of its existence, the Soviet 
Union had afforded each of its constituent 
Republics an opportunity to develop industrially 
and agriculturally and to attain a high cultural 
level. Evidence of their economic advance was the 
fact that they employed the latest achievements of 
science and technology, particularly in the field 
[7] By Resolution GC(XVI)/RES/287. [8] GC(XVI)/485. 

GC(XVI)/OR. 153 


of nuclear energy. They almost all possessed 
their own large nuclear study centres, equipped 
with such up-to-date facilities as research 
reactors, accelerators, powerful radioisotope 
irradiators, and modern nuclear physics 
equipment. 

46. New scientific institutes had been set up 
with locally trained staffs. In activation analysis, 
for example, a leading part was played by 
scientists from Georgia, Lithuania, Kazakhstan 
and Uzbekistan. The Uzbek radiochemistry 
school was well known both in the Soviet Union 
and abroad. Reactor technology had exhibited a 
new trend in Byelorussia, and the Nuclear Energy 
Institute there had begun studies on dissociating 
gas reactors. Active research was being 
conducted at Ukrainian nuclear centres in the 
fields of plasma physics and controlled nuclear 
fusion, high-energy physics, solid-state physics 
and reactor materials. The work of Moldavian 
specialists in the application of radioisotopes in 
agricultural studies was well known. 
47. In addition to the development of nuclear 
power within the Russian Soviet Federated 
Socialist Republic, nuclear power stations had been 
set up in Armenia, Kazakhstan and the Ukraine. 
The various Republics would henceforth possess a 
solid industrial basis for producing equipment, 
instruments and nuclear facilities. 
48. Mention should also be made of several 
particularly important achievements in nuclear 
physics. With the aid of the accelerator at 
Serpukhov it had been possible to establish new 
laws governing the interaction of nucleons and 
mesons. A joint project implemented by the 
High-Energy Physics Institute and the European 
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) had 
made it possible to determine, with great accuracy, 
an effect involving the formation of boson 
resonances that was of importance for the 
formulation of the elementary particle theory. In 
the convergent beam facilities at Novosibirsk the 
formation had been observed of two electronpositron 
pairs during collision between an 
electron and a positron. The electron accelerator 
at Erevan had been used for research in which it 
had proved possible to elucidate the nature of the 
charge distribution in the proton and to determine 
its dimensions more exactly. 
49. The experimental base for nuclear physics 
had continued to expand. The Serpukhov 
cyclotron had made it possible to double the mean 
intensity of the proton beam. The accelerator 
had been used to produce an electron beam 
(through disintegration of n-mesons) with an 
intensity of the order of 10^ electrons per cycle; 
as a result one could study several electromagnetic 
effects for energies considerably higher 
than those attainable in the most powerful electron 
accelerators in the world. 
50. Interesting results had been obtained in the 
field of high-temperature plasma physics. 
Soviet experts had continued to play a leading 
part in studies on prolonged plasma containment 
in Tokamak devices. During the past year, they 
had not only improved the plasma parameters in 
the most powerful device of that type at the 
Kurchatov Atomic Energy Institute, but had also 

engaged in studies aimed at designing new models 

of Tokamak installations and developing new 
techniques for heating the plasma. According to 
preliminary calculations, a change of an original 
nature in the magnetic field might make it possible 
to increase the present parameters of the plasma 

several times over, and to take a new step 
towards solving the problem of nuclear fusion. 

51. Nuclear power had continued to develop in 
the Soviet Union, just as in a number of other 
socialist countries. The fourth unit of the 
Novovoronezh power station, with a capacity of 
440 MW(e), would be started up in 1972, thereby 
raising the total capacity of the power station to 
1. 5 million kilowatts. In addition to the 
facilities already mentioned the Leningrad power 
station, which was to be equipped with two 
channel-type reactors and have an overall 
electrical capacity of 2 million kilowatts, would 
be put Into commission within the next few years. 
Several other nuclear power stations, for example 
those at Kola, Kursk and Smolensk, were in 
process of construction. 
52. Action had been taken to step up co-operation 
and integration among socialist countries in the 
field of science and technology. The Soviet 
Union was providing technical assistance for the 
construction of nuclear power stations in member 
countries of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (COMECON). Under its overall 
programme, COMECON had set up an autonomous 
international scientific company called 
"interatominstrument", responsible for meeting 
the needs of participating countries in nuclear 
instruments and devices. Another step towards 
implementation of the overall COMECON 
programme had been the establishment of an 
international scientific group to take charge of 
research in the physics of power reactors. 
Faithfully pursuing a policy of assistance to the 
countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America, the 
Soviet Union was providing aid to several 
countries on a bilateral basis as well as through 
the intermediary of international organizations, 
including the Agency. 
53. In conformity with its commitments under 
NPT, the Soviet Union contributed regularly to 
the financing of the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. Its voluntary contribution for 1972, 
which had been increased to 250 000 roubles, was 
being sensibly spent on the provision of 
equipment, instrumentation and materials for 
developing countries and on study tours in the 
Soviet Union for the benefit of the nationals of such 
countries. In 1972, two study tours had been 
arranged, with the participation of over 
60 specialists from developing countries. 

54. His delegation was authorized to announce 
that the Soviet Government had decided to raise 
its voluntary contribution to the Agency's General 
Fund to 350 000 roubles in national currency. 
-7 



GC(XVI)/OR.153 

The money could be used to provide equipment, 
instruments and materials of Soviet manufacture 
and for organizing scientific meetings in the 
Soviet Union. 

55. In conclusion, he wished to stress once 
again that the Soviet Union continued to advocate 
the intensive development of international 
co-operation in the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes, in conformity with the 
purposes and principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations, the Agency's Statute and NPT. 
The Agency's work in that sphere was of great 
importance for the preservation of international 
peace and security. It was to be hoped that the 
current session of the General Conference would 
represent a positive contribution to international 
co-operation in the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
56. Mr. KATO (Japan) congratulated the 
President and expressed his gratitude to the 
Government of Mexico which had welcomed the 
sixteenth session of the General Conference with 
such generosity and cordiality. He wished 
especially to stress the excellent relations his 
country enjoyed with Mexico and all the other 
Latin American countries. 
57. With the expansion of the world economy, 
the importance of atomic energy in the earth's 
total energy resources had also increased. That 
trend was particularly noticeable in Japan, which 
possessed scarce natural resources and was 
obliged to use atomic energy to support its 
industry. Thus, last June the Japanese Atomic 
Energy Commission had announced a long-term 
programme for the development and utilization 
of atomic energy. Under that programme a 
nuclear power capacity of about 60 000 MW would 
be attained by 1985 and about 100 000 MW by 1990, 
as compared with the present capacity of about 
2000 MW. That goal could be reached by the 
development of advanced thermal reactors and 
fast breeder reactors. 

58. Regarding nuclear materials requirements, 
Japan had to prospect for and work uranium 
deposits abroad in close co-operation with 
supplying countries. The Government had 
conducted feasibility studies on the joint 
construction of uranium enrichment plants and, 
in view of the supply of and demand for enriched 
uranium and the time when the facilities would be 
needed, it was expected that the Japanese 
Government would decide on such joint ventures 
in 1973 at the latest. The first nuclear ship to 
come from a Japanese shipyard had been 
completed in August 1972 and trials were in 
progress with a view to the vessel sailing on its 
maiden voyage in April 1973. 
59. Japan was co-operating closely with the 
Agency in the promotion of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and had concluded agreements 
with five countries involving the application of 
Agency safeguards, with the result that 
practically all nuclear materials in Japan were 
subject to those safeguards. Japan had 
established its own control and accounting system 
for nuclear materials and had thus facilitated the 
Agency's work. 

60. The rapid progress in science and 
technology and in economic development posed a 
problem of unprecedented gravity: how to protect 
the environment from industrial and other forms 
of pollution. In order to achieve maximum 
utilization of atomic energy without threatening 
the environment, it was essential first to solve 
such vital questions as safety in all nuclear 
facilities and the handling and disposal of 
radioactive wastes. In that respect the Agency 
deserved praise for its important contribution to 
the solution of thos problems; it could likewise 
provide assistance in solving the question of 
disposal of radioactive wastes into the sea. 
61. The days had passed when atomic energy 
had been of interest to only a limited number of 
countries. The Agency's technical assistance 
to developing countries had fortunately become 
more important. In that regard, the Government 
of Japan, subject to the approval of the Diet, 
would make a voluntary contribution for 1973 
consisting of an amount proportional to its 
assessed contribution, which had ranked fifth in 
size since 1969. Japan had also hosted a training 
course on radioactive waste management and 
another course for Asian countries on nuclear 
power generation, and had accepted Agency 
fellows. It also intended to participate in the 
Agency's market survey for nuclear power plants 
in developing countries, 
62. An event of great importance had been the 
Board's approval, the preceding week, of the NPT 
safeguards agreement between the Agency, the 
non-nuclear-weapon States Members of EURATOM, 
and EURATOM. It would be the first time that 
those States accepted the Agency's independent 
safeguards, thus contributing greatly to the 
evolution of the international safeguards system. 
Nevertheless, the Japanese delegation had pointed 
out during a Board meeting that its Government 
thought that certain provisions of that agreement 
needed careful study; it continued to believe 
that a technical committee should be established 
by the Agency to ensure "general, objective and 
uniform" interpretation and implementation of 
NPT safeguards agreements concluded between 
the Agency and individual States or between the 
Agency and a group of States. 

63. The Japanese Government was firmly 
convinced - assuming the EURATOM agreement 
to have been drafted on the basis of the model 
agreement - that the content and substance of the 
EURATOM agreement should also be applicable 
to any NPT safeguards agreement to be concluded 
between the Agency and an individual State or a 
group of States. Japan had therefore made a 
general reservation in that respect in view of the 
significant bearing which the EURATOM agreement 
would have on the preparatory talks initiated last 
June between the Agency and Japan in connection 
with an NPT safeguards agreement. 
64. EURATOM was at present composed of 
five non-nuclear-weapon States and one nuclear

GC(XVI)/OR. 153 


weapon State which was distinguished from the 
others in terms of the rights and obligations under 
NPT. The Japanese Government was interested 
in knowing what new implications would emerge, 
for the whole system of the Agency's safeguards 
in connection with NPT, when those safeguards 
were applied to an entity such as EURATOM. It 
also wished to know what practical implications 
in the context of NPT would ensue from the 
voluntary offers made by nuclear-weapon States 
to submit their peaceful nuclear activities to 
Agency safeguards. 

65. The Agency could also contribute to 
disarmament if enriched uranium intended for 
military purposes could be made available for 
peaceful uses through the medium of the Agency. 
According to a paper presented at the Fourth 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy held in Geneva in September 1971, 
there would be a world-wide shortage of enriched 
uranium and a slowing down in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy unless new enrichment plants 
were established before 1982. The release for 
peaceful uses of enriched uranium stockpiled for 
military uses would not only ease international 
tension but would also partly alleviate the 
shortage of enriched uranium. 
66. The Agency's role had become increasingly 
onerous and its activities more diversified. 
Therefore, it would do well to modify its structure 
to ensure adequate freedom of action. The 
Japanese delegation hoped that the amendment to 
Article VI.A-D of the Statute would obtain a 
sufficient number of ratifications for it to come 
into force at the earliest possible date. 
67. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) was gratified at the choice of Mexico 
City as the venue of the General Conference 
session, and on behalf of his delegation thanked 
the Mexican Government for its generous 
invitation. 
68. Safeguards, in view of their political 
significance, were of particular importance to the 
Federal Republic of Germany. Since the last 
session of the General Conference his Government 
had participated actively in the negotiations for a 
verification agreement in connection with NPT 
between EURATOM, Belgium, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, the 
Netherlands and the Agency. He recalled that the 
Federal Republic of Germany and the other participating 
States Members of EURATOM had 
undertaken not to ratify NPT before the conclusion 
of such an agreement. Its approval by the Board 
of Governors and by the Council of Ministers of 
the European Communities would enable the 
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany 
to sign the agreement and to submit it, together 
with NPT, to Parliament for approval. The new 
agreement was all the more important by virtue of 
the fact that there were 19 nuclear power plants 
and many other nuclear installations in operation 
in the five EURATOM countries, whereas thus far 
there had been only seven nuclear power stations 
subject to NPT safeguards in the entire world. 
The agreement would thus establish close 
co-operation in the field of safeguards between 
the Agency and EURATOM, as a result of which 
the purposes of NPT could be fulfilled without 
impairing the interests of the European 
Communities and with the avoidance of duplication 
of safeguards and of waste of the Agency's 
resources. 

69. The Government of the Federal Republic of 
Germany was confident that the countries which 
had waited to see the outcome of the negotiations 
between the Agency and EURATOM would also 
become party to a safeguards agreement. 
Moreover, it hoped for the early conclusion of the 
negotiations between the Agency and the nuclearweapon 
States which had voluntarily agreed to 
apply Agency safeguards to the use of atomic 
energy in their industrial activities, as that would 
play an important role when the Parliament 
considered the agreement and NPT. 
70. With the growth of nuclear commerce and 
industry, the safeguards provisions regarding 
export operations were gaining increasing 
significance. However, they should not be allowed 
to distort international trade through the 
application of practices that were at variance 
with one another. The Government of the 
Federal Republic of Germany hoped that a 
consensus could be reached on the scope and 
modalities of application of safeguards in such 
cases. 
71. Referring to safeguards techniques proper, 
he recalled that the Federal Republic of Germany 
had for many years sought to perfect the 
procedures for their application. The results 
obtained to date had already contributed 
decisively to the effectiveness of safeguards and 
to a reduction in their cost. With the rapid 
extension of safeguards it would be important to 
continue work in that direction. 
72. Turning to the activities of the Federal 
Republic of Germany within the Agency's field of 
interest, he said that his country was about to 
begin its fourth atomic energy programme, for 
the years 1973-1976. The production of nuclear 
power was about to become a profitable sector of 
the national economy: 22 nuclear power plants 
with a total output of 11 000 MW(e) were operating, 
under construction or on order. According to 
forecasts, the total power output by 1980 should 
be 25 000 MW(e), which would be equivalent to 
one third of the total production of electricity in 
the country. Almost all the plants used lightwater 
reactors which were able to compete with 
conventional power plants. Several orders for 
plants had already been received from abroad. 
73. Research would be continued on advanced 
reactors, i. e. the high-temperature reactor and 
the sodium-cooled fast breeder. Particular 
emphasis would be placed on uranium enrichment 
and the treatment and disposal of radioactive 
waste. In the light of progress to date, there 
was no doubt that private industry in the Federal 
Republic of Germany would be able to carry out an 
increasing share of the future development. 
9 



GC(XVI)/OR. 153 

74. Furthermore, the Federal Republic of 
Germany intended to promote international 
co-operation by Governments and private industry, 
and particularly to co-operate more closely with 
its European neighbours, taking into account that 
all large Government-supported projects were 
already carried out jointly with foreign partners. 
Research on safety would also be intensified, 
since the responsibility for safety was devolving 
to an increasing extent on the Governments of 
industrial countries, in addition to their promoting 
role. 
75. With regard to the Agency's programme for 
1973-78, he considered the list of priorities to 
have been satisfactorily established. The 
programme appeared to be well balanced and 
deserved approval. 
76. The draft budget for 1973 provided for 
stabilization of the number of staff posts and an 
increase in expenditure of 8. 8%. That seemed to 
be a reasonable increase in view of the general 
rise of prices; thus, the delegation of the 
Federal Republic of Germany was prepared to 
accept the budget. Nevertheless, it wished to 
make a few remarks on the subject. Seventy-five 
per cent of the Agency's funds were applied to 
staff and administration, leaving only a limited 
margin for operational activities. Special 
priorities had to be established even for areas of 
recognized importance and the Secretariat should 
continue its efforts to co-ordinate the Agency's 
activities with those of other international 
institutions in order to make optimum use of the 
limited resources available. The Agency's draft 
programme indicated that contacts existed or would 
be established with EURATOM not only in the field 
of safeguards but also in many other sectors. In 
view of the importance of EURATOM's activities, 
the time had come to conclude a relationship 
agreement with that organization. 
77. Radiological protection had not been one of 
the principal subjects discussed at the Stockholm 
Conference but the Agency rightly considered it 
an important question and the budget accordingly 
provided for a 20% increase in expenditure for 
nuclear safety and environmental protection. 
78. The development of nuclear energy depended 
closely on the training of scientists and 
technicians. Priority should therefore be given 
to encouraging experts in developing countries to 
carry out work which had a practical application. 
It would be in the interest of such countries to use 
those nuclear techniques which could directly 
contribute to the improvement of living conditions. 
Isotopes and radiation techniques were already 
being applied in many practical ways at 
relatively low cost. Nuclear plants could also 
provide great advantages for developing countries 
once certain questions, relating mainly to the 
size of the facilities and the investment required, 
had been solved. Thus, industrial countries 
should promote the development of new techniques 
which were needed specifically by developing 
countries. 
79. The Federal Republic considered that 
technical assistance should continue to be one of 
the main tasks of the Agency, and was prepared 
to contribute about $200 000 to the General Fund 
for 1973, a proportion of the target corresponding 
to its share of the assessed budget. It was to be 
observed, however, that such payments gave only 
an incomplete picture of the voluntary contributions 
of certain Member States. The Federal Republic 
had, for example, provided training cost-free for 
50 Agency fellows in 1971. In the same year it had 
sent 32 experts to other Member States, three 
times more than in preceding years, and intended 
to continue along those lines. The Federal 
Republic had donated a training reactor to the 
National University of Mexico and would supply a 
gamma irradiation plant to Peru to control 
harmful insects. The IAEA/FAO/Federal Republic 
of Germany Joint Programme to improve the 
protein content of certain plants had been 
initiated in 1971 and the Federal Republic would 
contribute approximately $ 1 million for it over a 
period of five years. It had also provided experts 
and financial aid for the Agency's market survey 
study relating to nuclear power stations in 
developing countries. Altogether the Federal 
Republic had contributed approximately $500 000, 
more than 14% of the total volume of voluntary 
contributions in cash and in kind, which gave it 
second place among contributing countries. 
80. The amendment to Article VI of the Statute 
would enable developing Member States to be more 
broadly represented on the Board and would allow 
several industrial countries that were actively 
collaborating with the Agency to serve on the 
Board. The Federal Republic was among them, 
and wished to have an appropriate voice in the 
Agency's governing bodies. It therefore urged 
Member States which had not yet done so to accept 
that amendment at the earliest date, in order to 
adapt the Agency's structure to present-day 
requirements and ensure that its successful work 
would continue. 
81. Mr. OGULANA (Nigeria) joined with other 
delegates in expressing his appreciation of the 
hospitality offered by the Mexican Government and 
people to the participants in the sixteenth regular 
session of the General Conference. The choice 
of Mexico City showed that the Agency was 
increasingly directing its attention to the 
advantages the Third World could derive from 
nuclear technology. 
82. The Agency was judiciously planning its 
future activities and had taken a wise initiative in 
conducting the market survey relating to power 
reactors for selected developing countries with 
the aim of determining the potential role of nuclear 
power in those countries. 
83. However, his delegation noted with concern 
that the Agency's overall programme was 
diminishing; the situation with regard to technical 
assistance was particularly serious since the 
present target of $3 million, if met, would have 
a purchasing power in 1972 equal to $2 million in 
1962 (the target set for that year). Also of great 
- 10 



GC(XVI)/OR. 153 


concern was the decline in expenditure under the 
Regular Budget on promotional activities such as 
food and agriculture, life sciences and physical 
sciences. 

84. The Nigerian delegation hoped the more 
advanced countries would augment their voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund so as to assist 
the Agency in providing appropriate technical 
assistance to developing countries, an obligation 
which constituted one raison d'etre of the Agency. 
85. The process of industrialization was 
complex and the development of nuclear industry 
was the most difficult aspect of it; however, no 
country could afford to ignore that process. The 
solution lay not in transferring technology but 
rather in establishing at the local level the 
competence necessary for the application of nuclear 
technology. In order to accomplish that it would 
be necessary to implement a research and 
development programme and make periodic 
technological forecasts. Although in the first 
stages technological knowledge would have to be 
imported and adopted, the research programme 
should always aim at replacing importation and 
establishing a creative scientific infrastructure. 
Such a method of technological development 
would also enable the country concerned to 
identify its needs and better absorb external aid. 

86. With regard to technical assistance provided 
by the Agency in the field of nuclear power, it 
would be preferable for the receiving country to 
determine its own needs, satisfy a portion of 
them itself and approach the Agency for the rest. 
Only through that approach would mankind avoid 
the situation described by the President of 
Mexico at the opening of the session in the 
following terms: "The exclusive enjoyment of the 
fruits of scientific progress by those countries 
which have attained the highest level of industrial 
development would be at variance with the 
universality of human culture. " [9 ] 
87. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 
congratulated the President on his election and 
was pleased to note that Mexico had done its 
utmost to provide all the participants with the 
facilities necessary for the proper performance 
of their work. On behalf of his delegation he 
thanked the Mexican Government for its warm 
and friendly hospitality. 
88. At the present session the General 
Conference had before it a particularly important 
document - GC(XVI)/485 - which presented the 
Agency's programme for 1973-78 and budget for 
1973. It was a carefully prepared document and 
was certainly most welcome inasmuch as it gave 
Governments interested in the Agency's activities 
an accurate idea of the general lines of work 
which the Agency proposed to undertake in order 
to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
89. Although the Secretariat deserved much 
praise for the work it had produced, the 
[9] GC(XVI)/OR. 151, para. 23. 
document nevertheless reflected certain 
management policies which could not be endorsed 
by his delegation. 

90. He would mention only the example of 
technical assistance. Under the programme 
established by the Secretariat the cost of 
technical assistance would continue to be covered 
almost exclusively from the voluntary contributions 
of Member States (Operating Fund II). [10 ] 
However, the Agency had rarely achieved the 
targets it had set for voluntary contributions to 
the General Fund. 
91. As a matter of fact, the Agency itself 
estimated that the present target of $3 million 
would be met only to the extent of 80%. That 
situation, coupled with monetary devaluation, 
meant that only 40% of the demand for experts and 
material could be satisfied. 
92. The situation was most likely to worsen. 
Indeed, several countries had informed the Agency 
that they did not intend to increase their 
contributions in the future, and some countries 
had even announced appreciable reductions in the 
payment of their shares. 
93. The technical assistance provided by the 
Agency would thus continue to diminish year by 
year, unless it was decided to augment 
significantly the proportion paid for from the 
Regular Budget. 
94. Between 1958 and the end of 1971 the Agency 
had provided technical assistance, financed from 
its own and other resources, whose value was 
estimated at more than $39 million. Of that 
amount $29 million had been devoted to experts' 
services and fellowships, and $10 million -a 
quarter of the total - to the provision of technical 
equipment. 
95. Now that nuclear power was coming of age 
in most developing countries, his delegation felt 
that the proportion of assistance in the form of 
equipment should be increased and assume 
preponderance. The Agency should, first and 
foremost, provide equipment designed to enable 
the research workers who had been trained 
during the past decade to get on with their work. 
Moreover, the budgetary distinction between 
"experts" and "equipment" should be eliminated. 
Every country should be able, if- it so desired, to 
switch from the provision of an expert to the 
supply of equipment. 
96. With regard to other Agency programmes, 
his delegation would like to see the Agency 
encourage, a bit more than in the past, the 
preparation of summaries of the results obtained 
from the use of isotopes and radiations in various 
scientific and technological areas. 
97. In the period from 1958 to 1971 the Agency 
had concerned itself only marginally with research 
of special interest to Africa; it had not, for 
[10] GC(XVI)/485, Table V. 3.1. 
- 11 



GC(XVI)/OR. 153 

example, organized a single symposium in 
Africa on matters of particular concern to 
African countries. It was time for that gap to be 
filled. In food and agriculture, for instance, the 
Agency could play a decisive role in the 

economies of African States if it decided to 
encourage research on African varieties of plants, 
insects and food products. 

98. With regard to other items of interest to the 
General Conference, his delegation was pleased to 
note that negotiations for safeguards agreements 
with Member States in connection with NPT were 
progressing satisfactorily. 
99. A less satisfactory matter was the 
ratification of the amendment to Article VI, A-D 
of the Statute, approved by the General Conference 
two years ago. The Members that had accepted 
that amendment were still relatively few, and the 
Agency would do well to undertake a campaign 
designed to obtain the number of acceptances 
necessary so that the new version of Article VI 
could be brought into force in September 1973. 
100. In 1972 Zaire had completed the construction 
of a TRIGA Mark II reactor with a nominal power 
of 1 MW, capable of pulses up to about 1600 MW. 
Several friendly countries had contributed 
financially to that project, especially the United 
States and Belgium, and he wished to express his 
gratitude to them. 
101. In conclusion, he drew the attention of the 
Conference to the problem of civil liability and 
other questions of responsibility in the event of 
nuclear accidents. So far the Vienna Convention 
on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage [11 ] had not 
yet come into force for lack of a sufficient number 
of ratifications. The Agency should undertake 
large-scale action in that area in order not to 
compromise seriously the progress of nuclear 
energy in developing countries. The Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 
could perhaps permit non-member States to 
adhere to the Paris Convention on Third-Party 
Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy, which 
had the advantage of being applied in a particularly 
dynamic manner. 
• The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m. 
[11 ] Reproduced in Legal Series No. 2 
(STI/PUB/54). 
- 12 



GC(XVI)/OR.154 
16 April 1973* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Thursday, 28 September 1972, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 
later: Mr. BERLIS (Canada) 


Item 

of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

9 
General debate and 1 -143 
report for 1971-72 
(continued) 

Statements by the 
delegates of: 

France 1 -16 
Iran 17 -32 
Republic of Korea 33 -38 
Belgium 39 -55 
Thailand 56 -63 
Holy See 64 -72 
Greece 73 -85 
Pakistan 86 -102 
Argentina 103 -119 
Poland 120 -131 
Colombia 132 -143 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 2 October 1972. 
** GC(XVI)/490. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC(XVI)/OR. 154 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1971-72 
(GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr.l and 3, 488) (continued) 

1. Mr. GIRAUD (France) expressed his 
satisfaction that the General Conference should be 
holding its sixteenth regular session in Mexico, 
and echoed previous delegates' gratitude to the 
Mexican Government for its hospitality in 
extending the invitation. 
2. Before proceeding to a review of various 
aspects of the Agency's work during the past year, 
he wished to pay tribute to the memory of the late 
Dr. Nabor Carrillo Flores, whose scientific 
achievements in nuclear matters in Mexico, 
particularly in water desalination, were well known, 
and to that of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai, whose 
scientific brilliance and high personal qualities 
in presiding over an earlier session of the 
Conference had stood the Agency in such good 
stead. 
3. In the French delegation's view, technical 
assistance continued to represent a vital Agency 
activity, and additional emphasis on projects 
aimed at yielding immediate advantages to the 
receiving countries was desirable. Hence more 
attention should be paid to expert missions on 
radioisotope applications, market surveys and so 
on, rather than to long-term basic research 
projects. 
4. That was the light in which his delegation 
viewed the market survey at present under way in 
a number of countries aimed at the construction 
of small- and medium-power reactors, a policy 
which seemed to be most promising. 
5. In 1972 France was assisting the Agency by 
making high-grade experts available for 
important missions and by welcoming 80 Agency 
fellows at French nuclear centres. His delegation 
was likewise happy to announce an increase in the 
French voluntary contribution, subject to the 
normal parliamentary ratification procedure. 
6. At a time when problems of the environment 
were so much in the limelight, it was his belief 
that the Agency had an important part to play both 
in establishing safety standards and as a scientific 
referee in the eyes of an anxious public. 
7. The past year had also witnessed the 
launching of the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS), which had been prepared by 
experts from Member States and which had 
enjoyed the full support of France since its 
inception. His Government likewise intended to 
lend its support to the international project for 
irradiation of foodstuffs in progress at Karlsruhe, 
in the firm belief that the project would yield 
substantial and immediate benefits to the 
developing countries, 
8. The increase in membership of the Agency 
justified the expansion of the Board of Governors 
embodied in the amendment to Article VI.A-D of 
the Statute approved in 1970, [1 ] and it was to be 
regretted that slow acceptance by Member States 
professedly in favour of the amendment was 
delaying its entry into force. 

9. His Government had never been opposed to 
the Agency's statutory responsibility regarding 
implementation of the system of safeguards, a 
responsibility which had now become even more 
onerous with the entry into force of the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT)[2]. However, it was vital that the 
Agency's other activities - notably technical 
assistance in all its forms - should not suffer as 
a result, and that there should be no discrimination 
as regards the award of fellowships or 
participation in scientific meetings against States 
which had submitted fewer of their nuclear 
facilities to the Agency's control than had others. 

10. The remarks he had just made implied no 
lack of confidence in the Agency's safeguards 
system, and France had indeed recently arranged 
to entrust to the Agency the application of the 
safeguards envisaged under a bilateral agreement 
between his Government and Japan on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. The relevant safeguards 
agreement with the Agency [3 ] had been approved 
by the Board of Governors on 21 June 197 2 and 
had come into force on 22 September following its 
signature, in Mexico City, by the three parties 
thereto, 
11. His delegation was also gratified at the 
outcome of the recently completed negotiations 
between the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM) and the Agency. The agreement was 
between the two international organizations with 
control responsibilities and the States which, 
under NPT, had undertaken to submit nuclear 
materials on their territories to control. As was 
right and proper the agreement implied, on the 
part of the international organizations party 
thereto, no political liability with regard to the 
provisions of NPT itself, but only an obligation to 
apply the controls established under the Agency's 
Statute and the ETJRATOM Treaty. 
12. He proposed to conclude his remarks by 
giving a brief description of France's role in the 
field of international nuclear collaboration. 
Whether in respect of natural uranium, enriched 
uranium or fuel reprocessing, France was 
prepared to conclude multinational arrangements 
which would ensure industrial and economic 
progress. With regard to enrichment, no 
industrialized country which as yet had no civil 
production capacity was in a position to construct on 
an economically viable basis - a facility 
adequate to meet its own requirements. A solution 
at international level was therefore urgently 
required. The very urgency of the matter [
1 ] By General Conference 
Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272, para. 1. 
[2 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[3 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/171. 
-2 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


disregarding the outcome of current research on 
other processes - would seem to indicate that the 
fully-proven gaseous diffusion process was the 
only one which could be employed in the new 
plants to be constructed. For that reason the 
French Government had proposed to a number of 
industrial undertakings that joint studies should be 

started with a view to solving the technical and 
economic problems involved in construction of 
gaseous diffusion plants in various parts of the 
world. Joint studies had been begun with 
Australia and with Japan, while in Europe 
EURODIF, an association of industrialists of six 
countries soon to be joined by those of two others, 
had been set up. 

13. For irradiated fuel reprocessing, the 
company "United Reprocessors" had been 
established by German, British and French 
industrial concerns, and was also open to extended 
membership. 
14. As an example of a multinational industrial 
project which had reached completion, mention 
should be made of the Franco-Spanish Nuclear 
Power Station at Vandelos in Catalonia, which 
had started up in 1972. In the field of fast 
reactors of advanced type, while France was 
itself completing construction of the 250-MW(e) 
prototype reactor Phenix, due to go into operation 
in 1973, it had already laid the foundations for an 
association of German, Italian and French 
electricity producers for the construction of a 
first operational station of 1200-MW(e) capacity. 
15. France's effort at international collaboration 
extended likewise into the field of basic research, 
two excellent examples of which were the Franco-
Soviet bubble chamber project at the Serpukhov 
accelerator - a model of bilateral collaboration and 
the Max von Laue-Langevin Institute 
operating the high-flux reactor at Grenoble as a 
joint Franco-German undertaking, with which the 
United Kingdom was shortly to become associated. 
16. While it was true that the Agency had played 
no direct part in those multilateral activities, it 
had nevertheless created the atmosphere which 
had rendered them possible, and much of the credit 
for that gratifying fact was due to the efforts of 
the Director General. 
• Mr. Berlis (Canada) took the Chair. 
17. Mr. AFSHAR (Iran) congratulated the 
President on his election to that very high office, 
and expressed the conviction that under his wise 
guidance the Conference's current session would 
be a very successful one. 
18. On behalf of his delegation he sincerely 
thanked the Government of Mexico for its kind 
invitation, which had made it possible, for the 
participants to gather there in that beautiful city 
and enjoy the hospitality of the Government and the 
people of that great country, steeped in history 
and tradition. 
19. The Iranian Government considered the 
Agency to be a model of international co-operation, 
with which it was proud to be associated, and 
pledged its continued support to the Agency's 
activities, which should serve to upgrade the 
quality of life throughout the world. 

20. Though blessed with an abundance of oil, 
Iran still recognized the need for alternative 
sources of energy in the future as well as the 
important role of nuclear science in agriculture, 
medicine and many other areas. 
21. The first step towards utilization of nuclear 
energy in Iran had been taken in 1959 with the 
establishment of the Teheran University Nuclear 
Centre, and a number of other organizations had 
also been established in that field. Although pure 
research was carried out at the Centre, priority 
was given to research projects having direct 
application to problems of national interest. 
22. In addition to general courses on nuclear 
energy at both graduate and undergraduate levels, 
special courses were offered to familiarize 
participants from various national organizations 
with the use of radioisotopes in science and 
industry. 
23. Radioisotopes needed for the treatment and 
diagnosis of disease had still to be imported but 
the Teheran University Nuclear Centre, with a 
great deal of invaluable assistance from the 
Agency, had initiated a large-scale programme 
for the production of radioisotopes which should 
soon cover all domestic requirements. 
24. The engineering group of the Centre had 
guided other national organizations in the application 
of radioisotopes, whilst another division was 
responsible for radiological safety throughout the 
country. 
25. In the field of electricity generation the 
Ministry of Water and Power had initiated a 
nuclear power plant feasibility study in 
co-operation with the Nuclear Centre's 
engineering group, and the Centre had presented 
a paper on the subject at the Fourth International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy held in Geneva in 1971 (the Fourth Geneva 
Conference). 
26. A very preliminary study had shown that a 
500-MW nuclear power plant would be desirable 
in about 1980 and the Centre was planning the 
advance training of the necessary personnel. 
27. One of the most important activities of the 
Agency had been the establishment of INIS, which 
had promoted the world-wide dissemination of 
nuclear information to scientists and experts 
concerned with the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. 
28. The Fourth Geneva Conference had 
emphasized the significant role of nuclear science 
and technology in electricity generation, 
agriculture and industry and confirmed the vital 
need for an organization such as the Agency to 
enable all countries to enjoy the benefits. 
-3 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


29. In regard to the question of NPT, he said 
that that Treaty was an enormous step towards 
peace and security in the world. Iran had 
welcomed and lent its full support to NPT, and a 
safeguards agreement between Iran and the Agency 
in connection with NPT was now under negotation. 
30. However, the heavy responsibilities of the 
Agency regarding NPT should not be allowed to 
impede its other peaceful activities, which had 
been extremely valuable to Member States. 
31. With reference to the amendment of 
Article VI.A-D of the Agency's Statute, he 
declared that Iran supported the proposal that 
membership of the Board of Governors be 
increased and had accordingly accepted that 
amendment. He urged those Member States which 
had not already done so to accept that amendment 
without delay. 
32. In conclusion, he applauded the constructive 
work of the Agency over the past year and 
expressed his country's gratitude for the technical 
assistance given to Iran. 
33. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) wished to join 
the delegates of France and Iran in congratulating 
the President on his election. Giving a brief 
outline of the main nuclear projects being 
implemented in Korea, he said that the construction 
of the first unit of the nuclear power plant was 
proceeding according to plan. The power reactor 
to be installed was of the pressurized-water type 
with a gross generating capacity of 595 MW(e). 
The 2-MW TRIGA Mark III research reactor, the 
construction of which had begun in 1969 and been 
completed in May, was now in normal operation. 
It was noteworthy that the technical skill and 
experience of the Korean scientists and engineers 
had played a key role in its installation. 
34. In view of the increasingly active implementation 
of the programmes and projects involving 
the use of atomic energy in the Member States, 
the time had come to carry out a complete review 
and re-define the Agency's overall operational 
programmes within a wider scope. Its 
assistance programmes should be so oriented in 
the future as to take more effective account of the 
immediate requirements of the countries receiving 
assistance. Although the assistance provided by 
the Agency had undoubtedly brought considerable 
benefit to the developing Member States, the 
pattern of development-oriented programming had 
remained essentially the same since 1957. The 
Agency had hitherto concentrated its technical 
assistance efforts on training fellows, providing 
services of experts to developing countries, 
awarding research contracts and so on. That did 
not sufficiently reflect the current needs of the 
Member States, for assistance of that kind could 
not be made available readily for the important 
projects. It was therefore imperative that the 
technical assistance policy should allow for 
greater diversification. 
35. In that connection, he suggested, first, that 
the Agency consider entering into consultations 
with the world's leading manufacturers with a view 
to facilitating the work of standardizing the power 
reactor. Despite the obvious difficulties 
associated with the problem, such work was bound 
to make a positive contribution to the acquisition 
of technology and to the rapid development of the 
nuclear industry in the developing countries. 

36. Secondly, the training programme should lay 
emphasis not so much on developing individual 
capacity as on imparting skills that would be of 
immediate use for a specific project or programme 
of the countries concerned. It could thus play a 
more significant, though indirect, role in 
developing and improving the various sectors of 
industry in the Member States. Furthermore, 
the main fields of training for many years had 
been the uses of radioisotopes and radiation, 
whereas the most urgent practical problems 
facing the developing countries related to the 
training of personnel to be employed in the 
construction, operation and management of nuclear 
power plants. Such training could be imparted 
most effectively in a permanent special training 
centre, which could be established at the regional 
level under the Agency's auspices. 

37. He expressed the hope that his suggestions 
would meet with the approval of most Member 
States, which were similarly situated as regards 
technology and economic conditions, including the 
advanced ones. 
38. In conclusion, he wished to assure the 
Agency of his Government's continued support for 
its future activities in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy for the common good of mankind. 
39. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) likewise 
congratulated the President on his election. The 
acclaim with which that had been received 
indicated the esteem in which he was held and was 
a merited tribute to the delegate of the country 
which had offered its hospitality to the Conference. 
40. Tlatelolco was a magnificent setting for the 
Conference, in that formerly it had been witness 
to the famous pre-Columbian civilization dedicated 
to the cult of the Sun, the first source of energy 
and life, whilst now it beheld the gathering of the 
adherents of a new source of energy - the atom. 
41. The past year had been of great significance 
for Belgium, just as for the other non-nuclearweapon 
States of EURATOM and for EURATOM 
itself, since it had marked the positive outcome 
of the negotiations leading to the safeguards 
agreement, of which the Board of Governors had 
recently taken cognizance. That would permit 
Belgium to fulfil its obligations under NPT without 
infringing the foundations of EURATOM, one of 
the spearheads towards a United Europe. 
42. He congratulated all those concerned for the 
spirit of purpose and mutual understanding 
displayed throughout the arduous negotiating 
sessions. 
-4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


43. Once that agreement had been signed, the 
procedures leading to parliamentary approval ol 
NPT and the complementary safeguards agreement 
could be instituted without delay. 
44. Much work had already been done in Belgium 
by the Centre d'etude de l'energie nucleaire 
(Nuclear Energy Research Centre) in 
collaboration with the Agency, EURATOM, the 
Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe (Karlsruhe 
Nuclear Research Centre) and EUROCHEMIC to 
establish safeguards procedures that were 
effective and as little burdensome as possible. 
45. With regard to the Agency's programme for 
1973-78 and budget for 1973 [4 ], his delegation 
welcomed the clear and careful presentation and 
the fact that henceforth the pattern would be to 
detail actual projects instead of merely listing 
general programmes. His delegation also 
applauded the Director General's intention to 
present cost estimates of individual programme 
components in future [5], which would facilitate 
the proper assignment of priorities. 
46. The careful budgeting and sound 
administration on which the Agency's future 
programmes were based might serve as a model 
for other United Nations organizations, as had in 
fact been rightly noted by the Advisory Committee 
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations. 
47. In regard to the sub-programmes dealing 
with radiological safety and waste management, [6 ] 
he congratulated the Agency on the fact that its 
safety standards, based on recommendations of 
the International Commission on Radiological 
Protection, had won universal acceptance. The 
work done by the Agency in connection with the 
safe transport of radioactive materials and the 
radiological protection of workers, the general 
public and the environment was also highly 
appreciated by all countries. 
48. He commended the Agency's system for 
emergency assistance in the event of radiation 
accidents and also welcomed the fact that 
machinery existed for the conclusion of 
agreements for the rendering of emergency assistance 
on a bilateral basis among adjacent countries. 
49. As regards the sub-programme on waste 
management, the treatment and disposal of 
radioactive waste raised a matter of crucial 
importance. The Agency would have a significant 
role to play in the matter, especially in regard to 
the storage of high-activity waste at international 
sites, with the exclusion of the sea, when in the 
near future the amounts to be disposed of would 
increase considerably. 
[4] GC(XVI)/485. 
[5] Ibid., para. I. 6. 
[6] GC(XVI)/485, paras V. 10. 7-V. 10.55 and 

V. 10. 56-V. 10. 98 respectively. 
50. As for thermal discharges from nuclear and 
other power stations, it was unfortunate that 60% 
of the energy was lost as heat. But there was no 
evidence to suggest that the heat thus lost 
constituted pollution, and the Agency's work in the 
field was of great interest because of the 
divergence of views. If the receiving medium was 
normal, there could not be any pollution, considering 
that the solar energy received by the earth 
was equivalent to the heat lost by a few hundred 
million of 1000-MW power plants. As regards 
the local effect, a joint group of engineers, 
biologists and chemists had been carrying out a 
study for 25 years in a 15-mile area on the 
River Columbia, where nine power reactors were 
now located, and had found no ecological damage 
attributable to the heat released into the river. 
Other groups working in other areas had 
confirmed the same. Furthermore, as the 
document in question righly pointed out, that heat 
could be recycled and used for domestic heating, 
desalination of brackish water, cultivation of 
fruits and vegetables, etc. 
51. The application of nuclear techniques for 
the management of non-nuclear pollutants of the 
environment and of fresh water in particular were 
of topical interest. It was hoped that the cost of 
such nuclear methods and their efficiency, as 
compared with those of other existing techniques, 
would be taken into consideration. 
52. Where the decommissioning of nuclear 
facilities was concerned - part of the objective of 
waste management - the Agency could, and 
should, play an important part in the matter of 
the development and administration of the sites 
involved with a view to ensuring the quality of the 
environment. It was indeed the operators of the 
facilities responsible for the deterioration of the 
site who were best qualified to eliminate such 
deterioration and advise the authorities 
responsible for the development of the area and 
town-planning on the re-establishment of better 
living conditions. 
53. He again recommended that the Agency's 
laboratories should confine themselves to 
carrying out work strictly in accordance with its 
statutory obligations, e. g. safeguards, and 
refrain from doing research for research's sake. 
If research was performed for others, the 
services thus rendered must be paid for in full 
by the party concerned. 
54. In that connection, the Agency should ensure 
that the specialized agencies such as WHO, 
UNESCO, ILO, etc., for which it carried out some 
work, followed the example of FAO in bearing a 
larger part of the administrative and financial 
burden involved. 
55. Lastly, he wished to assure the Agency of 
his country's constant interest in its activities, 
and said that any criticisms it made were 
constructive in nature. As in the past, the 
Belgian Government would make available six 
Type II fellowships, and would be pleased to 
provide a venue for the proposed symposium on 
-5 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 

fuel and fuel elements for fast-breeder reactors 
to be held in 1973. 

56. Mr. ISARANGKUN Na AYUTHAYA (Thailand), 
after congratulating the President on his election, 
pointed out that it was particularly appropriate 
that the generous invitation of the Mexican 
Government should have brought the General 
Conference to Tlatelolco, which had given its 
name to one of the most important treaties 
regulating the use of atomic energy [7 ]. 
57. Turning to the work of the Agency, he 
said his delegation noted with satisfaction that the 
Board and the Secretariat had been devoting their 
greatest endeavours to the Agency's safeguards. 
Thailand gave full support to the proposed 
establishment of the safeguards laboratory, and 
was certain that under the Agency's careful 
management it would not prove to be an excessive 
financial burden. 
58. At the previous session his delegation had 
noted that the number of acceptances of the 
amendment to Article VI. A-D of the Statute was 
very small. He wished again to urge those 
Member States which had not yet done so to accept 
the amendment as soon as possible. 
59. Thailand was grateful to the Agency for its 
customary assistance in promoting the peaceful 
use of atomic energy. Towards the end of 1972 
his country would be participating in the Agency's 
nuclear power market survey. That venture had 
been made possible by major contributions from 
the Agency and from certain advanced countries. 
60. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency 
had set the prevention- of food waste as one of the 
priorities in its programme in the field of food 
and agriculture, and it was well known that nuclear 
techniques could be of great assistance in that 
respect. Everyone knew that rice was the staple 
diet of the majority of the world's population, and 
Thailand would be pleased to contribute material 
to be used for wholesomeness and insect 
disinfestation studies. 

61. His delegation also believed that it would be 
meaningful for the Agency to place increasing 
emphasis on its scientific programmes and research 
contracts, activities which certain other international 
organizations were showing signs of 
neglecting. 
62. At present, there was a discernible trend 
in world affairs towards an easing of tension among 
the nations, and he hoped that, as a reflection of 
that phenomenon, all the greater attention would 
be focused on the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
63. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director 
General and the Secretariat on the excellent 
organization of the session and on their skilful 
preparation of the documentation before the 
Conference. 

64. Mr. ABS (Holy See) said he first wished to 
congratulate the President of the General 
Conference on his election and to express his 
appreciation to the Government and people of 
Mexico for the cordial hospitality his delegation 
had been accorded in Mexico City. 
65. The current session of the Conference was 
an opportunity for the Holy See to restate its 
position vis-a-vis the Agency, the place it 
occupied within that organization, and the 
contribution which it could make to the Agency and 
which was likely to be expected from it. The 
Agency had always been considered by his delegation 
as having two main purposes: peace and 
development. Such was the result of long efforts 
by the United Nations for universal supervision 
of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
Although the tasks of the Agency related only to 
the peaceful use of the atom, i. e. it had not been 
devised as an effective instrument to cope with 
the nuclear arms race, it had still been able to 
make fissionable material accessible to the 
developed Powers as well as to a great number of 
countries at all stages of industrial and technical 
development. That fact had proved extremely 
beneficial in causing world opinion to cease 
regarding nuclear energy as merely something 
destructive. It was now seen rather as a 
salutary force for building a better world. Thus, 
by turning fear into optimism the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy had diverted the mind of man from 
thoughts of war and strengthened the conviction 
that peace was possible. 

66. At the Palais des Nations in Geneva, the 
hall in front of the Council Chamber bore an 
inscription which, quoting from the Old 
Testament, proclaimed the coming of an age when 
swords would be forged into ploughshares. Could 
there be any better description for the work of the 
Agency, which devoted all its efforts to the 
peaceful use of an otherwise devastating force? 
And should not its work be a model to the leaders 
of all States "to think thoughts of peace", and to 
strive in all possible ways to retain that precious 
good, which was the only sure foundation for the 
progress of mankind? It was true, however, that 
the history of the past 25 years had not been 
encouraging. The world had continued along the 
path of war despite the devastation of two recent 
world wars. Other conflicts might break out as 
a result of continuing East-West mistrust, and as 
the inevitable outcome of the economic gap between 
the northern and southern hemispheres, between 
wealthy countries and those of the Third World, 
which, in the competition for natural resources 
and economic power, had been at a disadvantage. 
The world faced the risk of possible nuclear 
annihilation and nuclear tests were still being 
carried out. 

67. At the same time, over the past 25 years, 
[7 ] The Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear many open conflicts had been averted through 
Weapons in Latin America, reproduced in the negotiation, mediation, summit meetings and 
United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. treaties. Examples of that were NPT, the 
-6 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


selfless efforts of many people in the United 
Nations and the organizations connected with it, 
and the endeavours of the Agency and the 
international specialists who worked in it. Hence, 
it had to be stressed from the outset that the Holy 
See regarded the Agency as a means by which to 
achieve peace. Its presence in the Agency could 
consequently be seen in the light of the Holy 
Father's words to the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, during a recent audience, to the 
effect that although the means involved were 
different, the efforts of both the United Nations 
and the Catholic Church converged towards the 
aim of peace, 

68. Peace, however, was only the foundation of 
a future prosperous world. The corner-stone for 
that hoped-for prosperity was the progress of the 
developing countries. The duty of the Agency to 
increase and expedite the contribution of nuclear 
energy to world health and prosperity afforded a 
welcome opportunity to say a few words on the 
question of development. 
69. Material progress alone was not a guarantee 
for the improvement of the contemporary world 
order. Because Christians had never failed to 
recognize the superiority of spiritual values over 
merely temporal ones, they regarded it a duty and 
considered it a right to stress the principle that 
a just and equitable distribution of wealth must be 
considered an essential condition for the foundation 
of a better world. Traditional concepts of the 
"natural" differences between rich and poor, 
between those nations enjoying power and wealth 
and those with a less fortunate share had in the 
past served only as a flimsy pretext for 
unwillingness to reapportion the means of 
production and resources among countries. 
70. International aid to developing countries had 
to take into consideration the fact that any support 
that was not guided by well-balanced principles 
of technical effectiveness, economic viability 
and social equity could not make a lasting 
contribution to the task of development. Foreign 
investment and foreign enterprise which did not 
make allowance for the needs and requirements 
of indigenous populations could not hope to bridge 
the gap between rich and poor. Unfortunately, in 
many countries today the growth of the national 
wealth only benefited a small percentage of the 
population. Development that was not accompanied 
by equitable social distribution was not progress 
but exploitation. His delegation was convinced 
that the undertaking of the Agency to seek to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world was a direct contribution to improvement 
of the lot of many millions of human beings who 
lived on the margin of the modern economy and 
were prevented by many ills from fully 
realizing their potential. 
71. Having restated the Holy See's position on 
the increasingly important problem of peace and 
development, he wished to express his satisfaction 
at the conclusion of the formalities between the 
Holy See and the Agency relating to the application 
of safeguards in connection with NPT, to which 
the Holy See had acceded in February 1971. 
What was the significance of the participation of 
the Holy See both in NPT and in the recently 
signed agreement? When signing the safeguards 
agreement in June 1972, the Permanent Delegate 
of the Holy See to the Agency had pointed out that 
in subscribing to NPT, the Holy See had been 
motivated by a desire to contribute to the 
initiative which, by means of disarmament, aimed 
at promoting security, mutual trust and peaceful 
co-operation in relations between peoples. The 
Catholic Church wished to contribute to that cause, 
aware that it was rendering a service requested 
and inspired by the spiritual mission it was 
carrying out in the historical context of the world. 
The Holy See's adherence to NPT had unique 
significance - the significance of an assertion of 
a principle, a visible sign of encouragement and 
support for the purposes of disarmament and the 
reduction of international tension that had inspired 
the provisions of the Treaty. 

72. His delegation was convinced that the Holy 
See could make a special contribution to the 
Agency, as indeed to all international organizations 
with which it co-operated - the shaping of the 
minds of millions of Catholics by inspiring in 
them respect and sympathy for the work of modern 
intergovernmental organizations, and readiness 
to co-operate with them for the benefit of peace 
and the development of peoples. 


73. Mr. CATSAMBIS (Greece), expressing his 
delegation's conviction that the Conference would 
accomplish most productive work under the 
President's competent guidance, and also its 
delight at being invited to attend the Conference 
in such a magnificent setting, said that he wished 
to congratulate the Director General and 
Secretariat on the Agency's accomplishments 
during the past year and in particular on the 
successful work done in drawing up safeguards 
agreements in connection with NPT. In that 
connection he was pleased to recall that Greece 
had concluded a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency on 1 March 1972. [8 ] 
74. The revision of the Code of Practice on the 
Safe Handling of Radioisotopes would certainly be 
of great value and would contribute to the 
harmonization of rules and regulations at international 
level. 
75. It was unfortunate that international price 
increases and parity fluctuations had not 
permitted any overall expansion of the Agency's 
activities, while leading to a formal increase in 
the level of the budget. However, his delegation 
realized that the Agency was doing all within its 
power to effect a fair distribution of the funds 
available. It was to be hoped that the Agency 
would receive Member States' contributions 
earlier than usual, to enable it to carry out its 
technical assistance programme effectively. 
Greece had always endeavoured to meet promptly 
and in full its obligations as regards contributions. 
[8 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/166. 
-7 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


76. As part of its policy of developing culture 
and science, the Greek Government had set up a 
council to advise on planning and promotional 
activities associated with science and technology, 
and to determine which programmes should be 
given priority in the light of the country's social, 
economic, scientific and technological 
requirements. At the Greek nuclear research 
centre, a computer facility had been established 
embodying the use of two computers. A 
programming and computer consulting service 
was also available. Courses and seminars were 
held to encourage the use of modern calculating 
equipment throughout the country. 
77. The setting-up of a laboratory for an 
11-MeV tandem Van de Graaff accelerator had 
also represented a decisive step in the development 
of scientific research and technology. Another 
accelerator unit of 3 MeV would be utilized for 
sterilization of products, preservation of 
foodstuffs, polymerization of monomers and other 
applications. Those additional facilities would 
enable scientists not only in Greece but also in 
neighbouring countries to pursue experiments 
which would be of great value in basic and applied 
research. 
78. The production of radioisotopes in Greece 
had increased, not only covering domestic requirements 
but also permitting exports abroad. A 
radioisotope dispensing centre had been established 
for the supply, control and distribution of foreign 
and locally-produced radioactive isotopes to 
hospitals, industry, public institutions and 
organizations. A bone-bank had likewise been 
established to furnish hospitals with tissue for 
transplantations and bone grafting. 
79. Activities in the technological field 
included non-destructive testing, radioactive 
tracing - especially in solving hydrogeological 
problems - and irradiation of industrial products. 
80. A good deal of successful research had 
been recently completed in the effort to combat 
the olive fly (Dacus oleae). Important research 
was also being carried out in soil science, such 
as studies on soil permeability, nutrition of 
forest seedlings, and seasonal variations in soil 
nitrogen, 
81. Greece was participating in the Joint 
FAO/IAEA Wheat Fertilization Programme, which 
aimed at providing an adequate diet to the 
expanding world population by increasing 
agricultural production. 
82. The United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) project on prospecting for uranium in 
Central and Eastern Macedonia and Thrace had 
now entered its second year and interesting 
results were expected, 
83. Education was one of the main activities of 
the Greek Atomic Energy Commission. A school 
of radioisotope techniques had been in operation 
for some years past, attended by scientists in 
various disciplines and also engineers. There 
was likewise a school of advanced studies where 
students did laboratory work side by side with 
scientists and thereby gained valuable research 
experience. 

84. Greece was considering the possibility of 
constructing a nuclear power station and to that 
end had requested the assistance of the Agency 
under its market survey project for nuclear plants. 
In that connection his delegation wished to thank 
the Agency for sending a team of experts to Greece 
in order to assist the authorities concerned in 
assessing the potential role of nuclear power and 
planning future Greek policy in that field. 
85. In conclusion, he expressed gratitude on 
behalf of the Greek Atomic Energy Commission 
for the Agency's valuable assistance in providing 
fellowships, experts, equipment and advice. The 
scientific meetings organized by the Agency had 
enabled Greek scientists to contribute their share 
to the international pool of knowledge. 
86. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that the current 
session of the Conference had special significance 
because it was being held in a historic city with a 
rich heritage and a great future - the city, 
moreover, where the Treaty of Tlatelolco, 
banning the introduction of nuclear weapons into 
Latin America, had been signed. That Treaty 
was an example that could well be emulated in 
other regions of the world. 
87. A new phase of world history was beginning; 
the old order was giving way to a fresh and 
vigorous order, and a new generation of men was 
appearing at the helm of affairs. They would 
have to face two paramount issues: security and 
progress. The Agency could make vital 
contributions in both spheres, and was well 
equipped to help in enhancing world peace and 
prosperity. 
88. Significant developments affecting 
international security had taken place in the past 
year. The SALT agreements marked yet another 
important step in reducing the danger of a nuclear 
conflict. No doubt "vertical" proliferation, 
proliferation in sheer numbers of weapons, 
would thereby be checked, but the real purpose 
of the agreements would be defeated if the energies 
and resources thus released were channelled 
towards enhancing the destructive capacity of 
individual nuclear weapons and their delivery 
systems instead of being made available to 
satisfy the pressing economic needs of mankind. 

89. Pakistan had noted with great satisfaction 
the further evolution of the Agency's safeguards 
system. It supported a flexible system which 
could be continually improved and simplified without 
any sacrifice of reliability - in the light 
of the Agency's own experience and new technical 
advances. The Agency and the countries 
concerned deserved to be congratulated on the 
successful outcome of their negotiations 
concerning the application of safeguards in 
EURATOM countries. 
-8 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


90. But the Government of Pakistan was 
nevertheless gravely concerned by the prospect 
of a further proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
There were already five nuclear-weapon States 
which had special responsibilities for global 
security. If one more country tried to break into 
that group, the delicate balance so far maintained 
would be seriously upset. Indeed, the flood-gates 
would be opened, and many other nations would 
be encouraged to acquire nuclear weapons, thus 
aggravating the threat of accidental nuclear 
confrontation. In Pakistan's view, everything 
possible should be done to avert the dreadful 
consequences of further nuclear proliferation. 
91. Pakistan had placed all its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. It believed strongly 
that all bilateral agreements, without exception, 
should be brought under the Agency's safeguards 
system to remove any potential threat to harmony 
and peace in any region. 
92. After security, the second great challenge 
to world stability was the growing poverty of 
nations. The developing countries must be given 
a place in the sun and a stake in peace, not pushed 
to violence through sheer desperation. Nuclear 
technology, instead of widening the existing 
disparity between rich and poor nations, should 
be used to narrow it. The Agency could play an 
important part in improving and accelerating 
economic growth in the developing countries by 
imparting knowledge and providing assistance in 
the applications of nuclear energy and nuclear 
techniques for development. 
93. It was a matter for regret that the 
substantive programme of the Agency, as 
reflected in the 1973 programme and budget, was 
not only not expanding but even decreasing by a 
small amount. That was a great anomaly in view 
of the world's growing needs. The Agency 
possessed the infrastructure, the competence and 
the sound administration required to plan and carry 
out a much larger programme for the benefit of 
its Members. The Government of Pakistan 
accordingly urged the advanced countries to lend 
greater support to the Agency, so that it could 
finance more projects and programmes. The 
Agency could not afford to mark time; it must 
move forward to maintain the effectiveness and 
credibility which were so essential if it was to 
discharge its responsibilities. It would be a 
disastrous illusion to think that the Agency could 
perform its safeguards functions in a satisfactory 
manner without doing full justice to its promotional 
activities. 

94. In technical assistance the Agency had, 
despite very serious limitations of resources, 
played a vital role; it had continued to act as a 
catalyst in promoting the atomic energy 
programmes of developing countries. But at 
present the Agency could not meet more than 40% 
of the requests for technical assistance submitted 
to it. It was a familiar fact that that discouraged 
some of the developing countries from even 
approaching the Agency for assistance. The 
present target of $3 million had the same 
purchasing power as $2 million in 1962. That 
meant that the Agency had in fact frozen the level 
of voluntary contributions for a decade, during 
which the requirements of Members had multiplied 
by an order of magnitude. The irony was that 
even that target was not being met. Serious 
consideration should be given to raising the target 
for voluntary contributions to $ 5 million in the 
near future. 

95. The delegation of Pakistan appreciated the 
importance which the Agency attached to nuclear 
power and wished to commend the Director General 
for his initiative in starting a world-wide survey 
of nuclear power requirements in the developing 
countries. The survey would help developing 
countries to obtain an objective review of their 
nuclear programmes and to see them in an 
international context. It would help the nuclear 
industry to make appropriate plans, so that 
reactor programmes suited to the needs of the 
developing countries could be evolved. Loan 
institutions would also get an idea of the future 
financing requirements of the countries concerned. 
That project was in fact an excellent example of 
the type of constructive endeavour which should 
lead to meaningful co-operation between the 
developing countries, advanced countries, nuclear 
industry and financing organizations for achieving 
a common purpose. The manner in which the 
project had been financed held out hope that 
sound programmes would have an excellent 
chance of attracting outside support. 
96. Encouraged by the results of the survey, 
Pakistan proposed that the Agency should consider 
a joint programme aimed at promoting the 
applications of nuclear techniques for enhancing 
food production and preserving food grains. Such 
a project could be launched with the co-operation 
of FAO, interested developing and advanced 
countries, agricultural and research foundations 
and international banking organizations. It 
would provide a focal point for various Agency 
programmes in agriculture and biology. It would 
merit and very likely attract additional funds 
from outside. Over a five-year period it should 
yield results of great economic significance to 
the developing countries. 
97. The amendment of Article VI. A-D of the 
Agency's Statute, which would enlarge the Board 
of Governors and give increased representation to 
non-nuclear Member States, had yet to be accepted 
by the required two-thirds majority of the Agency's 
membership. Pakistan had hoped that, two years 
after the approval of the amendment, a 
reconstituted Board would already be functioning 
to facilitate the implementation of NPT. At the 
same time, however, it could well understand 
the hesitation of the many countries which had 
expressed reservations regarding the amendment. 
In fact, subsequent events and recent changes in 
the world scene had tended to justify some of 
their misgivings. But the matter was important, 
and it should now be quickly resolved through 
consultations among the interested Member 
States, so that the enlarged Board could be 
constituted as soon as possible. 

-9 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 

98. The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission 
had just completed a review of all its activities 
and drawn up a new programme after a careful 
selection of priorities, which included nuclear 
power and the applications of nuclear techniques 
in agriculture, medicine and industry. Pakistan 
suffered from a serious shortage of conventional 
energy resources, for proven per capita reserves 
of coal amounted to only 13 tons equivalent, or 
1% of the world average. For future power and 
energy requirements there was no choice but to 
turn to atomic energy. The country's first 
nuclear power station, at Karachi, known as 
KANNUP, was going through its final full-power 
commissioning trials. The success of the project 
had been largely due to hard and dedicated work 
by Pakistan's young scientists, engineers and 
technical staff. In planning and implementing the 
project, however, Pakistan had received most 
valuable technical and financial assistance from 
Canada, assistance which was keenly appreciated. 
99. Hence it was a pleasure to announce that 
KANNUP would be formally inaugurated on 
28 November. In conjunction with that event an 
international seminar on nuclear power in the 
developing countries and an exhibit on atomic 
energy for development were being planned. All 
friendly countries were welcome to come and 
help celebrate the occasion. Its experience with 
the KANNUP project had given Pakistan the 
confidence to plan new nuclear power plants, 
including a 500-MW station in the north and a 
dual-purpose plant for the production of water 
and electricity in the Karachi area. 
100. Pakistan was an agricultural country and 
accordingly took special interest in the application 
of nuclear techniques for enhancing agricultural 
output. A third centre for atomic energy in 
agriculture was being planned; and, for nuclear 
medicine, it had been decided to establish a 
fifth centre, to be known as the Institute for 
Radiotherapy and Nuclear Medicine. 
101. Pakistan was grateful to the Agency for the 
technical assistance and moral support which it 
had consistently provided in connection with the 
planning and implementation of the country's 
nuclear energy programme. 
102. In conclusion, he wished to express 
Pakistan's deep appreciation to the Government 
of Mexico for its invitation to hold the Conference 
in Mexico City, and for its warm hospitality and 
excellent arrangements. The sixteenth regular 
session would undoubtedly be one of the most 
memorable of all. 
103. Mr. QUIHILLALT (Argentina) said that he 
was particularly happy to offer the President the 
congratulations of the Argentine Government and 
delegation on his election. A debt of gratitude 
was owed to the Republic of Mexico, and in 
particular to its beautiful capital, for having 
offered the Conference such a splendid setting for 
its session and such warm hospitality. 
104. Thanks were due, moreover, to the 
Mexican organizers, to the Director General, and, 
through him, to the Secretariat as a whole, for 
the good organization of the session and the 
excellent services placed at its disposal. 
105. The Argentine delegation wished to welcome 
and offer its best wishes to the new Member, 
Bangladesh. [9 ] 
106. Argentina was continuing the brisk development 
of its nuclear programme in accordance with 
national policy. It was a programme which, as 
had been pointed out on other occasions, was 
basically designed to contribute to the progress 
and prosperity of the country's people. A brief 
account of the year's achievements would 
illustrate what he meant. 
107. Argentina's first nuclear power station 
would have a net electrical output of 319 MW and 
would serve the Gran Buenos Aires Litoral 
system. That, together with the exploitation of 
the country's uranium resources on an industrial 
scale - which was now getting under way - meant 
that the most modern techniques of electrical 
power generation were being adopted and that the 
technological status of the country as a whole was 
being raised. 
108. To ensure that domestic industry would 
take as large a part in the project as possible, the 
National Atomic Energy Commission had first 
undertaken a broad study of the country's industrial 
and engineering capacity and had subsequently 
launched an educational programme aimed at 
instilling in engineers and industrialists an 
appreciation of what the technology required, so 
that Argentine industry would be able to undertake 
the manufacture of important components and 
systems. Already 40% of the total cost of the 
project was being covered at home. 
109. The stage had now been reached at which 
the individual systems of the nuclear power 
station were being put into operation. The trial 
stage would culminate in the first start-up of the 
reactor, to take place at the end of 1972 or the 
beginning of 1973. The first commercial 
generation of nuclear power was expected to occur 
about the middle of 1973. The first fuel loadings, 
though containing Argentine uranium, would be 
fabricated abroad; but prototypes of powerreactor 
fuel elements fabricated in Argentina had 
already been tested in a foreign reactor. 
110. A second power station, producing 600 MW, 
was to be built in the central part of the country. 
Tenders had been invited without any foreordained 
selection of reactor type in the hope that 
competition would be lively. The preliminary 
studies had been carried out and the specifications 
established by the National Atomic Energy 
Commission, and it was expected that domestic 
participation would amount to more than 50% of 
the total cost. The national power plan called 
[9] Bangladesh became a Member on 
27 September 1972. 
- 10 



for more than 2000 MW of nuclear power by the 
end of the decade, and it was hoped that by 1980 
domestic participation would amount to more than 
80% in each plant. 


111. All that meant enormous responsibilities for 
the National Atomic Energy Commission, which 
had ceased to be the basic research institution of 
15 years earlier and had become, virtually, an 
enterprise for technological and industrial 
development, even while retaining research 
functions. 
112. There had also been, in Argentina, a 
noteworthy increase in the production of radioisotopes 
and labelled molecules to satisfy domestic 
requirements, which were increasing at a rate of 
about 30% a year. 
113. The Commission was co-operating with 
private industry in the use of intense radiation 
sources, mainly for the sterilization of medical 
and pharmaceutical products and the polymerization 
of wood products, and those activities 
were yielding results of great economic value. 
114. Argentina had maintained its close 
relationship with the Agency at every level: in 
the Board and in committees, in symposia, 
conferences and panels, by offering opinions and 
proposals for the modification of draft regulations, 
codes and so on, and by providing, each year, 
fellowships for trainees from Latin American 
countries. 
115. In 1972 Argentina had placed its nuclear 
power station under Agency safeguards. Just as, 
many years previously, it had had the satisfaction 
of placing the first Latin American research 
reactor under safeguards, now Argentina was 
doing the same with its power reactor. 
116. In the realm of international co-operation, 
Argentina maintained cordial "nuclear relations" 
with numerous countries, especially those of 
Latin America; proof of that was to be found in 
the many co-operation agreements relating to 
atomic energy which Argentina had signed or 
renewed. In 1972 agreements had been concluded 
with Bolivia and Paraguay, and within a few days 
another would be concluded with the Mexican 
Nuclear Energy Institute. 
117. Argentina had received splendid assistance 
from the Agency, especially in the form of highly 
qualified experts whose services had been 
exceptionally valuable. 
118. His Government believed nevertheless that 
the Agency should substantially increase the 
technical assistance which it offered. Moreover, 
a regional technical assistance office should be 
set up in Latin America: that would meet the 
desires of many Latin American countries. 
119. His delegation was thoroughly satisfied with 
the work of the Secretariat, and in particular with 
that of the Director General who, it was to be 
hoped, would long continue to discharge his present 
duties. 
GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


120. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) said that he 
wished to join others in congratulating 
Mr. Flores de la Pefia on his election to the post 
of President of the General Conference. Special 
thanks were due to the Mexican Government for 
its invitation to hold the Conference in Mexico 
City and for the excellent facilities it had 
provided. Their stay in Mexico would enable 
delegates to acquaint themselves more fully with 
that beautiful country, its age-old cultural 
traditions, its successes in modern technology 
and, above all, in nuclear technology. 
121. Another year had passed, and the Agency 
had continued to consolidate its position in the 
world, especially in view of the large number of 
States which had concluded the safeguards 
agreements called for by NPT. The Government 
of Poland, one of the first to enter into 
negotiations with a view to concluding such an 
agreement, was happy to note the increasing 
number of States that had already signed or were 
in the process of negotiating agreements. In 
particular, it welcomed the notice received from 
the Board concerning the approval of a draft 
agreement with five of the EURATOM countries. 
122. Poland, a country which had suffered 
terribly in two world wars, was vitally interested 
in that aspect of the Agency's work, and hoped that 
States which had not yet ratified NPT would do so 
soon. The negotiation of agreements should also 
go on at a faster pace. With such an excellent 
model as a basis for negotiations - that contained 
in document INFCIRC/153 - there should be no 
obstacle to completing the process in a relatively 
short time. 
123. The strength of the Agency, as of any other 
international organization, lay in its universality. 
Only by according equal treatment to all States 
could the Agency win true authority. For that 
reason the Polish Government felt obliged once 
more to call attention to the fact that one of the 
German States, namely the German Democratic 
Republic, was not yet a member of the Agency. 
The German Democratic Republic was a sovereign 
country which had displayed dynamic development 
in science and technology, and particularly in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It had also 
concluded a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
The fact that its accession to membership of the 
Agency had hitherto been blocked was not only 
contrary to the principle of universality but also 
a loss to the Agency, whose activities would 
profit from the contribution that the scientists of 
the German Democratic Republic could make. 

124. The accession of the German Democratic 
Republic as well as of other countries wishing to 
participate in the Agency's activities would be of 
benefit to both the Agency and its Members, as 
was apparent from the role played by the German 
Democratic Republic in the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance, the activities of which were 
of considerable importance to Poland. In that 
connection he wished to recall that the 
International Company for the Production of 
Nucleonic Equipment "Interatominstrument" was 
based in Warsaw. 
- 11 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


125. The annual report for 1971-72 was a clear 
and concise document and he commended the way 
in which the various projects had been tackled 
during that period. His delegation considered 
that the Agency's most important work lay in the 
fields of environmental protection, safeguards, 
technical assistance and information dissemination. 
In matters of environmental protection, which 
had recently been brought before the eyes of the 
world at the United Nations Conference on the 
Human Environment held in Stockholm, the Agency 
had a fine record and, in view of the fact that it 
already had qualified personnel as well as the 
necessary research and information experience, 
his delegation felt strongly that the Agency - in 
collaboration with WHO - was competent to 
co-ordinate international activities in that sphere, 
making the establishment of a new organization 
quite unnecessary. 
126. Safeguards activities would soon become a 
routine matter for the Agency, and he felt 
confident that the Agency's staff would be able to 
deal with all the work arising out of NPT. The 
Polish Government would lend its support to the 
planning and operation of safeguards by the Agency 
and the development of techniques facilitating the 
implementation of safeguards agreements. It 
would also support the establishment within the 
Agency - and nowhere else - of an organ to 
examine all questions connected with the 
implementation of NPT. 
127. Since technical assistance was such an 
important Agency function, it was gratifying to 
note that the Agency's funds for that purpose had 
increased appreciably and that there had also 
been a significant increase in UNDP allocations for 
large-scale projects. Those projects, which had 
risen in number from two to nine since 1971, 
highlighted the increasingly important role of 
nuclear technology, to which the Agency was 
making no mean contribution. In recognition of 
that fact, Poland would increase its voluntary 
contribution for 1973 by 300 000 zloty, i.e. by 
20%, and would continue to offer ten fellowships. 
128. His country had always lent full support to 
INIS and welcomed the Board's decision to 
introduce full-scope operation. Poland would 
participate as fully as possible, and he appealed 
to all Member States to do likewise, for only then 
would the success of INIS be assured. 
129. The Agency's programme for 1973-78 had 
been scrutinized by Polish experts, and he was 
authorized to say that most of it was acceptable. 
The Secretariat was to be commended for the vast 
effort devoted to its preparation. 
130. The Agency's budget for 1973 once again 
revealed an unfortunate inflationary tendency, 
especially with regard to salaries. Increases 
in budgetary expenditure should be tailored to 
increases in the national revenue of Member 
States. Although the increases were largely 
outside the Agency's control and the Director 
General had made great efforts to effect savings, 
means had to be found of reducing costs without 
impairing the Agency's effectiveness. 
131. Finally, his delegation approved the annual 
report for 1971-72 and congratulated the Agency 
on its progress, with which Poland was proud to 
be associated. 
132. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia) said that he 
was happy to present, in the name of the 
delegation of Colombia, his cordial congratulations 
to Mr. Flores de la Peña on his well-deserved 
election to the post of President of the Conference 
at its sixteenth regular session which, upon the 
generous invitation of his Government, was being 
held in the beautiful capital of Mexico. 
Congratulations were also due to Dr. Eklund for 
his wise conduct of the Agency's affairs during 
eleven years. 
133. The Conference had gathered to demonstrate 
once more a devotion to peace and a firm resolve 
to place the atom at the service of humanity. On 
14 February 1967, in the same building where' the 
Conference was now gathered, the Latin 
American countries had signed the Treaty of 
Tlatelolco - a moral lever, at that time, which 
had made possible the signing of NPT. Colombia, 
a nation devoted to peace and human understanding, 
had just ratified that Treaty and would fulfil to the 
letter the pledges thereby given. 
134. Colombia's Institute of Nuclear Affairs had 
continued to apply nuclear techniques to problems 
of fertilization and improved root growth in certain 
plants, in close co-operation with the Colombian 
Agricultural Institute. For some years cobalt-60 
and iridium-192 sources had been in use to detect 
defects in pressure tubing, in hydroelectric and 
thermoelectric plants, in industrial storage and 
chemical processing tanks, and in aeroplane 
components. The techniques of gammagraphy had 
been taught in theoretical and experimental 
courses given by the Institute. Radioisotopes 
were being applied to problems of hydrology, 
such as measurements of flow velocity in rivers 
and underground water and of leakage through 
dams, and were also being used for quality 
control and determinations of moisture and density 
in road-building operations. 
135. A great deal of work was being done on the 
production of labelled molecules with radioisotopes, 
and effective arrangements had been made for 
co-operation with the Military Hospital, the 
National Cancer Institute and the country's 
universities in medical programmes. 
136. Prospecting for radioactive ores was being 
carried out continuously by radiometric methods, 
from vehicles and in the field. 
137. The building destined to house the 
10 000-curie cobalt-60 source donated by the 
Government of the United States of America 
through the Agency was nearing completion. The 
source in question would be used to produce genetic 
mutations in various types of plant, for research 
in radiation chemistry, for the sterilization of 
heart valves and other surgical materials, for the 
irradiation of foodstuffs, and so on. 
- 12 



GC(XVI)/OR. 154 


138. Turning to the matter of technical 
assistance, he recalled that under its Statute 
the Agency was called upon to accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world. That was in fact its fundamental objective. 
The developing countries hoped that the Agency 
would continue to give them technical assistance 
in the applications of radioisotopes to agriculture 
(in many instances the foundation of their 
economy), medicine and industry, and 
especially in connection with nuclear power. 
139. Given the steady depletion of traditional 
sources of energy, it might be wise for the 
Agency to organize, perhaps on a regional basis, 
seminars in which the advantages of mediumsized 
reactors in the 150-300 MW range could be 
studied and discussed. The industrialized 
countries had often argued that such reactors 
were not competitive, that the large firms were 
unwilling to design and build them for fear of not 
finding a market; but power, nowadays, would 
never cost a country as dearly as not having it 
at all. The cost per kilowatt/hour in the 
industrialized countries should not be taken as a 
hard and fast measure of whether nuclear power 
should be introduced or not. For a country which 
totally lacked conventional means of generating 
electricity, medium-sized power reactors 
offered the best solution. Hence the Agency 
should take more decisive action in that respect. 
It was particularly fitting that it should do so 
during the second development decade. 
140. With the entry into force of NPT many 
countries had expressed the fear that the Agency 
might expend a large share of its resources on 
safeguards to the detriment of its other 
activities, including technical assistance. The 
Government of Colombia was anxious that a 
proper balance should be maintained among the 
Agency's activities, and, in particular, that 
priority should be given to technical assistance. 
141. During the June meetings of the Board, he 
had asked the Director General to study the 
possibility of appointing regional representatives 
in the geographical areas that received technical 
assistance from the Agency, and he was now more 
than ever convinced of the importance of adopting 
such a policy. The Agency needed to create an 
image, to impress upon the less-privileged 
countries that most needed its assistance exactly 
what it was and what it could do. The presence 
of the Agency should be felt in the person of its 
regional representative - not just any representative, 
but a person familiar with the workings of 
the Agency, dynamic, enthusiastic and convincing. 
Many developing countries were not receiving 
technical assistance simply because they were 
unfamiliar with the paths leading to the Agency. 

142. Science, once the privilege of the few, was 
becoming part of the patrimony of all peoples. The 
large nations which were leading the way in 
scientific, technological and social development 
had invested huge sums to train their young - the 
hope of future scientific progress - and to build 
laboratories, and so on. Research was not a 
routine activity, far from it: it often required 
effort and sacrifice bordering on heroism. A 
scientist was not something that could be 
improvised; his training was bound to be long 
and difficult, and indeed was likely to continue all 
his life. 

143. Thus it was vital that no time should be 
lost in initiating the younger generation into the 
mysteries of nuclear science, in helping them to 
learn everything that others had discovered before 
them. That was the true function of the Agency: 
to help its Members acquire the mastery of nuclear 
science which they required in order to take part, 
as a single large family, in the building of a 
better future. 
• The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m. 
- 13 



GC{XVI)/OR. 155 

International Atomic Energy Agency 4 May 1973* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Thursday, 28 September 1972, at 4.25 p.m. 


President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 


Item 
of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
9 General debate and 1-101 
report for 1971-72 
(continued) 
Statements by the 
delegates of: 
Spain 
Viet-Nam 
1 13 
12 
21 
India 2236 
Romania 3748 
Bangladesh 
Bulgaria 
Madagascar 
Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic 
Libyan Arab Republic 
49 61 
75809460 
74 
79 
93 
100 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 31 October 1972. 
** GC(XVI)/490. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC(XVI)/OR. 155 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1971-72 
(GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr. 1 and 3, 488) (continued) 

1. Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) said that 
Spain's national electric power development plan 
was proceeding at the anticipated rate and that 
30% of the country's installed generating capacity 
would be nuclear by 1983. 
2. During the period 1972-83 Spain would need 
to obtain on the domestic market experts' services, 
equipment and technical know-how to a value of 
120 thousand million pesetas, an amount which 
warranted the efforts which his country was making 
to create its own nuclear industry. 
3. Three nuclear power stations had been 
ordered in 1972, two of them with two 900-MW 
reactors each and the third with one reactor of the 
same power. Under an agreement between the 
administration and the operators of the power 
stations in question, the same reactor type had 
been chosen for all the stations in order to 
facilitate the creation of a domestic capital 
equipment industry which, with the help of foreign 
companies, would enable Spain to carry through 
its nuclear power station programme. An 
invitation to submit tenders for a sixth reactor had 
been issued recently and it was expected that 
authorization would soon be given for the 
construction of a seventh reactor. 
4. Several national enterprises had combined 
to form a joint company for the design and 
manufacture of components for the power stations 
mentioned, the Junta de Energia Nuclear (Nuclear 
Energy Board) assuming overall technical 
responsibility for research and evaluation. In a 
similar manner, the Empresa Nacional de Uranio 
(National Uranium Company) had been established 
with public and private funds; likewise assisted 
by the Junta de Energia Nuclear, it would deal 
with questions of fuel cycle technology. 
5. In 1972, the 480-MW Franco-Spanish 
nuclear power plant at Vandellos had begun 
operating on a trial basis and had already 
attained 90% of its nominal rating, while the Jose 
Cabrera and Santa Maria de Garona stations were 
continuing to operate normally. The three 
stations together constituted an installed capacity 
of 1053 MW. 
6. At the beginning of the current year, Spain 
had started implementing its third Four-Year 
Plan of Economic and Social Development, 
Nuclear research figured prominently under 
"Research and development", with particular 
attention to be paid to breeder reactors, the nuclear 
fuel cycle and desalination. 
7. Progress in radioisotope applications had 
continued and a symposium on isotope generators 
had been held in Madrid during the spring of 1972 
by the European Nuclear Energy Agency of the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development and the Junta de Energia Nuclear. 
8. The Institute for Nuclear Studies had 
continued with its courses in nuclear engineering, 
isotope applications and other subjects, and two 
new chairs had been created - one of solid-state 
physics and one of biophysics. Fellowships for 
training at the Junta de Energia Nuclear had been 
awarded to 12 foreign candidates through either 
the Instituto de Cultura Hispanica (Institute of 
Hispanic Culture) or the Agency. 
9. Spain had continued to collaborate with 
various countries and, in January of the current 
year, had concluded an agreement for co-operation 
in the nuclear field with Chile. 
10. The Spanish delegation appreciated the 
clarity and conciseness of the documents prepared 
for the session. It had examined the draft budget 
for 1973 [1 ] and was alarmed to see that the 
allocations for technical assistance, which had 
represented 19% of the budget in the previous 
year, had undergone a slight decrease in terms 
of relative value. That was regrettable, for 
technical assistance was, after all, the 
cornerstone of the Agency's activities and one of 
the surest means of achieving world peace and 
harmony on the basis of universal justice, 


11. In 1974, furthermore, technical assistance 
would be receiving only 17% of the budgetary 
resources; in other words, the decline in the 
amounts allocated to that activity was continuing. 
It was to be hoped that appropriate corrective 
action would have been taken by the time the 
General Conference met in 1973. 
12. Spain was making a voluntary contribution 
of $30 000 and was seriously considering the 
possibility of increasing the number of fellowships 
offered to the Agency each year. The Spanish 
delegation approved the Agency's programme of 
seminars, symposia and conferences; it would, 
however, like to see the symposium on 
atmospheric transport of radioactive materials 
and the regional study group meeting on safety 
and environmental protection included among the 
important meetings. 
13. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam), warmly 
congratulating Mr. Flores de la Peña on behalf 
of the Viet-Namese delegation on his unanimous 
election to the post of President of the Conference, 
wished also to express his gratitude to the 
Government of the United Mexican States for its 
hospitality. 
14. He was pleased to note that during the past 
year, thanks to the Secretariat's diligence, a 
considerable number of the safeguards agreements 
required in connection with the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [2 ] 
had been concluded. The Agency had made 
commendable efforts in exploiting the benefits 
of the atom for peaceful purposes, especially in 
agriculture, and in attempting to ensure rapid 
[1 ] GC(XVI)/485. 
[2 J Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 

GC(XVI)/OR. 155 


dissemination of nuclear knowledge through the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). 
It was also encouraging to see that the Agency-
was completing the market survey of nuclear 
power for developing countries and taking an 
active part in work aimed at protecting the 
environment against pollution. 

15. The Viet-Namese delegation considered that 
the Agency deserved the highest credit for never 
having neglected its technical assistance and 
promotional work. It was to be regretted, 
however, that despite the Agency's best efforts the 
proportion of technical assistance requests that 
could be met had diminished appreciably in 1972. 
That state of affairs was due to the general fall in 
the value of money, added to the chronic penury of 
the Agency's own resources. 
16. To help the Agency overcome that 
difficulty during the next year, his delegation 
wished to urge all Member States to support the 
Board's proposal that the target of $ 3 million for 
voluntary contributions should be maintained [3 ] 
and the amount of the Regular Budget increased 
by 8. 8% in comparison with the past year. [4 ] 
Without the combined efforts of all, especially the 
advanced countries, the Agency would not be able 
to implement its programme of activities for 
1973, and the programme for the following six 
years would undoubtedly suffer. 
17. That programme, in his delegation's 
opinion, had been the subject of careful and 
rational planning and deserved to be approved as 
a whole. The document setting forth the 
programme, very concise in its new format, not 
only clearly showed the evolution of the various 
proposed activities of the Agency but also laid 
down the guidelines for concerted international 
action, guidelines which would be of great value 
to Member States and help them in orienting their 
nuclear programmes towards more active 
regional and international co-operation. 
18. As regards regional co-operation in 
particular, the Viet-Namese delegation had 
learned with pleasure that the Regional Co-
operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology, concluded among the countries of 
Asia and South East Asia, had entered into force 
in June. [5 ] It earnestly hoped that a certain 
number of pilot projects of common interest to all 
countries in the region would be implemented in 
the near future under the auspices, and with the 
help, of the Agency and advanced countries. 
19. The first co-operative projects should, in 
his view, relate to subjects of practical research 
which could, within a reasonable time, bring 
about a clear improvement in the economic and 
social conditions of the countries in the region. 
[3] GC(XVI)/485, para. 1.28. 
[4] Ibid., para. 1.19. 
[5 ] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 

document INFCIRC/167. 

That would be an irrefutable proof of the benefits 
of the atom and of the usefulness of, and the need 
for, regional co-operation; Governments would 
thus be encouraged to make every effort to 
collaborate in integrating research projects into 
a regional framework. His country, for its part, 
was willing to co-operate in the application of 
nuclear techniques in medicine and agriculture, 
especially in activation analysis and the 
preservation of food-stuffs by gamma rays. 

20. Another, no less important, sphere of 
regional co-operation was systematic training of 
medium-level technicians. As his delegation had 
pointed out on several occasions at previous 
sessions, the lack of technical personnel was a 
serious handicap besetting his country's nuclear 
projects. The Agency had played an effective role 
in the training of senior personnel by awarding 
fellowships and organizing seminars and courses 
at the regional and interregional levels. The 
problem of training medium-level technicians 
nevertheless remained, and could only be solved 
radically within the framework of regional 
co-operation with the help of the Agency and other 
international and regional organizations. The 
Organization of the Ministers of Education of 
South East Asia had given proof of its special 
interest in that activity by holding in Saigon in 
December 1971 a seminar on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 
21. Through its participation in the current 
session, the Government of Viet-Nam wished to 
give evidence of its continued interest in the 
progress achieved by the Agency in the pursuit of 
its objectives. Although in the past year his 
country's efforts in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy had inevitably been very limited owing to 
the particularly difficult situation prevailing 
there, he was certain that its research programme, 
modest as it was, would form a good basis of work 
for the better days to come. He fervently hoped 
that, in the very near future, Viet-Nam would be 
able to associate itself more closely and effectively 
with the great work being carried out by the 
Agency in extending the benefits of the atom to all 
nations. 
22. Mr. SETHNA (India) congratulated the 
President on his unanimous election and thanked 
the Mexican authorities for having invited the 
Conference to meet in Mexico City, for the 
excellent arrangements and for the hospitality it 
had extended to participants. 
23. He welcomed the Agency's newest Member 
State, the People's Republic of Bangladesh, [6 ] 
with which India had very cordial relations. 
Assuring Bangladesh of his country's complete 
co-operation, he said he expected that the new 
Member State would play an important and growing 
role within the Agency. 
24. The work of the Conference had been 
considerably facilitated by the excellent 
[6] Bangladesh became a Member on 
27 September 1972. 
-3 



GC(XVI)/OR. 155 

documentation presented by the Director General. 
Under Mr. Eklund's wise leadership the Agency 
had made great progress towards achieving the 
objectives enshrined in the Statute. The Fourth 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy, which had been a further historic 
step along that path, had provided evidence of the 
Director General's administrative qualities. The 
Indian delegation hoped that Mr. Eklund would 
continue in office for many years to come. 

25. India was happy to note that the Agency was 
assuming ever wider responsibilities. As far as 
regulatory activities were concerned, substantial 
progress had been made in the negotiation and 
implementation of safeguards agreements - project 
agreements, transfer agreements, and agreements 
in connection with NPT. 
26. The Agency had also taken a keen interest in 
the important question of the effects of nuclear 
energy on the environment. However, he noted 
with concern that the promotional activities of the 
Agency, financed from its annually increasing 
budgets, had been somewhat curtailed or, at best, 
had remained stationary. The Indian delegation 
hoped that the growing importance which was 
being attached to the Agency's regulatory 
functions would not lead to a situation where the 
Agency's principal objective under the Statute - to 
seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world - would no longer receive 
highest priority. Moreover, it was a statutory 
requirement that, in carrying out its functions, 
the Agency should not make assistance to Members 
subject to any political, economic, military, or 
other conditions incompatible with the provisions 
of the Statute. 
27. The untimely death of Mr. Sarabhai, on 
30 December 1971, had been a great loss for 
India. The numerous messages of condolence 
received by the Indian authorities had eloquently 
demonstrated the high esteem he had enjoyed in 
the world of science, and especially in the domain 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
28. During the past year, India had maintained 
its rate of progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
technology and in fundamental research. On 
22 May of the current year, the PURNIMA reactor, 
a zero-power plutonium-fuelled fast reactor for 
neutronic investigations in multiplying assemblies, 
had become critical. It was being used to obtain 
the basic data required to design a pulsed fast 
reactor at the Reactor Research Centre recently 
established at Kalpakkam, near Madras. 
29. On 11 August 1972, India's second power 
reactor, which was at the same time the first 
unit of the Rajasthan Atomic Power Station, had 
become critical. The collaboration between 
Atomic Energy of Canada Limited and Canadian 
industry on the one hand and the Indian Atomic 
Energy Commission and Indian industry on the 
other was a notable example of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
All major civil engineering work for the second 
unit of that project had been completed and the 
installation of nuclear and conventional components 
was in progress. The second unit was expected 
to achieve criticality in the first half of 1975. 

30. The power reactors at the Madras Atomic 
Power Project, which had already reached an 
advanced stage of construction, would become 
critical some time later. India had also recently 
announced the construction at Narora, near Delhi, 
of its fourth nuclear power station, which would 
consist of two units each producing 235 MW(e). 
31. In a statement made at the Conference's 
previous session his predecessor had mentioned 
that India had shortly before embarked on a 
programme for the design and construction of a 
fast breeder test reactor in collaboration with 
France. [7 ] That reactor, with a capacity of 
15 MW(e), would be basically similar to the 
Rapsodie reactor at Cadarache in France, but 
modified for power generation. It would form 
part of the Reactor Research Centre being set up 
near Madras. A nuclear fuel complex had been 
set up at Hyderabad to produce the nuclear fuel 
required for the thermal reactors under 
construction and planned as well as Zircaloy 
materials for the cladding of the fuel elements. 
32. Apart from power generation, India had 
continued to make progress in many peaceful 
uses of the atom. For example, a project for the 
radiosterilization of medical products had been 
undertaken by the Atomic Energy Commission in 
co-operation with the United Nations Development 
Programme, the Agency acting as executing 
agency. With the irradiation plant it would be 
possible to sterilize, initially, approximately 
3300 cubic metres of medical and surgical products 
and other materials of interest to hospitals and to 
the pharmaceutical industry. Ultimately, the 
capacity of the plant could be increased tenfold, 
so that it would be able to process approximately 
33 000 cubic metres of material annually. The 
construction and operation of the plant, which 
was expected to be commissioned towards the end 
of 1973, would also help in acquiring the skills 
needed to build other important irradiation 
facilities, not only for the radiosterilization of 
medical products but also for other forms of 
radiation processing. 
33. Permissible levels of radioactive contamination 
in working areas and in the environment 
were set in accordance with very rigid standards 
and were related to the working and environmental 
conditions obtaining in India. It was India's 
policy to establish at each major nuclear 
installation environmental surveillance laboratories 
for undertaking local studies on micrometeorological 
conditions, population living habits and 
possible contamination of products harvested in the 
vicinity of the installations. Such investigations 
were directed towards the evaluation of 
contamination pathways at different levels of the 
food chain, population living habits and 
[7] GC(XV)/OR. 146, para. 96. 
-4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 155 


occupational distribution, and contaminant 
concentration factors in the different environmental 
areas. The population exposure control 
programme involved body burden measurement 
operations for assessing the impact of radioactive 
releases on the population in general and for 
calculating the body elimination rates of the 
nuclides ingested by people living in the vicinity 
of the radiation areas under surveillance. 

34. India was dedicated to the principle and 
practice of international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and was happy to 
share its experience and its expertise with the 
Agency and with other countries. At the same 
time, it gratefully acknowledged the assistance 
which it received from the Agency and from other 
countries. During the year under review, India 
had ratified agreements on co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy with the Socialist 
Republic of Romania and the Federal Republic of 
Germany. It was glad to note that under 
agreements with other countries and under Agency 
programmes satisfactory progress had been made 
in various fields, such as information exchange, 
fellowships and expert missions, the placement 
of trainees, and the organization of seminars. 
His country was particularly gratified that a joint 
FAO/IAEA Symposium on Recent Advances in the 
Radiation Preservation of Food was to be held at 
Trombay from 13 to 17 November 1972. About 
100 scientists would be attending the meeting. 
Immediately afterwards, FAO and the Agency 
would also be convening a panel on the application 
of food irradiation in developing countries. 

35. The Government of India took great pride 
in the fact that the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
had entered into force on 12 June 1972. The 
conclusion of the agreement, which covered 
South Asia, South East Asia and the Pacific and 
Far East, held much promise of effective 
collaborative efforts for all parties under the 
auspices of the Agency. 
36. The Indian delegation had noted that the Board 
had proposed to set the 1973 target for voluntary 
contributions at $ 3 million. He was happy to 
announce that India would be contributing the 
equivalent of $45 000 in Indian currency, which 
was a little higher than the amount corresponding 
to its base rate of assessment under the Regular 
Budget. 
37. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania) associated himself 
with the congratulations offered to the President 
on his election and expressed heartfelt thanks to 
the Mexican Government for its generous 
hospitality. 
38. Analysis of the Agency's activities showed 
that it sought to establish world peace and 
co-operation by promoting development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. There were 
numerous sources of conflict in the world, but it 
was hoped that they would be eliminated. 
Romania, to the extent of its ability, was actively 
seeking to promote peacefully the cause of 
international security and co-operation. It was 
firmly convinced that the activities devolving upon 
international organizations could not meet with 
full success until peace prevailed throughout the 
world and countries exercised policies of mutual 
respect. 

39. It therefore hoped to accelerate general 
nuclear disarmament and attached great 
importance to a world disarmament conference in 
which all countries of the world would participate 
on an equal footing. In that respect the Agency 
should promote the establishment of a specific 
programme to halt the production of nuclear 
weapons and draw up a security treaty, 
universal in scope and obligatory in character, 
which would both prohibit the further production 
of fissionable materials for military uses and 
release existing stockpiles of such materials for 
peaceful purposes. 
40. As the President of Romania had stated, 
the time had come to silence the clangour of arms 
for ever, to establish lasting world peace among 
all nations and ensure that countries devoted all 
their material and human potential to economic 
and social development and to the solution of 
problems of vital importance for the future of all 
mankind. 
41. It was incumbent upon the Agency to direct 
all its efforts toward international co-operation 
in the fields of science and industry by devoting 
special attention to the needs of the developing 
countries. To that end the Romanian delegation 
proposed that the Agency should include in its 
future programme the elaboration of an 
international agreement on universal co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, under 
which all States would, without discrimination, 
benefit from the results of the conquests of 
science and technology in that field. A new 
impulse should be given to co-operation by 
replacing the concept of "assistance for development" 
by that of "co-operation for development". 
Such collaboration should be founded on the active 
participation of all countries and not simply 
limited to the granting of technical assistance by 
one group of countries to another. 
42. The Agency's programme should continue to 
maintain a balance among its principal activities, 
especially with regard to accomplishment of the 
aims of NPT. However, the Agency could not 
perform its work effectively unless all countries 
participated in its activities. For that reason it 
was completely anomalous that the German 
Democratic Republic, the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea and the Democratic Republic 
of Viet-Nam were not yet members of the Agency 
and steps should be taken to remedy that 
situation. 
43. Romania was making considerable efforts 
to accelerate its economic progress, which was 
linked to the peaceful use of atomic energy. It 
had therefore paid special attention to the 
orientation of research tasks involving the 
-5 



GC(XVI)/OR. 155 

application of nuclear technology in industry, 
agriculture, medicine, biology, etc. The results 
obtained were very satisfactory. Nuclear power 
stations would play a preponderant role in nuclear 
power programmes. In anticipation of the 
construction of nuclear power plants in the near 
future, the Romanian Government had decided to 
found an institute of nuclear technology. He took 
the opportunity to thank the Agency for its 
assistance in the setting up of that establishment. 

44. The annual report of the Board was proof 
of the efficiency of the Agency's activities, 
particularly with regard to nuclear power. The 
manner in which, the Agency had carried out its 
work in that field represented a guarantee that it 
would play an active role in the industrial 
applications of atomic energy. Parallel with that 
activity, the Agency had exercised wise judgement 
in the application of isotopes and radiation in 
industry, agriculture, medicine, biology, 
hydrology, etc. The results obtained in the 
peaceful application of nuclear explosions were 
also a source of satisfaction. In the future that 
activity should be extended to all the technical 
and economic aspects of the problem. 
45. The Agency should pursue its efforts to 
train staff in the field of nuclear power. 
Co-operation with other organizations within the 
United Nations family would accelerate the 
training of technical personnel. 
46. The Agency's draft programme for 
1973-78 had been elaborated with competence and 
clear vision and took into account various areas 
of international co-operation ranging from nuclear 
power to basic research. The Secretariat should 
carry out an analysis, of the scientific aspects of 
international co-operation in order to determine 
properly the needs of the developing countries. 
47. The Romanian Government would contribute 
in the same proportion as previously to the 1973 
Operational Budget and would make available to the 
Agency ten fellowships of one year's duration. 
48. He congratulated the Director General and 
the Secretariat on their work and assured them 
that Romania would provide full support for the 
Agency's activities, 
49. Mr. HOSSAIN (Bangladesh) congratulated 
the President on his election and thanked the 
Conference for having approved Bangladesh for 
membership of the Agency [8 ]. The Conference 
had thereby acknowledged that Bangladesh was 
capable of implementing a nuclear energy 
programme within the framework of the Charter 
of the United Nations and in accordance with the 
objectives of the Agency. 
50. The activities of Bangladesh in the realm of 
nuclear energy fell within the purview of the 
Ministry of Scientific and Technological Research, 
and it was planned to set up an atomic energy 
commission to co-ordinate the relevant 
[8] By Resolution GC(XVI)/RES/287, para. 1. 
programmes. Those activities were divided into 
two general categories - nuclear power production 
and the application of radioisotopes and radiation 
sources in medicine, agriculture and industry. 
Additional fields were pure and applied research 
and prospection for radioactive ores. 

51. The Government had commissioned a highlevel 
committee to determine the country's 
energy needs and to advise on the feasibility of 
constructing nuclear power stations. A large 
number of engineers and scientists had already 
been trained in that area and a limited research 
programme on nuclear technology was under way. 
A reactor design institute would soon enable 
nuclear engineers to improve their knowledge, 
and his country hoped to receive assistance from 
more advanced countries and from the Agency. 
52. Deposits of heavy minerals, specially 
rutile, ilmenite and zircon, together with traces 
of monazite, had been discovered, and a pilot 
extraction plant would make it possible to decide 
whether their exploitation could be considered 
economically viable. 
53. The Atomic Energy Centre at Dacca had 
obtained interesting results in pure and applied 
research, and several theoretical physicists of 
Bengali origin had been granted research 
fellowships at the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste (the Trieste Centre). 
54. In agriculture it had proved possible to 
obtain four improved varieties of jute and four of 
rice by means of irradiation. The four rice 
varieties had been tested against 73 other 
varieties, and two of them, together with a 
Philippine variety, had been judged the best by 
the International Rice Institute. The new seed had 
yielded as many as nine tons of rice per hectare, 
and the crop had matured a month earlier than the 
best variety available at present. In addition, the 
protein content was higher. The new rice and 
jute varieties were to be distributed throughout 
the crop-growing regions. The success attained 
had encouraged Bangladesh to set up an institute 
of nuclear agriculture, which was scheduled to 
start work in 1973. 
55. In food preservation by irradiation, 
laboratory experiments had been carried out on 
the disinfestation of rice and wheat, and on 
prolonging the shelf-life of certain food-stuffs, 
more particularly fish. 
56. There were nuclear medicine centres in 
existence at three university medical faculties 
and that number was due to be raised to eight. 
At a later stage, that area of study would be 
included in the higher educational courses. The 
university medical faculties were organizing 
their own deep radiotherapy services, and a 
personnel dosimetry service had been established 
for them. 
57. Implementation of the research programme 
had demonstrated that Bangladesh was capable of 
setting up the technological infrastructure 
-6 



GC(XVI)/OR. 155 


necessary for developing its own electronics and 
precision instrument industries, and for 
introducing advanced techniques into research 
methods. He hoped that, in the light of the 
progress achieved, the Agency would continue its 
assistance on an increased scale in the form of 
research contracts, fellowships and equipment. 

58. Generally speaking, the Agency's technical 
assistance had been remarkably effective, but 
there was need for systematic evaluation of the 
advantages gained so as to ascertain whether it 
might not be worth while channelling more 
resources into major joint projects. The Agency 
had set up research centres only in Europe; it 
should also consider establishing an institute of 
nuclear science and technology in Asia. 
Furthermore, scientific meetings sponsored by 
the Agency and the Trieste Centre should be held 
in developing countries so as to ensure that the 
participants from those countries gained maximum 
benefit. 
59. The nuclear power market survey was a 
commendable venture. In that connection the 
advanced countries should standardize 100-300 MW 
reactor designs so as to cut down the cost of 
power stations in that range, and to permit their 
incorporation into national grid systems. The 
advanced countries and international financial 
bodies should approve low-interest loans for the 
construction of the power stations in question. 
60. As a country with 75 million inhabitants, 
Bangladesh was rapidly rehabilitating its economy 
and already moving towards the legendary goal of 
Sonar Bangla (Golden Bengal); sure of the good 
will of all countries and international organizations, 
Bangladesh would be able to play its part in the 
community of nations. In conclusion, he 
commended the Agency and the Director General 
on the work that had been accomplished and 
thanked the people and Government of Mexico for 
their hospitality. 
61. Mr. IVANCHEV (Bulgaria) congratulated 
the President on his unanimous election. He 
thanked the Mexican Government for its 
hospitality and welcomed the People's Republic 
of Bangladesh as a new Member of the Agency. 
62. In that connection he expressed the belief 
that the German Democratic Republic would also 
not be long in gaining admission to the Agency. 
That would be completely in conformity with the 
principles of the Agency and would assist it in 
attaining its high objectives. It was appropriate 
to recall that the German Democratic Republic 
was one of the most highly industrialized countries 
in the world and had been one of the first to 
conclude with the Agency an agreement to 
implement Article III of NPT. 
63. Thanks to the continuous expansion of its 
activities the Agency had acquired an exceptional 
expertise in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
In discharging the obligations incumbent upon it 
in connection with NPT, it had increased its 
prestige on the international plane. Like all the 
other socialist countries, Bulgaria was conforming 
to the terms of Article III of NPT. 

64. The Bulgarian delegation had studied the 
activities of the Agency in all their aspects and 
accorded them its overall approval. Despite its 
limited financial means the Agency had always 
endeavoured to assist developing countries to 
draw the maximum benefit from nuclear energy. 
Its programme for 1973-78 conformed to the 
principles laid down in the Statute and took into 
account the constant progress of science and 
technology. The Secretariat had elaborated the 
programme with care, so that it faithfully 
reflected all the important aspects associated 
with the utilization of nuclear energy for the 
benefit of mankind. Technical assistance continued 
to be one of the Agency's principal activities. 
With the development of science and technology 
it was playing a more and more definite role in 
agriculture, biology, physics, public health, 
power engineering, waste management and other 
spheres involving the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy. 
65. In that connection the Agency should be 
congratulated on its future plans to compensate 
for the lack of resources by grouping related 
projects together, in order to achieve optimum 
utilization of its specialist personnel. Those 
measures would make it possible for larger sums 
to be allocated for the purchase of the necessary 
equipment. At a certain stage of development 
the services of experts could assume exceptional 
importance, and Bulgaria proposed to apply for 
expert assistance to deal with a specific problem. 
Economies might also have been achieved by 
denying technical assistance to States which could 
use it indirectly for military purposes. South 
Viet-Nam, South Korea and Israel fell into that 
category and the Bulgarian delegation could not 
approve of assistance being given to those 
countries. 
66. Bulgaria had already stated its satisfaction 
with the Agency's work in the field of safeguards 
and it was ready to support any measure which 
would facilitate the Agency's supervisory 
operations. 
67. Since there was a great need to increase 
world food supplies a particularly important role 
devolved upon the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of 
Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture. However, 
the contribution made by the Agency to the 
financing of the Division's activities seemed too 
high in relation to the functions it was called upon 
to perform. When the budget for the Division was 
prepared, the Agency should have insisted that 
FAO's contribution be increased, since the latter 
was more directly concerned with food and 
agricultural questions. 
68. The work of the Agency in the information 
field was extremely valuable. Bulgaria therefore 
lent its support to the proposal to extend the 
operations of INIS to include the full subject scope 
as from 1973. For more than a year Bulgaria 
had been participating in the preparation of input 
-7 



GC(XVI)/OR. 155 

data and would shortly be adopting a more 
advanced system for transmitting them. 

69. As regards radioactive contamination of the 
environment, the Agency was competent not only 
to give expert advice but also to draw up 
appropriate standards. Bulgaria would support 
any measures the Agency might undertake to reach 
a satisfactory solution to that problem. The latter 
was closely allied to the question of radioactive 
waste disposal. Bulgarian experts had succeeded 
in devising a method for treating low-activity 
waste with the aid of locally produced bitumen and 
natural sorption agents, and had also developed 
the necessary equipment. 
70. Nuclear technology and radioisotope 
techniques were now playing an ever-increasing 
role in solving problems vital to the development 
of various countries. In Bulgaria the application 
of radioisotopes was constantly increasing, 
particularly in the following fields: medicine, 
geology, flaw detection, agriculture, hydrology 
and power engineering. Several medical 
institutions were now able to apply modern methods 
of diagnosis and treatment and part of the 
equipment used for that purpose had been supplied 
by the Agency. Nuclear physics techniques were 
being used for the prospecting and working of 
reserves of coal, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, 
oil and natural gas. 
71. In large mechanical engineering works and 
assembly shops gamma spectroscopy was making 
it possible to detect manufacturing defects at 
minimum cost. In agriculture, Bulgarian experts 
had also achieved positive results. Through the 
application of radiation they had obtained highyield 
pea varieties with the protein content 
increased from 3% to 6%, In the case of maize 
and barley they had obtained radio-induced 
mutations which were of very great value to 
agriculture. The irradiation of seeds had served 
to stimulate plant growth to some extent, 
72. Those results had been obtained thanks to 
the aid provided by the Soviet Union and to the 
collaboration of the socialist countries within the 
framework of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (COMECON). The consummation of 
that collaboration through the establishment of a 
joint undertaking, "Interatominstrument", of an 
international working group to study reactor 
designs and of several scientific and technical 
co-ordination boards could not fail to contribute 
to the rapid development of science and technology. 
73. Bulgaria, whose socialist economy was 
developing successfully, was experiencing 
increasing energy requirements. At the end of 
1944 the per capita energy consumption was 
45 kWh, while in 1971 it had risen to 2230 kWh, 
In 1980 it was expected to be 6400 kWh, rising to 
18 000 kWh by the year 2000. That rapid increase 
in electrical energy requirements had induced 
Bulgaria to make a survey of its conventional fuel 
reserves, the results of which had led to the 
decision to construct its first nuclear power 
station "Koslodui" having a water moderated and 
cooled reactor with an initial capacity of 
880 MW(e), rising ultimately to 1760 MW(e). The 
construction of the power station was under way 
and the first reactor would be commissioned in 
1974. 

74. In conclusion he declared that his 
Government would not cease to support all the 
efforts made by the Agency to promote the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy for the 
benefit of mankind. 
75. Mr, RAZAFINDRATANDRA (Madagascar) 
congratulated the President on his election and 
expressed his delegation's wish that the session 
would bring its work to a successful issue. He 
also thanked the Mexican Government for the 
hospitality it had shown the Conference. 
76. Madagascar was a small country which, 
like most developing countries, had to solve 
many development problems, but which, having 
only limited financial resources, could not hope 
to tackle them all. Nevertheless, in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy it had achieved 
some progress through the efforts of the few 
specialists at its disposal and the assistance 
provided by the Agency, the United Nations and 
certain friendly countries - assistance consisting 
in the services of experts, in the provision of 
equipment and fellowships, and in training 
programmes and research contracts. 
77. Even so, as was doubtless the case in other 
developing countries, the technical assistance 
provided by the Agency was not sufficient; 
comprehensive studies would be needed if the funds 
required to finance the activities of such countries 
were to be found. Bilateral assistance from the 
advanced countries would also have to be 
increased in the years to come. The Malagasy 
delegation had noted with interest the pledges of 
contributions already made. On 20 June 1972 the 
Board had set at $ 3 million the target for 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 
1973, subject, of course, to approval by the 
Conference. Madagascar would meet its 
financial obligations. 
78. During the debate on the draft amendments 
to Article VI of the Statute at the Conference's 
session in 1970, Madagascar had been one of the 
Members that had suggested an adjournment for a 
few months in the hope of arriving at a compromise 
which might rally a large majority of votes [9 ]. 
That suggestion had not been accepted, and one of 
the proposed sets of amendments had been approved 
by the Conference by 54 votes [10], According to 
the latest information received, only 44 Members 
had so far deposited their instruments of 
acceptance of those amendments [11 ]. 
79. Although Madagascar had abstained in the 
vote in question, it figured among those 44 
[9] GC(XIV)/COM. 2/OR. 54, para. 1. 
[10] GC(XIV)/OR. 142, para. 19. 
[11] INFCIRC/159/Rev. 2. 
-8 



GC(XVI)/OR. 155 


Members since it hoped for greater participation 
by the developing Members in the Agency's 
governing bodies. In order to bring the new text 
of Article VI.A-D into force as soon as possible, 
the Malagasy delegation wished to appeal to 
Members that had not already done so to accept 
the new Article VI of the Statute as early as 
possible. It was indeed astonishing that some 
Members which had been co-authors of the 
amendments and which had so staunchly 
defended them two years earlier had not yet 
deposited their instruments of acceptance. 


80. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) wished to congratulate the President on 
his election and thank the Mexican Government 
for inviting the Conference to hold its current 
session in Mexico. 
81. Before discussing the activities of the 
Agency, the Byelorussian delegation wished to 
emphasize that the agreements concluded between 
the Soviet Union and the United States, the 
agreement on West Berlin, and the agreements 
relating to co-operation between the Soviet Union 
and France and several other West European 
countries had created favourable conditions for 
a general detente, the establishment of good 
neighbourly relations and the consolidation of 
peace. It could be stated without exaggeration 
that during the past year the Agency had done 
useful work by strengthening co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. The safeguards 
functions which it had assumed under Article III 
of NPT had enhanced its authority at the 
international level. 
82. After carefully studying the Agency's 
programme, Byelorussia noted with satisfaction 
that it had been prepared with care and that it 
took account of the numerous problems involved 
in the use of atomic energy for the good of the 
world as a whole. 
83. As regards the various items of the 
programme, Byelorussia was satisfied with the 
work carried out by the Division of Nuclear Safety 
and Environmental Protection, which had in 
particular prepared standards governing the use 
of radioactive substances and drafted 
recommendations concerning the effects of 
radioactivity on the environment. It also approved 
the programme relating to nuclear power and 
reactors. The activities in that field concerned 
both advanced and developing countries. It was a 
familiar fact that the Division of Nuclear Power 
and Reactors was endeavouring to strengthen 
international co-operation in relation to the 
generation of nuclear power and other peaceful 
uses of nuclear reactors, 
84. INIS had begun in 1972 to extend its operations 
to full subject scope without involving additional 
expenditure in the 1973 programme. The 
programmes relating to physical sciences and 
dosimetry were also useful. The activities in 
food and agriculture proposed for 1973-1978 took 
into account the main problems likely to be 
encountered in that field. A point that should be 
made, however, was that the Agency was bearing 
a considerably larger share of the cost of the 
Joint Division than FAO, a much larger 
organization. As regards the Department of 
Safeguards and Inspection, its programme had 
been prepared with care and would enable the 
Agency to satisfy the obligations it had assumed 
in connection with NPT; accordingly it deserved 
to be approved in full. 

85. He expressed satisfaction that the People's 
Republic of Bangladesh had been admitted to 
membership of the Agency. That action was in 
conformity with the principle of universality which 
every international organization should apply. 
The German Democratic Republic, however, was 
still not a member of the Agency. Under 
Article IV of the Statute, any State which accepted 
the Statute, whether a Member of the United 
Nations or not, could become a member of the 
Agency. That applied fully to the German 
Democratic Republic, which accordingly fulfilled 
the conditions required for admission to the 
Agency. The German Democratic Republic had 
done significant work in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and was among the first countries 
to have signed and ratified NPT and concluded a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. Its 
presence would help the Agency to discharge its 
growing obligations. 
86. In 1972, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic would celebrate the fiftieth anniversary 
of its founding. During that period Byelorussia 
had created a vast industry, a diversified 
agriculture and a large complex of scientifc and 
higher educational institutions. It had several 
research institutes and a large group of highly 
qualified specialists. All that created favourable 
conditions for the application of atomic energy in 
the country's economy. Details of the work 
carried out in Byelorussia in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy could be found in the brochure 
entitled "The Atom for Peace in Byelorussia", 
which was being distributed to all delegates. 

87. Nuclear power was developing rapidly in 
many countries. The Institute of Nuclear Energy 
of the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences was 
carrying out original studies on the development 
of large nuclear power plants using a 
dissociating gas as coolant. 
88. In view of the importance of the problems 
associated with fast reactor power stations, the 
Agency had been invited by the USSR State 
Committee on the Utilization of Atomic Energy 
to arrange a seminar on gas-cooled fast reactors 
in Minsk. The seminar had been held from 
24 to 28 July 1972 and had been attended by 
30 experts from ten countries, including Belgium, 
France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, 
the United Kingdom and the United States, and 
three international organizations. Twenty-one 
papers had been presented. The Institute of 
Nuclear Energy had not only assisted in arranging 
the seminar, but had also demonstrated the work 
that was being done to develop power stations 
equipped with nuclear reactors cooled with a 
dissociating gas. 
-9 



GC(XVI)/OR. 155 

89. The experts had seen that the studies on 
breeders using helium, carbon dioxide and a 
dissociating gas were opening up new horizons 
for the development of nuclear power, and showed 
promise of leading to a substantial improvement 
in the economics of nuclear power. The Agency 
therefore had every reason to pursue that 
complex and important avenue of research and to 
encourage the countries concerned to unite their 
efforts with a view to resolving the problems. 
90. In 1972 Byelorussia had been happy to 
receive the Director General of the Agency, to 
inform him of its progress in the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy and to show him several of the 
facilities of the Institute of Nuclear Energy which 
were used for the study of dissociating gases. 
91. Byelorussia would continue to carry out work 
on a cost-free basis under contracts concluded 
with the Agency, and to exchange information with 
several countries. In 1972 the Institute of 
Nuclear Energy had been visited by experts from 
several countries, both individually and in groups, 
who had come to exchange experience and knowledge 
in nuclear power engineering, radiochemistry 
and the applications of gamma radiation. Staff of 
the Institute had also visited other countries for 
the same purpose. 

92. The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
was thus contributing substantially towards the 
strengthening of international relations and the 
exchange of scientific results. It was pleased 
with the increasing efforts being made by 
COMECON with a view to co-ordinating work in 
several socialist countries. The subjects that 
had been dealt with by COMECON included power 
stations equipped with breeder reactors cooled 
with dissociating gas. 
93. It was to be hoped that international cooperation 
in the nuclear power field would help to 
accelerate the application of scientific achievements 
to the development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. 
94. Mr. ELMEHRIK (Libyan Arab Republic) 
thanked the Mexican Government for its 
generosity in welcoming the participants of the 
sixteenth regular session of the General Conference, 
thus giving them an opportunity to admire the 
beauty of Mexico City, to see the progress made 
by Mexico in the realm of science and to 
appreciate its contribution to the strengthening 
of peace in its part of the world. 
95. Realizing the importance of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, the Government of the 
Libyan Arab Republic had set up a national 
committee to promote them, to make the best use 
of the Agency's technical assistance programmes 
and to participate as closely as possible in its 
activities. 
96. The Agency must make every effort to 
reduce the gap between the advanced and 
developing countries, as it was a fact that the 
former had used all possible means to secure 
domination in the nuclear field, whilst a number 
of developing countries were striving, with the 
utmost difficulty, to provide the simplest 
foundation for themselves. Unless the Agency 
followed a wise policy, the conflict of interest 
between the two groups of countries would lead it 
away from the objectives laid down in its Statute. 

97. Libya was a vast country consisting of more 
than 90% arid land; it did not have steady sources 
of fresh water for drinking or irrigation. The 
implementation of agricultural and industrial 
projects had always been extremely difficult for 
that reason. Most of the large towns were on the 
Mediterranean coast, which was the only part of 
the country with a favourable natural environment. 
The only way of overcoming such unfavourable 
conditions was to acquire an abundant source of 
energy. Atomic energy had in fact proven itself 
in various regions of the world and could solve the 
water problem. Libya therefore wished to enlist 
the aid of the Agency and friendly countries in 
order to transform its desert regions into 
productive areas. 
98. Libya was well aware of the serious 
financial problems the Agency had to contend with 
and was prepared to meet its responsibilities, as 
a Member State, to try to improve that situation. 
However, it was not always justifiable to take the 
gross national product as a criterion for fixing 
the level of a State's financial contribution: that 
could lead to errors of appraisal. It should not 
be forgotten that Libya was undertaking social 
and economic development programmes to make 
up for years of delay and stagnation, and that 
those programmes called for great efforts and 
involved heavy expenditure; his country would 
have to transform its society into a solid and 
active community, and to do that it had to solve 
problems of education and professional training, 
improve agricultural methods and establish a 
national industry. It had had to carry on a long 
struggle for its freedom and had been a field of 
battle during the Second World War, so that it had 
faced an overwhelming task of reconstruction. 
99. However, those considerations did not 
cause the revolutionary Government of Libya to 
forget its duties to a larger community, and it 
would not fail to assist other countries when it 
could. Since it was a Member of such international 
organizations as FAO, WHO, and UNESCO, its 
opinions were heard at international conferences 
as had been the case, in particular, at the United 
Nations Conference on the Human Environment 
held in Stockholm. 

100. The Government of Libya considered that 
the contributions it paid to the Agency were fairly 
assessed and represented the maximum it could 
afford. 
• The meeting rose at 6. 20 p.m. 
- 10 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
4 May 1973* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Friday, 29 September 1972, at 10. 45 a. m. 


President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 
later: Mr. QUARTEY (Ghana) 


Item 

of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

10 
Closing date of the 1 -3 
session 

9 
General debate and 4 - 136 
report for 1971-72 
(continued) 

Statements by the 
delegates of: 

Czechoslovak Socialist 4-1 0 

Republic 

Philippines 11 - 26 
Italy 27 - 37 
Mexico 38 - 57 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 58 - 72 

Republic 

Yugoslavia 
73 - 84 

Hungary 
85 - 97 

Ireland 
98 - 109 

Austria 
110 - 120 

Turkey 
121 - 130 

Gabon 
131 - 136 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 25 October 1972. 
** GC(XVI)/490. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC(XVI)/OR. 156 


THE RECORD 

CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

1. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to 
fix the closing date of the session, on the 
recommendation of the General Committee. 
2. The General Committee had considered the 
matter and had authorized him to recommend on its 
behalf that 3 October 1972 be fixed as the closing 
date, 
• 3. The Committee's recommendation was 
accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1971-72 
(GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr.l and 3, 488) 
(continued) [1 ] 

4. Mr. BARABAS (Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic) after thanking the Mexican Government 
for its generous invitation to hold the session at 
Tlatelolco and congratulating the President on his 
election, expressed disappointment at the 
relatively small number of States that had 
concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency 
in connection with the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [2 ]. 
However, among those States which had done so 
were several countries with substantial 
programmes devoted to the peaceful use of atomic 
energy. Czechoslovakia had concluded its 
safeguards agreement with the Agency [3 ] on 
3 March 1972, and numerous measures for 
implementation of the agreement had been taken 
since then. His Government indeed gave its full 
support to the Agency's efforts at perfecting the 
practical arrangements for concluding safeguards 
agreements and at developing the theoretical 
bases for safeguards procedures. That support 
would also take the form, for example, of 
analysis by Czechoslovak laboratories of samples 
of nuclear materials subject to Agency safeguards. 

5. Among the safeguards agreements concluded 
recently had been one between the Agency and the 
German Democratic Republic, and a propos of that 
event he wished to remind the Conference that the 
Agency, being an organization based on the 
principle of universality, should admit the 
German Democratic Republic to membership, not 
only because that State had signed NPT and 
concluded a safeguards agreement but also 
because it stood at a very high level of 
development as far as the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy were concerned. 
6. Since the Conference was meeting in a 
Latin American country, it might be of interest 
[1] GC(XVI)/OR. 155. 
[2 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[3 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/173. 
to delegates to learn that Cuba had recently been 
admitted to membership of the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (COMECON). 

7. The Czechoslovak delegation on the whole 
approved the Agency's long-term programme, [4] 
and particularly welcomed the detailed activities 
planned for safeguards, radioisotope applications, 
nuclear power, health and safety, and radioecology. 
His delegation also took a positive attitude towards 
the International Nuclear Information System 
(INIS). 
8. Technical assistance, of course, continued 
to be a vital activity, and as his delegation had 
said in the Board of Governors in February 1972, 
greater care should be devoted to ensuring an 
equitable distribution of technical assistance as 
between expert services and equipment, and care 
should be taken to avoid any discrimination as 
regards the geographical distribution of aid. 
9. On the subject of the budget, on which his 
delegation had already made its views known at the 
June meetings of the Board, it was unfortunate 
that the attempts at achieving economies had led 
to curtailment of a number of projects. However, 
his delegation would not vote against the relevant 
budget resolution before the Conference. 
10. He had pleasure in announcing that in 1973 
the Czechoslovak Government would host one 
scientific symposium and one study tour for 
participants from developing countries, and would 
make available five long-term and four one-year 
fellowships for training at scientific institutes in 
the country. The Czechoslovak contribution to the 
General Fund would also be increased by 
50 000 crowns, making a total of 200 000 crowns 
in 1973. 
11. Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) remarked that 
his Government, in view of the close ties which 
had existed between the Philippines and Mexico for 
over four hundred years, was particularly 
gratified that Mexico City should be the venue for 
the current session of the Conference, and felt it 
was most appropriate that an experienced 
development economist who had had the opportunity 
to represent Mexico in various United Nations 
organizations, particularly the United Nations 
Conference on Trade and Development, should be 
elected President of the session. The Philippine 
Government had all down the years endeavoured to 
participate actively in the Agency's General 
Conferences. Such participation and the 
accompanying opportunity of exchanging views with 
colleagues all over the world represented an 
excellent means for taking stock of events and 
trends in the atomic energy field. However, 
continuous attendance inevitably represented a 
growing financial burden on Governments, and 
there was also the consideration that, as time 
went on, the subject-matter of the Conference 
[4] See document GC(XVI)/485 (The Agency's 
Programme for 1973-78 and Budget for 1973). 
-2 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 


tended to follow sin ever more stereotyped pattern. 
An injection of new ideas would therefore provide 
a stimulus to maintaining the present high level 
of participation, particularly by the developing 
countries. 

12. The past few years had seen a rapprochement 
between countries having different social and 
economic systems and the completion of the first 
steps towards world-wide disarmament as referred 
to in Article VI of NPT. It was gratifying that a 
growing number of countries were concluding 
safeguards agreements with the Agency under the 
terms of the Treaty, which the Philippines itself 
had already ratified. 
13. Those events were conspicuous evidence of 
man's capacity to resolve even the most difficult 
and controversial issues when there was a 
common will to do so. He wished therefore to 
appeal to all Member States and to all parties to 
the Treaty, particularly the nuclear-weapon 
States, to take steps to ensure the attainment of 
the aims and objectives of the Agency, particularly 
those referred to in Article III. A. 2 of the Statute 
and in Article IV of NPT, concerning the 
provision of assistance in the field of nuclear energy. 
14. The Agency's programme for 1973-78 and 
budget for 1973, as contained in 
document GC(XVI)/485, gave cause for grave 
concern on the part of all Member States 
interested in the work of the Agency. 
15. The proposed Regular Budget for 1973 
represented an assessment increase of 8. 8% 
attributed to a 9. 9% over-all increase in prices, 
including approximately 4. 5% due to the 
revaluation of currencies, less a 1.1% reduction 
in programme activities. [5 ] The greater part of 
the price increases were due to higher salaries 
and allowances for the staff of the Agency. If 
that trend continued, the Agency would soon find 
itself to be an organization with a very large 
number of highly-paid staff and a very limited, if 
not marginal, programme. 
16. The proposed budget for 1973 would thus 
result in substantially higher salaries and a 
decreased output per man. That kind of 
situation would undoubtedly lead to the bankruptcy 
of any organization, particularly one which was in 
any case faced with serious financial difficulties. 
It should be recalled that at the end of 
December 1971 the Agency had had a cash deficit 
for the first time in its history. 
17. In order to ease the Agency's financial 
situation, the Philippines was in favour of raising 
the Working Capital Fund to a level higher than 
$2 million, but would find it difficult to accept 
any budgetary procedures which were of doubtful 
legality. 
18. In his delegation's view, the programme of 
the Agency should show a real growth rate 
[5] Ibid., para. 1.23. 
corresponding to the average real growth rate of 
the gross national product of all Member States. 
The achievement of that goal might well involve 
great sacrifices by Member States, but it was 
only thus that the Agency could play a significant 
role in promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 

19. His Government attached great importance 
to technical assistance and appreciated the 
assistance granted by the Agency to the 
Philippines. The Philippine Atomic Energy 
Commission had indeed been able to pursue its 
activities in the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
mainly thanks to the varied types of assistance 
granted by the Agency. It was precisely because of 
its experience as a receiving country that the 
Philippines was in a position to inform the 
advanced countries of the inadequacy of the 
resources available for technical assistance and 
of the urgent need substantially to increase the 
target of $3 million, a figure which was 
unrealistically low. 

20. The Philippines was a country in which a 
certain amount of initial assistance gave rise to 
subsequent requirements which the country was 
itself incapable of meeting. Specifically, the 
need was for nuclear facilities of appropriate 
size and on acceptable financial terms. He hoped 
that the Agency would be able to continue its 
earlier effective assistance by helping the 
Philippines to find suppliers of the equipment and 
obtain easy terms of payment. The recent Agency 
survey was a valuable step in that direction. 
21. The Philippines had recently suffered a 
natural disaster which had caused damage 
greater than that suffered during the Second World 
War. Thanks to contributions by members of the 
international community and various international 
organizations, relief and rehabilitation work was 
now in progress, and he wished to express the 
appreciation of his Government to the States 
Members of the Agency and to the Agency's Staff 
Council for their generous contributions during 
the Philippines' hour of greatest need. He 
congratulated the Director General and the 
Secretariat on the formulation of the Agency's 
technical assistance programme and hoped that it 
could be adequately funded so as to render it 
meaningful. In spite of the natural disaster of the 
last summer, his Government would contribute 
to the General Fund an amount equal to the 
preceding year's contribution. Moreover, the 
Philippine Government would continue to provide 
two Type II fellowships. 
22. The United Nations Conference on the 
Human Environment held in Stockholm (the 
Stockholm Conference) showed that a 
reorientation of policies at national and international 
levels was required. The insufficiency 
of knowledge on numerous environmental problems 
and the inadequacy of organizational structures for 
safeguarding the environment had clearly emerged 
from the deliberations of the Stockholm 
Conference. 
-3 

GC(XVI)/OR. 156 

23. His delegation believed in the positive role 
which the Agency could play in combating 
environmental pollution because of the 
availability of proven nuclear research techniques 
and know-how in that area. It was to the Agency's 
credit that health and safety standards, covering 
every type of activity in which nuclear energy was 
employed, had been continuously and 
conscientiously developed. 
24. During the years since its establishment, 
the Agency had gained considerable experience in 
the evolution of an international machinery able 
to cope with the complex problems of an interdependent 
technological civilization. Member 
States, in spite of their constitutional need to 
preserve their independence and sovereignty, had 
found it possible to delegate to the Agency the 
exercise of certain prerogatives of their 
sovereignty. 
25. He desired to inform the General Conference 
of the Philippines' particular sensitivity to manmade 
environmental and ecological changes and 
his Government's strong objections to atmospheric 
tests of nuclear explosives. Such tests had a 
direct bearing on changes in the environment and 
ecology, changes which could lead to natural 
calamities all over the world. He therefore 
appealed to countries which were planning to 
undertake nuclear tests to desist from such 
activities. 
26. Finally he wished to draw the attention of 
the Conference to the fact that the Far East region, 
to which the Philippines belonged, had not been 
fully represented on the Board of Governors, and 
to take the opportunity of joining previous 
delegates in welcoming the People's Republic of 
Bangladesh to membership of the Agency. [6 ] 
27. Mr. PEDINI (Italy), after remarking how 
the excellent organization of the session by the 
Secretariat matched the generosity and imagination 
of the Mexican Government in inviting the 
Conference to hold it in Latin America, observed 
that the annual report (GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr. 1 
and 3, 488) had clearly underlined the numerous 
problems attending the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in the modern world. Italy, both as an 
independent State and as a member of the 
European community, was particularly concerned 
with those problems. 
28. For several years past the Agency had 
been devoting particular attention to studying the 
effects of nuclear energy on the environment. In 
the light of the emphasis placed on environmental 
problems at the recent Stockholm Conference, 
those activities on the part of the Secretariat 
clearly deserved every encouragement. 
29. The Italian Government was convinced that 
nuclear energy constituted the only valid 
[6] Bangladesh became a Member on 
27 September 1972. 
alternative to conventional power sources from the 
point of view of protection of the environment. 
One of the main purposes of the use of nuclear 
power had indeed always been the solution of the 
environmental problems which were threatening 
to place restrictions on economic and social 
development. A further effort should therefore 
be made by the Agency finally to dispose of the 
public apprehensions which were still aroused at 
the mention of the word "nuclear". 

30. The various market surveys on the 
feasibility of nuclear power in the developing 
countries undertaken by the Agency were of great 
value. Work of that nature fitted in perfectly 
with the aims and objectives of the Agency, and the 
nuclear power stations which, it was to be hoped, 
would result therefrom would help to meet power 
requirements and would play a decisive part in 
general economic development. 
31. In the field of nuclear documentation, Italy 
had always supported INIS, the value of which had 
been recognized from the outset by the participating 
countries. Consequently Italy had been 
unreservedly in favour of the recent decision by 
the Board of Governors to expand the activities 
of the system. 
32. There was now scarcely any need for him 
to enlarge upon the merits of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste (the 
Trieste Centre): those merits were known to 
everyone, and he was pleased to note that his 
Government was in favour of the joint IAEA/ 
UNESCO proposal for increased financial support 
for the Centre. 
33. The conclusion of the agreement between 
the Agency and the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) in implementation of 
Article III of NPT constituted a milestone in 
European, and even in world history. The 
negotiations leading up to the agreement had 
demonstrated the unity of the European community, 
a unity which would be further confirmed during 
the practical application phase. The whole 
operation was a living proof of the consolidation 
of Europe as an autonomous political entity. 

34. The EURATOM agreement should likewise 
contribute to achieving a universal adherence to 
NPT, which was indeed one of the conditions 
required to ensure the vitality of the Treaty. In 
that respect it would seem legitimate to ask 
whether the obligations laid down in NPT were 
compensated for by an appropriate reciprocity 
in undertaking commitments on the part of a 
certain number of countries. Consequently it 
was to be hoped that other States, which had not 
so far done so, would sign the Treaty in order to 
stimulate the States that had already done so to 
adhere to it more fully. 
35. The entry into force of NPT and the development 
of the complex system of controls which the 
Agency was called upon to apply would likewise 
lead to a sharper definition of the vital problem 
of reform of the Board of Governors. In that 
-4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 


connection he wished to announce that Italy, fabrication techniques and their adaptation to 
which was one of the countries most interested Mexican conditions, 
in the entry into force of the amendment to 

Article VI of the Statute, was about to pass the 
relevant legislation permitting ratification of the 
amendment. 

36. Thus far 46 States had given their formal 
assent to the new text, and it was to be hoped that 
the remaining ratifications needed for implementation 
of the amendment would soon be forthcoming. 
37. In conclusion, he was gratified to state 
officially that the Italian Government had decided 
to increase its voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund from $80 500 to $96 600. 
38. Mr. ALBA ANDRADE (Mexico) reiterated 
his great satisfaction that the General Conference 
of the Agency should be meeting in Latin America. 
The contacts now being established between 
delegations from abroad and their Mexican 
counterparts could not but lead to a better 
understanding of the economic and social problems 
affecting most countries in the international 
community. 
39. The peoples of the Third World were 
striving to overcome their difficulties not only 
through their own efforts but also on the basis of 
effective collaboration - through the international 
organizations - with countries more fortunately 
situated. Mexico itself, applying strict 
processes of analysis and self-criticism, was 
co-ordinating the utilization of existing resources 
and seeking new ones in an effort to achieve a 
balanced development of the national economy. 
40. Such action involved of course the 
stimulation of progress in the scientific and 
technical field, including the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 
41. Since the preceding session of the 
Conference the Mexican Congress had approved the 
legislation necessary for establishment of the 
National Institute of Nuclear Energy as successor 
to the earlier National Nuclear Energy 
Commission. In explaining the purpose of the 
new legislation, the President of the Republic 
had declared his intention steadily to expand the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in the interests 
of the economic and social development of 
Mexico. 

42. The new basic law entrusted the Institute 
with full responsibility for developing the national 
nuclear fuel industry, and for promoting nuclear 
science and technology in co-operation with 
appropriate public and private bodies and 
academic institutions. 
43. Thus, the National Institute of Nuclear 
Energy would be the organ through which the 
State would meet future national nuclear fuel 
requirements, beginning with prospection work 
and extending right up to reprocessing of 
irradiated fuel. The tasks of the new Institute 
would also include selection of the latest fuel 
44. The President of the Republic also 
considered that the provision of adequate power 
was vital to the economic development of the 
country. Up to the present, oil and natural gas 
accounted for 90% of Mexico's total power 
capacity, with hydro and coal-fired stations 
supplying the remainder. It had to be accepted 
that oil and gas would continue to constitute the 
main source of power for some decades to come, 
but there was a pressing need to release 
hydrocarbon fuel resources for application in 
other directions, and that could be brought about 
by the gradual expansion of nuclear power. 
45. The annual report of the Board before the 
Conference contained a clear indication of the 
rising trend of development expected in respect 
of installed nuclear power capacity and proved in 
effect that the further exploitation of uranium as 
a source of power was the only way to conserve 
supplies of conventional fuels and ensure their 
longer availability for the purposes for which 
they remained essential. 
46. The Agency had learned by experience that 
the introduction of nuclear power in a developing 
country required careful planning, and in Mexico 
the preliminary studies for the building of a 
nuclear power plant had started five years 
previously. However, the stage had now been 
reached at which the Federal Electricity 
Commission, after examining tenders submitted 
by companies in various countries, had placed an 
order for the reactor for the first unit of the 
power station at Laguna Verde, Veracruz. 
47. Nothing had been left to chance, and in 
selecting the site for the nuclear station the 
Mexican authorities had received valuable 
assistance from the Agency, which had sent two 
missions to advise on the most important aspect 
of the project. 
48. The excellent co-operation between the 
Federal Electricity Commission and the National 
Institute of Nuclear Energy meant that the 
rigorous safety requirements associated with 
operating the nuclear power plant would be fully 
met. The Institute had, with the Agency's 
assistance, prepared draft regulations governing 
construction and safe operation of nuclear power 
stations, and those regulations were in process 
of final revision. 
49. His delegation wished formally to announce 
that the Mexican Government would shortly submit 
to the Agency, under Article XI of the Statute, a 
request for assistance in obtaining the fuel for 
the Laguna Verde power station. 
50. It was very probable that in the decade 
1980-1990 Mexico would need an additional 
30 000 MW of electrical capacity. Of that amount, 
about 500 MW would be hydro or coal-fired, the 
remaining 25 000 MW being furnished by oil or by 
nuclear power. 
-5 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 

51. In view of the probable need for nuclear 
power plants in the future, the National Institute 
of Nuclear Energy was according high priority 
to uranium prospecting, and there were good 
hopes that Mexico might prove to be self-sufficient 
in reserves of fissionable materials. At present, 
intensive prospecting was in progress in the 
States of Nuevo Leon, Tamaulipas and Chihuahua, 
and would soon be extended to other areas in the 
north of the country. 
52. The National Institute of Nuclear Energy 
had recently undertaken a reorganization of its 
entire structure, with a view to ensuring more 
rational utilization of the facilities of the Nuclear 
Centre and attracting back to the home country 
Mexican scientists who were working abroad. 
Senior scientific and technical staff of the 
Institute had also been making extensive tours of 
installations in countries advanced in nuclear 
matters. The purpose of such visits was to obtain 
data which would be of value for the over-all 
organization and the programme of the Institute. 
53. That programme extended, in the first 
instance, to the year 1976. Emphasis was being 
placed, naturally enough, on nuclear fuel, and 
three pilot plants were to be constructed for 
experiments on uranium ore concentration and on 
fuel element fabrication and quality control. 
Similarly, work had started on the design of three 
industrial scale facilities which would embody the 
experience gained with the pilot plants to which he 
had just referred. 
54. At the opening of the Conference the 
President of Mexico had expressed his gratitude 
for the valuable assistance rendered to Mexico by 
the Agency and his hope that that assistance would 
be continued in connection with the ambitious 
projects which Mexico now had in the nuclear 
field. [7 ] 
55. Technical assistance should be applied 
over the whole spectrum of science and technology, 
so as to obviate the risk of one-sided or incomplete 
development. It would undoubtedly be possible, 
given the requisite degree of good will, to find 
ways and means of securing international 
technical co-operation appropriate to the 
comprehensive programmes now under way in 
the developing countries. To proceed otherwise 
would be to commit the sin of technological 
colonization to which President Echeverria had 
referred in his inaugural speech. [8 ] 
56. Mexico's adherence to the purposes and 
principles of the Agency had been once again 
demonstrated - as recently as two days 
previously - by the conclusion of the new 
safeguards agreement between the Agency and the 
Government in connection with both the Treaty for 
[7] GC(XVI)/OR. 151, para. 25. 
[8] Ibid., para. 23. 
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America (the Tlatelolco Treaty) [9] and NPT. 

57. Finally, he had pleasure in informing the 
Conference that the Senate of the Republic had on 
11 September 1972 ratified the amendment to 
Article VI of the Statute, and that the instrument 
of acceptance would shortly be delivered to the 
depositary Government. All would agree that an 
increase in the membership of the Board was of 
great importance for the representation of the 
developing countries. 
58. Mr. PASECHNIK (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic), associating himself with the other 
delegations in congratulating the President on his 
election, said that the delegates were grateful to 
the Government of Mexico for inviting the Conference 
to meet in its capital and for providing an 
opportunity for making acquaintance with the 
culture of the Mexican people. 
59. The activities in the past year represented 
for the Agency an important step towards 
achieving a faster and wider use of atomic energy 
for peace, health and prosperity in the world as 
a whole. The annual report showed that the 
Secretariat had focused its attention on the most 
important aspects of its activities. He was pleased 
to note that one such activity was associated with 
NPT. 
60. His delegation considered that success in 
the Agency's work had been due, to a great extent, 
to the easing of international tension in the past 
year. 7'he most important events in that respect 
were the talks held between the Soviet Union and 
the United States and the agreements on the 
limitation of strategic arms concluded between 
them in Moscow. The political climate in 
Europe had improved considerably with the entry 
into force of the agreements between the Soviet 
Union and the Polish People's Republic and the 
Federal Republic of Germany. The international 
collaboration in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy would have been still greater if the areas 
of tension in South East Asia and in the Middle 
East had been removed and the problems of 
disarmament solved, 
61. Nuclear research was carried out in the 
Soviet Union on a wide front uniting the efforts of 
the Union Republics. In the Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic, the leading role was played 
by its Academy of Sciences, which comprised 50 
institutes, including 10 associated with physics 
and industrial physics. Working in collaboration 
with those engaged in work on material science, 
chemistry, geology and biology, they made an 
impressive contribution to nuclear science and 
technology. 
62. On 10 October 1972 the Soviet physicists 
would celebrate the 40th anniversary of the 
[9 ] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
-6 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 


discovery in the Ukrainian Institute of Technical 
Physics of the nuclear reaction on lithium, which 
had played such an important part in the 
subsequent developments in nuclear physics. 

63. In the Ukraine, medium- and low-energy 
physics had undergone rapid development in the 
past few years. It now had nuclear facilities, 
in which nucleon structure and the dynamic 
structure of matter could be studied. Ukrainian 
scientists had contributed to the development of 
fast reactors by their research on the interactions 
of neutrons with nuclei and matter. The study of 
the behaviour of materials under extreme 
conditions had made it possible to solve the most 
difficult problem of modern atomic physics, viz, 
that associated with structural materials and 
burn-up. The study of the action of radiation on 
micro-organisms, plants and animals had led to 
the development of high-yield mutants of microbes 
and plants, of new methods of diagnostics and 
therapy of malignant diseases and treatment of 
radiation burns. New methods had been found in 
the treatment of materials, which improved the 
reliability of structures, machines and components, 
a factor of great importance in technology. 
Automation was finding increasing use in the 
metallurgical and heavy and light engineering 
industries. 
64. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic had 
begun the construction of a two-million-kilowatt 
nuclear power station in the past year, 
65. While attaching great importance to the 
practical applications of nuclear energy, his 
country continued to encourage basic research. 
The work of Ukrainian scientists on the statistical 
theory of nuclei, the theory of super-conductivity 
of nuclear matter, quasi-molecular models of 
nuclei and the theory of hadrons was well known. 
Considerable progress had been made in 
developing the microscopic theory of nuclei, which 
had predicted the existence of the relatively longlived 
nuclei in the far transuranic region. 
66. The Ukrainian scientists shared their 
results with other scientists in the world through 
their participation in INIS and in international 
scientific meetings, Kiev had been the venue for 
a conference on plasma physics in 1971 and the 
International Gerontology Congress in 1972. In 
1973, the second scientific conference on neutron 
physics and nuclear data for fission and 
thermonuclear reactors would be held in Kiev and 
was expected to be attended by the Agency's 
experts and scientists from many countries. The 
Institute of Theoretical Physics maintained close 
links with the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste. His country would continue 
to participate in the dissemination of knowledge 
in atomic science and technology through the 
nuclear data centre and INIS. 

67. He fully supported the Agency's 
programme for 1973-78 since, as a whole, it 
correctly outlined the future development of the 
organization. 
68. He commended the Agency's role in 
promoting exchange of information on the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy between Member States 
and the international organizations concerned. 
Since further expansion and greater efficiency 
were planned for INIS during the following six 
years, it was desirable that the Agency should 
devote greater attention to that important 
activity. 
69. His delegation's reservations about certain 
aspects of the programme had been expressed at 
the meetings of the appropriate committee. 
70. It was a matter of regret that the Agency 
had not yet achieved universality in its membership. 
As in the past years, there was no delegation 
from the German Democratic Republic, a 
sovereign State, which was actively implementing 
a national programme in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy and collaborating fruitfully in that 
field at the international level. Fully endorsing 
the statement of the Czechoslovak delegate, he 
pointed out that the German Democratic Republic 
was already actively collaborating with the 
Agency. By concluding a safeguards agreement 
with the Agency in connection with NPT, it had 
placed its entire nuclear activity under the 
safeguards of the international community. 
Strict observance of the principle of universality 
would certainly raise the Agency's international 
status as a co-ordinator in the uses of atomic 
energy. 
71. Welcoming Bangladesh as a new Member of 
the Agency, his delegation wished it success in 
the use of the atom to improve the well-being of 
its people. 
72. In conclusion, he expressed his confidence 
that the Agency would continue actively to 
promote the harnessing of the inexhaustible 
intranuclear forces for the benefit of mankind. 
73. Mr. VOSNJAK (Yugoslavia) associated 
himself with previous speakers in congratulating 
the President on his election and in thanking the 
host country for its hospitality and for providing 
well organized and pleasant facilities. 
74. He was happy that the Conference was 
meeting in Tlatelolco, which hacL-witnessed the 
first step in the world's history towards nuclear 
disarmament. 
75. The current session was important not only 
because the work of the past year would be 
analysed, but also because the programme for 
1973-78 would be decided upon. During the past 
year the Agency had made every effort to conclude 
safeguards agreements with States in connection 
with NPT. Yugoslavia was gratified to have been 
one of the first signatories of such an agreement. 
The decision to sign had been the result not only 
of the policy of his Government, but also of 
fruitful co-operation between Yugoslavia and the 
Agency. States accepting safeguards did so, 
however, in the expectation that they would also 
receive general assistance from the Agency in 
-7 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 

implementing their national programmes for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. Developing 
countries attached particular importance to the 
matter as in some cases the problem of 
development could become so serious as to 
threaten peace and security in the world. It was 
his duty therefore to examine all the components 
of the Agency's programme with great care in 
order to ensure that the pressing needs of 
developing countries were being met to the extent 
possible. 

76. While the Agency had done much in 
providing scientific and technical assistance to 
developing countries, budgetary limitations 
impaired progress. New possibilities for 
co-operation must be sought and the volume of 
assistance increased. 
77. In view of the growing possibilities for the 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, the 
need for international assistance was particularly 
important, primarily in the field of financing, 
where the highly industrialized countries had a 
prime role to play. The Agency's main task was 
to ensure the rapid development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in developing non-nuclearweapon 
States without discrimination. 
78. Obligations under NPT applied equally to 
nuclear Powers and non-nuclear-weapon States. 
In practice, however, nuclear Powers, while 
insisting that non-nuclear-weapon States 
fulfilled their obligations, were slow in meeting 
their own, particularly in the sphere of 
disarmament. 
79. His delegation had noted with satisfaction 
that most non-nuclear-weapon States had 
concluded or were negotiating safeguards 
agreements in connection with NPT with the 
Agency. States having both a nuclear industry 
and the nuclear capability to destroy civilization 
should in their turn do everything in their power 
to contribute to "the further development of the 
applications of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes, especially in the territories of nonnuclear-
weapon States Party to the Treaty, with 
due consideration for the needs of the developing 
areas of the world", as laid down in Article IV 
of NPT. They should also strive to cease the 
nuclear arms race and take measures leading to 
nuclear disarmament and to the conclusion of a 
treaty on general and complete disarmament under 
strict and effective international control, in 
accordance with Article VI of the Treaty. His 
delegation was far from satisfied with the progress 
achieved so far. 
80. The Agency's efforts to ensure that 
verification was carried out and its conclusion of 
a safeguards agreement with EURATOM were 
matters for great satisfaction. It was to be 
hoped that safeguards agreements could be 
concluded rapidly with further countries, 
particularly those with extensive nuclear activities. 
81. The Agency must find a proper balance 
between its promotional and its regulatory 
activities. The provision of varied technical 
assistance to countries developing their nuclear 
activities under Agency safeguards must on no 
account be impaired by the increase in the 
Agency's control functions. He was grateful that 
efforts were being made to keep the volume of 
safeguards operations within reasonable bounds. 

82. The Agency's activities during the past 
year had been substantial, varied and successful. 
They would be still more fruitful, however, if the 
principle of universality of the Agency's 
membership were achieved. There were 
prospective Member States whose participation 
in the work of the Agency could help to solve a 
number of problems. A solution to the question 
of the admission of the German Democratic 
Republic would be a step in the right direction. 
83. His delegation wished to express satisfaction 
at the admission of Bangladesh and to congratulate 
that country. 
84. Yugoslavia was firmly convinced that the 
Agency would continue to carry out with success 
the two tasks conferred on it by its Statute, 
namely to promote the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and to prevent its use for 
the purpose of destruction. It could do so thanks 
primarily to the support and assistance of all its 
Member States. 
85. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary), in conveying 
his congratulations to Mr. Flores de la Peña on 
his election as President of the Conference, said 
that his qualities of leadership and diplomacy 
were bound to ensure a successful series of 
deliberations between Member States. 
86. Since the previous session progress towards 
world peace had been maintained. Europe had 
been free of conflict for 27 years and disputes 
were being successively dealt with by processes 
of negotiation. The Soviet Union and the other 
progressive countries had played no mean role in 
those developments. It was regrettable that the 
situation was clouded by the long drawn out 
struggle in Viet-Nam for, as long as hostilities 
persisted anywhere in the world, humanity would 
be overshadowed by the threat of total nuclear 
war. This necessarily put all the more emphasis 
on the Agency's peaceful protagonism of the 
atom. 
87. The Agency continued to progress towards 
universality and the accession of Bangladesh 
opened the way for further millions of people to 
profit from the Agency's know-how. Unfortunately, 
that still did not apply to the German Democratic 
Republic, which was already well advanced in 
nuclear technology, took an active part in 
COMECON's peaceful nuclear activities and lent 
its full support to the Agency's safeguards 
programme. The fact that talks had taken place 
between the Director General and the Foreign 
Minister of the German Democratic Republic was 
a positive indication. 

-8 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 


88. The interests of universality were also 
likely to be served by the imminent European 
security conference. 
89. The past year had witnessed sound progress 
by the Agency. The Fourth International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy held in Geneva (the Fourth Geneva 
Conference) had stimulated the exchange, 
comparison and analysis of peaceful nuclear 
experience on a world-wide basis and had lent 
positive direction to the work of the Agency and the 
nuclear energy commissions of the Member States. 
The rapid publication of the proceedings and 
their brilliant symbolic rainbow cover design 
deserved commendation. 
90. Since the last session Hungary had ratified 
and deposited its safeguards agreement in 
connection with NPT [10 ] and that agreement had 
come into force on 31 March 1972. 
91. The programme of technical assistance 
based on both Agency and United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) funds was 
succeeding in broadcasting nuclear technology far 
and wide and the new system of UNDP fund 
allocation was resulting in more effective 
utilization of resources. In recognition of the 
importance of technical assistance, Hungary 
would meet its quota towards the voluntary 
contribution target of $3 million. It was 
unfortunate that the Agency had seen fit to restrict 
the number of Type I fellowships, thereby placing 
more reliance on the Type II awards offered by 
Member States. However, it was pleasing to note 
that the Type II awards offered by Hungary were 
being put to increasing use by the Agency. 
92. The report of the Secretariat of COMECON 
which lay before the Conference bore witness to 
the progress which had resulted from the 
collaboration between the socialist countries in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The 
Hungarian Nuclear Energy Commission set great 
store by COMECON, under the auspices of which 
an international collective had been set up to 
study characteristics of the WWRP reactor in 
the power engineering division of the Central 
Physical Research Institute in Budapest, 
promising further development of that already 
proven reactor type. 
93. The setting up of "Interatominstrument" in 
Warsaw, to co-ordinate the production of 
nucleonic equipment within COMECON, was also 
a welcome development. 
94. A research programme in Hungary with 
Agency sponsorship on medical instrument 
sterilization by irradiation was also being 
continued. 
95. The annual report reflected the great work 
done by the Agency and it could be confidently 
[10 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/174. 
expected that the programme for 1973-78 would 
be successfully implemented. His Government 
would like most emphasis to be placed on the 
exchange of nuclear experience, the full 
development of INIS, environmental protection 
and the application of nuclear techniques in food 
preservation, agriculture and medicine. 

96. The Agency's programme could only be 
completed successfully on the basis of sound 
budgeting. Increases in expenditure were only 
justifiable for the purpose of implementing that 
programme and Hungary deplored the constant 
cost spiral associated solely with administrative 
expenses and currency fluctuations. 
97. He concluded with the hope that the Agency 
would continue to make the optimum use of its 
intellectual and financial resources in order to 
assure the success of NPT and stimulate the 
widest possible application of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. 
98. Mr. BIGGAR (Ireland) offered Mr. Flores 
de la Peña his warm congratulations and good 
wishes on his election as President of the 
Conference, He also wished to join with many 
previous speakers in expressing their gratitude 
to the President and Government of Mexico for 
inviting the Conference to meet in that beautiful 
city. It was particularly appropriate, in view of 
the part played by Mexico in disarmament and 
related questions, that the Conference should 
have been convened in Tlatelolco, where, in 1967, 
the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America had been signed. 
99. Expressing satisfaction with the annual 
report for 1971-72, he remarked that the new 
procedure, [11 ] whereby the same report was 
presented to the General Conference and to the 
General Assembly of the United Nations, was 
clearly a success. 
100. Recalling that NPT had had its origin in a 
draft resolution tabled by Ireland over a decade 
ago at the General Assembly of the United 
Nations [12 ] and that Ireland had been the first 
country to ratify the Treaty, he extended his 
congratulations to the Agency on concluding so 
many safeguards agreements and also to the 
States parties to those agreements. Such progress 
indicated the importance which the Member States 
attached to the Agency's work, and he hoped that 
the number of agreements would continue to 
increase, thereby furthering the efforts to check 
the nuclear arms race and achieve eventual 
nuclear disarmament. In that connection it was 
pleasing to note that the Agency's programme 
envisaged wide application of its safeguards system 
in 1973-1974. The Agency's successful endeavours 
would ensure that, in the future, greater reliance 
would be placed on the efforts of international 
organizations to effect arms control. 
[11 ] Under Resolution GC(XV)/RES/274. 
[12 ] General Assembly Resolution 1665 (XVI). 
-9 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 

101. He reported that his Government had concluded 
negotiations with the Agency for a safeguards 
agreement which had come into force on 
29 February 1972. 
102. Ireland welcomed the conclusion of the 
agreement between the Agency, the States 
Members of EURATOM and EURATOM itself 
which, once ratified, would lend fresh impetus 
to NPT. Ireland's safeguards agreement 
contained a protocol providing for its replacement 
by the EURATOM-IAEA safeguards agreement 
when Ireland became a Member of the European 
Economic Community on 1 January 1973. The 
suggestion that the time had now come to 
formalize relations between the Agency and 
EURATOM in a general agreement seemed very 
logical and his Government would await developments 
with the keenest interest. 
103. His delegation welcomed the decision to 
broaden the membership of the Board of 
Governors by amending Article VI of the Statute, 
and he urged Member States which had not already 
done so to accept the amendment without delay. 
104. Provision had been made in Ireland for the 
setting up of a Nuclear Energy Board under the 
Nuclear Energy Act, 1971, but that Board had not 
yet been established. The Electricity Supply 
Board had been studying the feasibility of a nuclear 
power station and had taken a keen interest in the 
Agency's activities relating to nuclear power 
generation. 
105. If current searches for oil and gas on the 
Irish continental shelf were successful, it was 
possible that the construction of a nuclear power 
station would be deferred indefinitely. 
106. In regard to the Agency's annual report and 
its programme for 1973-78 he was particularly 
impressed by the Agency's activities in the areas 
of soil fertility, plant breeding, plant protein 
improvement, animal production and health, food 
preservation, insect eradication and pest control 
which all helped to mitigate hunger and disease. 
It was also very pleasing to note the expansion in 
the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
107. His Government had been very pleased to 
participate in the Fourth Geneva Conference in 
1971 and the Agency was to be congratulated for 
making the conference an outstanding technical 
contribution to progress in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
108. In previous years his delegation had 
expressed concern over the disposal of radioactive 
waste into the sea and, consequently, it welcomed 
the recommendation made by the Stockholm 
Conference that Governments should explore with 
the Agency and WHO the feasibility of developing 
a system for the registration of the release of 
significant quantities of radioactive materials into 
the biosphere. [13 ] The Board's draft programme 
[13 ] See United Nations document A/CONF. 48/14, 
Part one, II. B, Recommendation 75(a). 
in that regard was also a source of profound 
satisfaction to his Government, as were also the 
additional suggestions outlined by the Director 
General in his statement. [14 ] 

109. In conclusion, he was happy to inform the 
Conference that his Government had pledged a 
contribution to the General Fund in accordance 
with the recommended target. 
110. Mr. MANZ (Austria) congratulated 
Mr, Flores de la Peña on his election to the 
presidency of the session. He also wanted to 
express his delegation's thanks to the Government 
of Mexico for providing such excellent facilities 
for the Conference. 
111. He considered Mexico City a particularly 
suitable place for discussing the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. Mexico had made outstanding 
contributions to the cause of peace and security, 
for instance by its work in connection with the 
prohibition of nuclear weapons in Latin America. 
112. It was appropriate that the Board had given 
great prominence in its report to problems 
connected with the implementation of NPT. At 
the previous session the material for safeguards 
agreements in connection with NPT drafted by the 
Board's safeguards committee had been highly 
commended, and his Government wanted to add 
its praise to that expressed by other delegations. 
However, it should be realized that using that 
material satisfactorily to meet the different 
conditions existing in Member States would require 
great efforts by the Agency and all the countries 
concerned. In that connection he was pleased to 
note that 30 of the 74 States which had ratified 
NPT by July 1972 had already fulfilled their 
obligations under Article III,' and negotiations with 
other States were in progress. In the same 
context his country welcomed the agreement 
between the Agency and EURATOM including the 
five States Members of EURATOM which were 
signatories to NPT. The gratifying progress 
made towards the implementation of NPT would 
encourage countries that had not ratified the 
Treaty, or had not entered into negotiations with 
the Agency, to reconsider their position. 
113. He recalled that Austria had assumed the 
status of permanent neutrality and was therefore 
particularly interested in initiatives for peace 
and disarmament. His country regarded NPT as 
an important instrument for the promotion of 
those objectives. Austria had been one of the 
first States to ratify NPT and to conclude a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency [15 ] and it 
was taking steps to incorporate those arrangements 
in the system of Austrian law. Referring to 
Article III. 2 of NPT, he said his delegation hoped 
that most countries would agree on the rules that 
should govern the exports in question. 
[14] GC(XVI)/OR. 152, paras 3-40. 
[15 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/156. 
- 10 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 


114. Referring to Article IV. 2 of NPT he 
wondered whether the principle of free exchange 
of technical information, with due consideration 
for the needs of the developing areas, had been 
reflected in the Agency's work during the 
preceding year. While those Member States that 
were most advanced in the field of nuclear science 
and technology had endeavoured to supply 
valuable information to smaller countries, the 
Board's report again pin-pointed the Agency's 
increasing difficulties in meeting requests for 
technical assistance. It was alarming to note that 
the percentage of requests that could be met had 
dropped to 40. 3%. It was his belief that a 
substantial increase in funds would be necessary 
in order to fulfil the expectations raised by 
Article IV of the Treaty. Austria would continue 
to support the Agency's technical assistance 
programme and would contribute to the General 
Fund in proportion to its base rate of assessment, 
subject to parliamentary approval, 
115. Taking account of the difficulties that had to 
be faced his delegation considered the Board's 
recommendations relating to the Regular and 
Operational Budgets for 1973 highly satisfactory. 
Seen against a background of inflationary trends 
and fluctuating exchange rates the proposed budget 
increase was comparatively small. He was quite 
sure that in the existing circumstances only very 
few countries would be able to keep the increase 
in their own national budgets at such a low level. 
His Government approved the three draft 
resolutions submitted by the Board. [16 ] 
116. In recent years measures for the reduction 
of pollution and the protection of the human 
environment had been receiving the attention not 
only of Governments and experts, but also of the 
general public. With growing concern his country 
had recognized the increasing dangers of waste 
and pollution. Two thirds of Austria's national 
territory were covered by mountains, and tourism 
was an important sector of the Austrian economy, 
so that it was a vital necessity to safeguard the 
landscape and the environment. In Austria, energy 
production had given rise to no serious environmental 
protection difficulties, mainly because 
there was an abundant supply of hydroelectric 
power. However, almost 50% of Austria's total 
hydroelectric resources were being put to use, 
and with energy demands doubling every ten years 
other sources of energy would have to be exploited. 
In 1971 Austria had decided to construct a 
nuclear power plant with a 700-MW(e) boilingwater 
reactor at Zwentendorf on the Danube, 
some 40 kilometres west of Vienna, and good 
progress had already been made. It was expected 
that the reactor would be operational by the 
summer of 1976. Austria's decision to build the 
reactor was influenced by the conviction that 
nuclear power could be almost as clean as hydroelectric 
power. Of course, nuclear power raised 
its own pollution problems and their solution 
would require a great deal of information 
[16] GC(XVI)/485, Annex V. 
exchange. Taking all those arguments into account 
he completely shared the Board's view that, in 
the light of its statutory responsibilities and its 
experience the Agency would, in years to come, 
have to concern itself increasingly with the 
problems posed by radioactivity released from the 
many peaceful applications of nuclear energy; the 
Agency should assume the leading role in that 
area, in close collaboration with the other 
competent organizations. 

117. The preceding years had been characterized 
by rapid advances in nuclear power technology 
and remarkable developments in the nuclear 
equipment industries. It could reasonably be 
expected that manufacturers would consider the 
production of smaller generating units which 
would be of special interest for the introduction 
of nuclear energy in developing areas throughout 
the world. However, he wanted to point out that 
an analysis of the few known incidents in nuclear 
power generation had shown that the cause was 
often human failure rather than technical 
inadequacy. Governments would therefore not 
only have to assume the responsibility for issuing 
appropriate guidelines and regulations for reactor 
safety but would also have to ensure that they 
were properly observed. He realized that the 
imposition of strict safety standards that were 
subject to constant change and improvement would 
not facilitate the task of electric power companies 
and reactor users, but it was the only way to 
ensure that nuclear power production remained 
clean. 
118. Referring to Article VI of the Statute he 
said his country was starting the necessary 
parliamentary procedure to ratify the amendment 
in the near future. 
119. On another plane, he recalled that in 
October 1971 the Agency and the "international 
Organizations Headquarters and Conference 
Centre Vienna Inc. " had reached an agreement as 
to the Agency's space requirements in the 
Headquarters building, the joint services area and 
common institutions and the conference area. In 
December 1971, and again in February 1972, 
preliminary plans for the Headquarters building 
had been presented to the Agency. Soon afterwards 
several meetings with Agency officials had taken 
place, and in May 1972 a plan had been completed 
for submission to the competent authorities as 
required by Austrian building legislation. A 
satisfactory solution to one of the traffic problems 
had also been found; the Headquarters area would 
be connected with the proposed "Donauufer-
Autobahn", a motor highway leading to the 
airport. A decision had also been reached by the 
end of May regarding the technical installations 
which were to be provided in the Headquarters 
building. As far as the construction of the joint 
service premises, common institutions and 
conference rooms was concerned, discussions 
on the working and planning levels had started at 
the beginning of June 1972, and the necessary 
draft plans had been completed by 3 August 1972, 
All the further planning would also be done ir close 
co-operation with the Agency. The actual 

- 11 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 

construction work on the Donaupark site was scheduled 
to start at the beginning of 1973. Negotiations 
between the Austrian authorities and the Agency 
were proceeding favourably regarding the 
construction of the safeguards laboratory and the 
transfer to Seibersdorf of the three laboratories 
at present located at Agency Headquarters. 

120. Finally he said he was glad to note that the 
documentation for the sixteenth regular session 
of the General Conference had been made as clear 
and concise as possible. 
121. Mr. TUREMEN (Turkey) associated himself 
with the other speakers in congratulating 
Mr. Flores de la Peña on having been elected 
unanimously to the high post of President of the 
session. The Mexican Government's offer to the 
Conference to convene in an area so rich in 
beauty and heritage had provided all the 
participants with a rare opportunity to combine 
business with pleasure, 
122. Recalling that the Mexican representatives 
at the past two sessions of the Conference had 
advocated holding General Conferences outside 
Austria, [17 ] to permit more direct contact with 
people in other areas, he said he was sure that 
the meeting in Mexico would serve to strengthen 
the universal character of the Agency. 
123. In view of the tremendous expansion of 
nuclear power generation, which was expected to 
exceed three million megawatts by the year 2000, 
he considered that it was incumbent upon the 
Agency and the advanced countries to promote 
universal co-operation in that area, so that the 
developing countries might also move into the 
nuclear age. 
124. The technical assistance budget of the Agency, 
when considered in the light of that observation, 
was extremely limited and failed to meet the needs 
of the developing countries. 
125. However, in spite of its limited resources, 
the Agency had been taking some encouraging 
steps towards fulfilling its obligation in that 
field. 
126. His delegation appreciated the Agency's 
initiative in undertaking a market survey on the 
nuclear power requirements of developing 
countries. [18 ] Turkey had gladly participated in 
that exercise and he believed that the results of the 
survey would be extremely useful. 
127. The uranium resources in the advanced 
countries were being exploited so rapidly that 
their reserves of low-cost uranium were expected 
to be exhausted by the early 1980s and, 
consequently, reserves were being sought 
[17] GC(XIV)/OR. 137, paras 18-22 and 
GC(XV)/OR. 147, para. 103. 
[18 ] See document GC(XVI)/485, paras V. 9. 65V. 
9. 68. 
elsewhere. Turkey was a developing country 
which had indications of possible large uranium 
reserves on its territory. It was intended to 
exploit those reserves and in the near future UNDP 
assistance would be sought for a uranium 
prospecting project in Turkey. He expressed the 
hope that the Agency with its known competence in 
conducting mineral surveys would, in conjunction 
with UNDP, assist Turkey with that project. 

128. The role of the Agency was increasing in 
significance not only in connection with the 
expansion of nuclear power but also in connection 
with the question of environmental protection, 
which had become one of the most significant 
issues of the age. He felt that of all the United 
Nations organizations the Agency would bear one 
of the greatest responsibilities for dealing with 
environmental problems and for that reason he 
welcomed the comprehensive study which the 
Director General proposed to undertake. 
129. It was pleasing to note that the amendment 
to Article VI. A-D of the Statute had now been 
accepted by 46 Member States. As one of the cosponsors 
of that amendment his delegation hoped 
that other Member States which had not already 
done so would accelerate the ratification 
formalities to enable the amendment to come into 
force. 
130. Finally he congratulated the Mexican 
Government and the Agency's Secretariat on the 
excellent arrangements that had been made for the 
Conference. 
131. Mr. EYEGUET (Gabon), congratulating the 
President on his election, said that the efficiency 
with which the meetings were being conducted and 
the harmony that prevailed bore testimony to his 
ability. 
132. The Gabon delegation commended the 
reports and programmes submitted to the 
Conference and approved the outlines of the 
programme for 1973-78. Despite the budgeting 
difficulties facing the Agency's technical 
assistance programme, he hoped that timely 
solutions would be found enabling that programme 
to be maintained at its current level of effectiveness 
in the following years. In implementing 
the system of safeguards in connection with NPT, 
the Agency could count on his country's full 
support. 
133. As regards the representation of the various 
regions on the Board, his delegation hoped that 
the countries which had not yet accepted the 
amendment to Article VI. A-D to the Statute would 
do so as soon as possible. 
134. His country had been participating in the 
supply of uranium ore on a world-wide basis. Its 
contribution had hitherto been limited to ore 
prospecting and mining. It was going to enter 
more theoretical fields, if only because of certain 
characteristics of great scientific interest of the 
ores found. As would be recalled, the French 
- 12 



GC(XVI)/OR. 156 


delegation had announced the discovery of the existed 1700 million years earlier under its soil 
traces of an old chain reaction in the opencast and that it was in Gabon that such a phenomenon 
mining site at Oklo. [19 ] He had appreciated it had been discovered for the first time. 
that the French delegation had associated his 
delegation with that important communication. 136. In conclusion, he wished to thank the 

Mexican Government and people for their 

135. At a time when the young Republic of Gabon hospitality and for the excellent arrangements 
had just established institutions of higher they had made for the Conference, 
learning and a national university, it was 
pleasant news that a natural nuclear reactor had • The meeting rose at 1. 25 p.m. 
[19] See document GC(XVI)/OR. 151, paras 54-62. 
- 13 

GC(XVI)/OR. 157 

International Atomic Energy Agency 4 May 1973* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Friday, 29 September 1972, at 4.30 p.m. 


President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 

of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

9 General debate and 1 - 51 
report for 1971-72 

Statements by the 
delegates of: 

Egypt 1 -8 

Switzerland 9-1 5 

Norway 16 - 26 

Saudi Arabia 27 - 31 

Portugal 32 - 38 

Ghana 39 - 45 

Sudan 46 - 51 

[* ] A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 2 November 1972. 

[**} GC(XVI)/490. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC(XVI)/OR. 157 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1971-72 
(GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr. 1 and 3, 488) 

1. Mr. EFFAT (Arab Republic of Egypt) 
congratulated the President on his election and 
expressed his sincere thanks to the Mexican 
Government for the generous hospitality he had 
been accorded. 
2. In the course of the past few years, two of 
the Agency's fields of activity had gained considerable 
prominence - safeguards and the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS) and 
the budgetary allocations pertaining to them 
were rapidly increasing. Although his country 
had lent its support to those activities, it did not 
really consider that they represented the fields of 
direct and immediate interest to developing 
countries. It was essential to make sure that 
such activities were not pursued to the detriment 
of those of major interest to the developing 
countries, for the latter based great hopes on 
nuclear technology, and it was the Agency's 
responsibility to help them to realize their 
aspirations. 
3. The time had come for the Agency to focus 
attention on a narrower range of subjects, more 
particularly, the use of nuclear energy for power 
production and desalination, the use of nuclear 
explosive devices for peaceful purposes, and 
large-scale prospecting and exploitation of raw 
materials. 
4. It was anticipated that by the end of the 
century, nuclear energy would have become the 
main source of power production, and according 
to estimates it would account for 15% of the 
world's power by 1980. For that reason the 
Agency should take a more active part in solving 
the many complex problems facing the developing 
countries, one of which was the financing of 
nuclear projects. The implementation of such 
projects would mean a rapid growth in the demand 
for raw materials during the present decade, and 
according to the specialists the consumption of 
uranium would have reached 100 000 tons per year 
by 1980. The huge nuclear raw material reserves 
in the developing countries had still not been 
properly exploited owing to the lack of funds and 
experience; hence it was essential to find a means 
of financing the exploration and exploitation 
programmes on an international level, especially 
those relating to uranium. 
5. The developing countries were keenly 
interested in the use of nuclear explosions in 
civil engineering and in the mining and oil 
industries, and were accordingly expecting 
practical action to that end on the part of the 
Agency, which should now work out a feasibility 
study programme for certain specific projects 
in a number of countries, and establish ways in 
which the projects could be put into effect. The 
programme for the coming six years should 
include the action he envisaged. 
6. His country had always encouraged all forms 
of co-operation in every aspect of scientific and 
technological development. The setting up of the 
Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for 
the Arab countries, in 1963, was the most 
noteworthy example of its co-operation with the 
Agency. The Agency had made a very valuable 
contribution to the realization of the Centre's 
aims, namely the use of radioisotopes in tackling 
the problems specific to the region, and the 
training of numerous specialists. Although its 
participation in the work of the Centre had 
terminated in 1968, there was still co-operation 
in various forms. 
7. His Government's concern with co-operation 
was likewise manifested by its participation in 
United Nations activities related to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. Thus, it had 
contributed to the work of the four United Nations 
conferences on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
and had supported the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [1 ], the 
partial test ban treaty, and the work of the 
Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, held 
at Geneva in 1968. That co-operation was also 
reflected in bilateral agreements between the 
Egyptian Atomic Energy Establishment and 
several countries, as well as in scientific contacts 
with high-level institutuions, 
8. The implementation of the Agency's 
technical assistance activities was contingent to 
a large extent on an increase in voluntary 
contributions. It was clear from the Board's 
report (GC(XVI)/480, 480/Corr. 1 and 3, 488) that 
the proportion of technical assistance requests 
that could be followed up by the Agency was ever 
waning - it had fallen from about 50% in 1962 to 
less than 25% in 1972. The developing countries 
were seriously disturbed by that situation and it 
was consequently all the more important to 
strive for a considerable increase in the 
voluntary contributions. As far as his own 
country was concerned, it had been decided to 
make the same voluntary contribution in 1973 as 
in 1972, a proportion of the target corresponding to 
more than twice its assessed contribution to the 
Regular Budget. 

9. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland), speaking on 
behalf of the delegation of the Principality of 
Liechtenstein and the Swiss delegation, 
congratulated the President on his election and 
asked him to convey their profound gratitude to 
the Government of the United Mexican States for 
its generous hospitality. 
10. At the previous session the Swiss delegation 
had reviewed at some length the major activities 
of the Agency and the principal developments in 
nuclear energy in Switzerland, [2 ] so it would now 
confine itself to a few comments on various 
important events of the past year. 
[1 ] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[2] See document GC(XV)/OR. 149, paras 1-13. 
2 



GC (XVI)/OR. 157 


11. The Swiss delegation wished first of all to 
reaffirm the support of the Swiss authorities for 
the objectives and activities of the Agency. It had 
learnt with keen interest of the successful outcome 
of the negotiations between the States Members of 
the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM), EURATOM itself and the Agency 
concerned with formulating the agreement called 
for by Article III of NPT, as well as the recent 
approval of that agreement by the Council of 
Ministers of the European Communities and the 
Agency's Board of Governors. That new situation, 
which foreshadowed the early ratification of NPT 
by five of the States Members of EURATOM, 
would undoubtedly be watched with close interest 
in Switzerland. The Swiss Government had 
signed NPT in December 1969, but its ratification 
had to await a detailed analysis of the practical 
consequences of Article III. In that connection the 
work of the Board's safeguards committee had 
proved very useful. 
12. Turning to the question of environmental 
protection, the Swiss delegation fully supported 
the recommendations made by the United Nations 
Conference on the Human Environment held in 
Stockholm (the Stockholm Conference) concerning 
the release of low-level waste into the 
environment and the management of high-level 
waste. The development of the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy had been characterized by an 
excellent standard of safety, which was due in 
large measure to the precautionary practices 
adopted by those responsible for that development. 
It was absolutely imperative that the same 
attitude should govern the approach to problems 
associated with radioactive releases into the 
atmosphere and hydrosphere and with the 
management of high-level waste. Clearly those 
problems, which were bound to assume vital 
importance in the decades ahead, called for 
international collaboration, with the Agency playing 
an active role. Switzerland would give the 
Agency every possible support. 

13. With regard to the protection of the 
environment against thermal pollution, the Federal 
authorities had initiated a major research 
programme to examine the technical, economic 
and ecological aspects of all forms of thermal 
emission from nuclear power stations, of all 
possible methods of utilizing the waste heat from 
those power stations for productive purposes, and 
of the general effect of emissions from all types 
of power plants. Those studies would continue 
for several years and would cover: direct 
cooling of nuclear power stations by water from 
rivers, natural lakes and large artificial 
reservoirs; the cooling of nuclear power stations 
by wet, dry or mixed cooling towers, with 
natural or forced circulation, for various types of 
reactors; the utilization of waste heat from 
nuclear power stations for district heating, for 
supplying industrial heat and for water treatment, 
etc.; the establishment of a register of thermal 
emissions covering all forms of power plant, and 
all of Switzerland; the establishment, with the 
aid of a physico-mathematical model, of registers 
of thermal ground level concentrations for 
different meteorological conditions, together with 
an evaluation of changes in climatic conditions 
and their effects on human health as well as on 
flora and fauna; the establishment of optimum 
bases for the future development of the thermal 
emission register and the evaluation of the 
maximum tolerable limits for real and latent heat 
emissions in respect of the various climatic 
regions of Switzerland. The results of those 
studies would be communicated to the Agency. 

14. The Swiss delegation was disappointed to 
learn that the Agency was having difficulty in 
raising the necessary funds for providing 
technical assistance to the developing countries. 
Universal solidarity was a prerequisite for that 
vital international activity. The resources could 
only increase in line with the needs if every State 
undertook to shoulder its share of the burden. 
15. In conclusion, his delegation recalled the 
profound words of that great Mexican statesman 
Benito Juarez: "The essence of peace is respect 
for the rights of others". He addressed an 
urgent appeal to all delegations to employ every 
means in their power to make that thought the 
reality of tomorrow in the relations between men 
and between States throughout the world. 
16. Mr. ERIKSEN (Norway) said that the 
Director General, in his statement two days 
earlier, had analysed the situation regarding the 
implementation of the Agency's commitments 
arising out of NPT and had expressed concern at 
the slow rate of progress achieved to date. [3 ] 
He shared the Director General's concern, although 
the conclusion of the negotiation of an agreement 
between the Agency, non-nuclear-weapon States 
Members of EURATOM and EURATOM itself 
represented a great step forward. 
17. The Norwegian Government had now approved 
the subsidiary arrangements to the safeguards 
agreement between Norway and the Agency and 
had thus formally provided for inspection of its 
nuclear activities by the Agency; inspections had, 
in fact, already been made over more than six 
months. He noted with satisfaction that efforts 
were being made further to develop safeguards 
methods in order to introduce improvements and 
modifications to the system as soon as they were 
justified. 
18. The Agency's work on nuclear safety and 
environmental protection should continue to 
receive high priority. He complimented the 
Director General and the Secretariat on the results 
already obtained, and was pleased to note that the 
Agency, in its plans for the future, was stressing 
the need to work in close collaboration with other 
organizations having responsibilities in that field. 
The Agency's handbooks and manuals, a considerable 
number of which were issued jointly with 
United Nations organizations such as FAO, ILO, 
IMCO and WHO, were used by States and 
organizations all over the world. 
[3] GC(XVI)/OR. 152, para. 19. 
-3 



GC(XVI)/OR. 157 

19. The conferences and seminars on nuclear 
safety organized by the Agency, often jointly 
with those United Nations organizations, had been 
of direct practical value for Norway's work in 
that field. The exchange of experience on nuclear 
safety and the concordance at international level of 
basic and detailed standards were among the 
important tasks of the Agency. In particular there 
was an urgent need for internationally accepted 
standards on radioactive waste disposal and an 
equally urgent need to establish maximum 
permissible limits for the concentration of 
nuclear effluents discharged into the sea and the 
atmosphere. The Director General had also 
mentioned in his statement the recent decision by 
the Board that one of the Agency's most important 
tasks was to prepare safety standards governing 
the dispersion into the environment of radioactive 
wastes resulting from the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. [4] 
20. The Stockholm Conference had formulated a 
large number of recommendations which would be 
discussed by the General Assembly of the United 
Nations in the near future. [5 ] He had been 
particularly pleased to hear the Director General 
mention Recommendations 57 and 75. 
21. In Recommendation 57 the Stockholm 
Conference had recommended the Secretary-
General of the United Nations to take steps to 
ensure proper collection, measurement and 
analysis of data relating to the environmental 
effects of energy use and production within 
appropriate monitoring systems. The design 
and operation of such systems should include 
monitoring the environmental pollution levels 
resulting from emissions from conventional 
power stations and from releases of oil and 
radioactivity. 
22. In Recommendation 75 it was recommended 
that Governments should explore with the Agency 
and WHO the feasibility of developing a registry 
of releases to the biosphere of significant 
quantities of radioactive materials and that 
Governments should support and expand, under 
the Agency and appropriate international 
organizations, international co-operation on 
radioactive waste problems. The Agency's 
achievements in that respect were a source of 
great satisfaction to Norway, which welcomed 
action by the Director General to enable the 
Agency to participate fully in the implementation 
of the recommendations just referred to. 
23. Public opinion on nuclear power was a 
matter of concern to all. In that regard he would 
like to mention a very recent Agency publication 
prepared in collaboration with WHO and entitled 
"Nuclear Power and the Environment". That 
publication, which was drafted in a condensed 
and readily understandable form, was a valuable 
[4 ] Ibid., para. 5. 
[5] The texts of the recommendations are set 
out in United Nations document A/CONF. 48/14, 
Part one, II, B. 
contribution to public understanding and 
acceptance of nuclear power. The Norwegian 
Government intended to translate the publication 
for home use. 

24. The Director General had indicated that 
some additional and expanded activities relating 
to environmental problems posed by the largescale 
introduction of nuclear power could be 
considered for implementation during 1973 and 
1974. [6] The list of activities presented seemed 
to the Norwegian delegation to be of fundamental 
importance and he hoped to be able to study the 
proposed programme of work more closely. 
25. Dissemination of information on nuclear 
matters was also one of the main tasks of the 
Agency. Norway would continue to support INIS 
and was convinced that it would be particularly 
useful to the smaller nations and the developing 
countries. Norway was also very satisfied with 
the co-operative spirit of the Agency staff working 
on INIS. He was pleased to say that Norwegian 
experts who had already received output from 
INIS on a pilot basis were very satisfied with it, 
26. Two years had passed since the Conference 
had adopted the resolution on the amendment to 
Article VI. A-D of the Statute [7 ] which laid down 
the composition of the Board. The Norwegian 
Government hoped that a sufficient number of 
Member States would respond to the resolution 
adopted two years previously so that the 
composition of the Board would reflect the 
decision of the General Conference, 
27. Mr. KABBANI (Saudi Arabia) said he was 
particularly impressed with the harmony and 
efficiency of the work of the General Conference 
under the guidance and courtesy of its President. 
28. The Agency showed remarkable vitality 
and dynamism in its response to the problems of 
the nuclear age. Such great problems as the 
depletion of natural resources, rapid population 
growth and deterioration of the environment had 
been brought into sharp focus by the Fourth 
International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy held in Geneva and the Stockholm 
Conference. He was glad that the Agency was 
prepared to make significant contributions to the 
solution of those problems, 
29. The delegation of Saudi Arabia was pleased 
with the Agency's efforts to adapt reactor and 
desalination technology to the needs of developing 
countries. In that regard the nuclear power 
station market survey [8 ] in a number of developing 
countries was particularly timely. Because of 
the size of the electricity grids in advanced 
countries and the consequent need to build 
extremely high-capacity power stations, there 
[6] GC(XVI)/OR. 152, para. 11, 
[7] Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272, para. 1. 
[8 ] See document GC(XVI)/485, paras V. 9. 65V. 
9. 68. 
-4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 157 


was great danger that builders would devote all 
their research and development effort to very 
large reactors. That would be unfortunate, as 
100 to 500 MW units were most appropriate for 
developing countries. In that respect the 
Director General had clarified certain policies of 
the Agency deserving the fullest support. 

30. Several delegations had justifiably expressed 
their anxiety at the reduction in the funds allotted 
to technical assistance, a state of affairs that 
would jeopardize the Agency's future activities. 
Everyone foresaw an increasing diversification of 
the Agency's commitments and responsibilities 
and a greater demand for funds for safeguards, 
environmental studies, reactor safety, 
radioactive waste disposal and so on. 
Nevertheless, in his opinion such expenditure 
should not be made to the detriment of technical 
assistance programmes. 
31. Saudi Arabia hoped the Agency would find 
the means of effecting savings through improved 
efficiency and rationalization without resorting 
to reduction of its technical assistance 
programmes or promotional activities. 
32. Mr. SOEIRO de BRITO (Portugal) 
congratulated the President on his election, which 
would certainly guarantee efficient conduct of the 
Conference's work. He also expressed his 
gratitude to the Government of Mexico which, 
through its invitation to hold the session in 
Mexico City, had enabled the participants to 
become acquainted with the glorious past and 
remarkable progress of the country. 
33. Portugal's main nuclear activities were 
conducted by the Portuguese Atomic Energy 
Board whose principal organs were the Office of 
the Chairman, the Planning Department and the 
three Operational Departments. The Office of the 
Chairman carried out managerial and 
administrative functions; the Planning Department 
prepared and co-ordinated the Board's programme 
and ensured co-operation between the Board and 
other national and international organizations; 
and the Operational Departments included a 
nuclear physics laboratory with a staff of 
500 experts, of which one third were university 
graduates. 
34. The laboratory research programmes 
included, inter alia, work on nuclear physics, 
neutron chemistry and radiochemistry, 
radioisotope production and applications, nuclear 
fuel metallurgy, the development and production 
of electronic measuring and analysis equipment, 
and radiation protection. 
35. The Mining Department was responsible for 
the prospecting and exploration of uranium and 
other materials needed for nuclear activities. At 
the present time it was working a Portuguese ore 
deposit at Urgeirica. 
36. The Nuclear Power Reactor Department was 
in charge of the studies and regulatory activities 
required in connection with the National Nuclear 
Power Programme. A study made by that 
Department had shown that hydro power would 
not suffice to satisfy the country's electricity 
requirements and so there had to be a reversion 
to thermal production, either in conventional or 
in nuclear power stations. Bearing in mind the 
present cost of those energy sources the study 
had concluded that introduction into Portugal's 
electricity grid of a nuclear power station of 
500-600 MW would be possible and desirable by the 
end of the decade and would raise the total 
installed nuclear capacity to 3000 MW by 1990 
and to 7000 MW by the end of the century. The 
Atomic Energy Board was being prepared for the 
functions of licensing and inspection of nuclear 
power stations, since their acquisition and 
operation had been entrusted to electric utility 
companies, 

37. Portugal was not only collaborating with 
the Agency and the Nuclear Energy Agency of 
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development but was also preparing or had already 
concluded a number of bilateral agreements with 
Brazil, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, 
South Africa, Spain, the United Kingdom and the 
United States. 
38. Portugal was keenly interested in the 
Agency's activities and had decided to increase 
its voluntary contribution to the General Fund to 
$4500. 
39. Mr. QUARTEY (Ghana) congratulated the 
President, whose unanimous election showed the 
esteem in which he was held by all delegations. 
He welcomed Bangladesh, recently admitted to 
membership of the Agency, [9] and thanked those 
Member States whose wise appreciation had made 
it possible to accept the candidature of a new 
State without complications. 
40. While not wishing to revert to the lengthy 
discussion which had taken place in the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
he noted that the Agency's budget showed an 
increase of about 8%, [10] allegedly due to salary 
and wage increases and to the revaluation of 
various currencies. As far as the programme 
activities were concerned, however, there was in 
reality a decrease of about 1%; [11 ] that decrease 
was particularly regrettable in view of the fact 
that the programme comprised activities relating 
to atomic energy applications in food, agriculture 
and medicine, which were of great interest to 
Ghana and to other developing countries. 
41. The target for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund had been set at $3 million, [12 ] but 
even if that figure were achieved, the purchasing 
power would be of the order of $ 2 million, in 
[9] Bangladesh became a Member on 
27 September 1972. 
[10] See document GC(XVI)/485, para. 1.19. 
[11 ] Ibid., para. I. 23. 
[12] Ibid., para. 1.28. 

GC(XVI)/OR. 157 

other words the same as the target for 1962. The 
Agency's technical assistance programme was 
financed mainly by voluntary contributions paid by 
Member States, and Ghana was particularly 
grateful to the Agency for providing assistance 
for the implementation of projects selected by the 
recipient Member State rather than by the Agency 
itself. In spite of financial difficulties, Ghana 
would therefore make a voluntary contribution 
higher than that based on its assessed contribution, 
and he expressed the hope that all Member States 
would rapidly meet their obligations in that respect. 

42. At the fifteenth regular session Ghana had 
expressed its fear that safeguards expenditure 
would increase to the detriment of technical 
assistance, [13 ] and those misgivings still existed. 
The funds allocated to technical assistance were 
not adequate, and the method of financing was 
not satisfactory. One might have assumed that, 
since the Agency's main obligation towards 
developing countries was the provision of technical 
assistance, the necessary funds would be charged 
to the Regular Budget; perhaps the Board of 
Governors could pay some attention to that 
problem. 
43. Referring to the amendment to Article VI. A-D 
of the Statute, he noted that some 20 acceptances 
were still necessary for the new text to come into 
force. That amendment was in conformity with 
the views of the vast majority of Member States 
and he urged that those Governments which had not 
deposited their instruments of ratification should 
do so without delay. 
44. As the President of the United Mexican 
States had pointed out at the opening meeting of 
the session, the monopolization of the blessings 
of nuclear science and technology by highly 
industrialized countries was contrary to the 
principles of the universality of culture, [14 ] and 
the Agency should strive to become one of the 
main instruments for distributing the fruits of 
scientific progress by ensuring that the 
developing countries received a fair share. 
45. Finally, he thanked the President, 
Government and people of Mexico for the excellent 
arrangements they had made to enable the session 
to be held in such a friendly and hospitable 
country. 
46. Mr. RAHMAN (Sudan) congratulated the 
President on his unanimous election. 
47. Although the Sudanese Government was 
represented at the General Conference for the 
first time, it had been associated with the Agency 
since 1961, during which year Agency experts 
had gone to Khartoum to help in planning the 
Medical Irradiation Centre. Thanks to the 
technical assistance provided by the Agency during 
[13] GC(XV)/OR. 148, para. 119. 
[14] GC(XVI)/OR. 151, para. 23. 
subsequent years, that Centre had now been 
operating efficiently for the past eight years. 

48. Since 1961 the Sudan had received further 
technical assistance from the Agency for various 
other projects, especially in agriculture. Indeed, 
an article in the latest issue of the Bulletin 
described in detail various aspects of an 
agricultural project which had recently been 
launched under the technical assistance programme. 
The Sudan had also benefited from Agency 
fellowships, in particular at the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste. He 
wanted to take the opportunity to thank the Agency 
for all the assistance it had given to his country; 
his thanks were also due to the delegations of all 
those States whose contributions to the Agency 
had made that possible. 

49. A short time ago, the Sudanese Government 
had taken important steps to organize activities 
in the nuclear field and a law had been passed 
providing for the establishment of an atomic 
energy commission. The Sudan had accepted the 
amendment to Article VI. A-D of the Statute, 
being convinced that the entry into force of that 
amendment would facilitate the work of the Board 
of Governors. The ratification of NPT by the 
Sudan was at present being studied and should 
take place before long. 
50. The delegation of the Sudan noted with great 
satisfaction the importance attached to the 
Agency's survey on nuclear power requirements. 
That survey would be a great help to many 
developing countries in correctly evaluating the 
possibilities afforded by nuclear energy for their 
further development. He hoped that that general 
survey would also include the Sudan. 
51. The Sudanese delegation considered that 
voluntary contributions to the technical assistance 
programme should be compulsory for Member 
States and that the Statute should be amended to 
that effect. One would then be able to assess more 
accurately the scope of the programme of 
assistance to be drawn up, so that difficulties 
arising out of the financial situation could be 
quickly resolved. However, it would not help in 
solving the main problem, namely the limited 
amount of funds available. In that connection he 
supported previous speakers in urging the 
advanced countries to consider seriously the 
possibility of making large financial contributions, 
which would make the Agency a powerful and 
effective international organization. In conclusion, 
on behalf of the Sudanese Government, he wished 
to thank the Mexican Government for all the 
hospitality it had shown to the Conference 
participants in the magnificent locale of Mexico 
City. 
• The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m. 
6 



GC(XVI)/OR. 158 

International Atomic Energy Agency 4 May 1973* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

SIXTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 26 SEPTEMBER-3 OCTOBER 1972 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held in the conference centre of the Secretariat of External Relations, 
Mexico City, on Tuesday, 3 October 1972, at 10.55 a.m. 

President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PEÑA (Mexico) 

Item 
of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

3 Credentials of delegates 
to the sixteenth (1972) 
regular session 

(b) Report of the 1-10 
Credentials Committee 
15 The Agency's accounts 11-1 2 
for 1971 

16 The Agency's relations 13-2 2 
with intergovernmental 
organizations 

11 Opening date of the 23 - 24 
seventeenth (1973) 
regular session 

12 Election of Members to 25 - 39 
the Board of Governors 

13 The Agency's programme 40 - 41 
for 1973-78 and budget 
for 1973 

14 Scale of Members' 42 - 46 
contributions for 1973 

17 Elections to the Agency's 47 - 48 
Staff Pension Committee 

18 Voluntary contributions to 49 - 50 
the General Fund for 1973 

19 Closing of the session 51-7 5 

* A provisional version of this document was 
issued on 8 November 1972. 
** GC(XVI)/490. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVI)/INF/139/Rev. 3. 


GC(XVI)/OR. 158 

THE RECORD 

CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE 
SIXTEENTH (1972) REGULAR SESSION 

(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE (GC(XVI)/496) 
1. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the draft 
resolution contained in the last paragraph of the 
report of the Credentials Committee (GC(XVI)/496), 
the adoption of which was recommended by the 
Committee. 
2. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) recalled that during the general debate 
his delegation had stressed the need to respect the 
principle of universality in the Agency's 
membership and had stated that it was essential 
that the German Democratic Republic should 
participate in the Agency's work. [1 ] That 
country, which had assumed a place in the front 
rank in industry, trade and the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, had seen its admission to the 
Agency refused because of the prejudices of 
certain States, The situation was all the more 
abnormal as the German Democratic Republic had 
already concluded a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency and the Agency's inspectors had already 
commenced control activities there. Several days 
previously the Conference had approved the 
admission to the Agency of Bangladesh [2 ], a 
State that had been created very recently. The 
Soviet delegation had welcomed that decision and 
now considered it all the more inadmissible that 
the same right should be refused to the German 
Democratic Republic, which had been in 
existence for more than 20 years and from whose 
participation the Agency would derive every 
advantage. 
3. Mr. URSU (Romania) wished to raise two 
objections to the draft resolution before the 
Conference. First, his Government recognized 
the Provisional Revolutionary Government as the 
only legitimate Government of South Viet-Nam 
and therefore considered that the credentials 
issued by the Saigon administration were 
unacceptable. Secondly, it did not recognize the 
right of South Korea to represent the whole of 
Korea. 
4. In addition, Romania wished to reaffirm that 
it was essential that the German Democratic 
Republic should participate in the Agency's work. 
5. Mr. LUCIC-LAV(5EVIC" (Yugoslavia) said 
that he was unable to accept the credentials 
issued by the Saigon regime in view of the fact 
that only the Provisional Revolutionary Government 
was entitled to represent the people of 
South Viet-Nam. 
[1 ] GC(XVI)/OR. 153, para. 42. 
[2] By Resolution GC(XVI)/RES/287, para. 1. 
6. Mr. DO-LAI-KY (Viet-Nam) recalled that 
his delegation had participated regularly for 
14 years in the work of the sessions of the General 
Conference as it had a great desire to exchange 
information on the results of the work being 
carried out all over the world in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. The comments that had 
just been made were all the more inopportune in 
view of their political nature; they were out of 
place at a meeting of a technical character. It 
was for that reason that his delegation habitually 
refrained at the Conference's sessions from 
raising the objections which it could make to the 
credentials of delegations that disputed its own 
representativeness. 
7. Nevertheless it wished to take the 
opportunity to recall the sufferings imposed on the 
people of South Viet-Nam. For five months the 
National Liberation Front, inspired by Hanoi, had 
been carrying out operations in South Viet-Nam 
that were costing the lives of thousands of innocent 
victims. Those that contested the validity of the 
credentials of his delegation would do well to 
meditate on the saying of Juarez: "The essence of 
peace is respect for the rights of others", 
8. He supported the draft resolution before the 
General Conference and rejected the allegations 
of countries that denied the validity of his 
delegation's credentials. 
9. Mr. ELMEHRIK (Libyan Arab Republic) 
said that his delegation had presented its 
credentials in the course of the morning. 
• 10. The draft resolution in 
document GC(XVI)/496 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1971 
(GC(XVI)/492) 

11. Mr. CASTELLON CRUZ (Chile), Rapporteur 
of the Administrative and Legal Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the Agency's 
accounts for 1971 (GC(XVI)/492). 
• 12. The draft resolution in 
document GC(XVI)/492 was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH INTERGOVERNMENTAL 
ORGANIZATIONS (GC(XVI)/493) 

13. Mr, CASTELLON CRUZ (Chile), Rapporteur 
of the Administrative and Legal Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the Agency's 
relations with intergovernmental organizations 
(GC(XVI)/493). 
14. The PRESIDENT requested delegates to consider 
draft resolution A in document GC(XVI)/493 
concerning a co-operation agreement between the 
Agency and the Agency for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL). 
15. Mr. JACKSON (United Kingdom) heartily 
recommended the adoption of the resolution; it 
-2 



GC(XVI)/OR. 158 


was particularly appropriate that it should be put 
forward for adoption at Tlatelolco. 

16. Baron van BOETZELAER (Netherlands) was 
also in favour of adopting the resolution and 
endorsed the comment made by the United 
Kingdom delegate. An agreement of that type 
assumed particular importance now that the 
Agency had concluded a similar one with the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), 
17. Mr. GLENNAN (United States of America) 
recalled that the United States had ratified 
Protocol II to the Treaty for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the 
Tlatelolco Treaty) [3 ]. He too considered that the 
agreement was of the greatest importance, and 
was convinced that it would usher in a long period 
of co-operation between the Agency and OPANAL. 
18. Mr. ROLDAN MORALES (Guatemala) said 
that his Government had followed very closely the 
negotiations leading up to the agreement and 
welcomed the co-operation that would result from 
it. 
• 19. Draft resolution A in 
document GC(XVI)/493 was adopted. 
20. Mr. ALBA ANDRADE (Mexico) expressed 
his deep satisfaction at the adoption of the 
resolution. The agreement, which was designed 
to facilitate the efficient functioning of the control 
system set up by OPANAL, would secure one of 
the most important objectives of the Tlatelolco 
Treaty. 
21. The PRESIDENT then invited delegates to 
turn to draft resolution B in document GC(XVI)/493 
concerning the representation of intergovernmental 
organizations at regular sessions of the 
Conference. 
• 22. Draft resolution B in 
document GC(XVI)/493 was adopted. 
OPENING DATE OF THE SEVENTEENTH (1973) 
REGULAR SESSION 

23. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee had asked him to put 
forward its recommendation that the opening date 
of the seventeenth regular session should be 
Tuesday, 18 September 1973. 
• 24. The recommendation of the General 
Committee was accepted. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XVI)/491) 

25. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
report of the General Committee on the election 
of Members to the Board of Governors 
(GC(XVI)/491), in paragraph 1 of which the 
Committee notified the Conference that five 
Members had to be elected to the Board. In 
paragraph 2 the Committee specified the 
geographical areas in respect of which elections 
were required, and in the last paragraph drew 
attention to the fact that elections had to be 
conducted with due regard to equitable 
representation on the Board as a whole of the 
Members in the geographical areas specified in 
Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure. At the end of 
that paragraph the Committee had appended, for 
the Conference's guidance, a list of Members 
that had already been elected by the Conference 
or designated by the Board to serve on the Board 
after the end of the current session. He reminded 
the Conference that Rule 79 of the Rules of 
Procedure provided that the elections to the Board 
should be by secret ballot and that there should 
be no nominations, 

• 26. At the invitation of the President, a 
member of the Philippine delegation and a 
member of the Uruguayan delegation acted as 
tellers. 
27. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect two Members from the area of Latin 
America. 
• 28. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Members to be elected: 2 
Ballot papers returned: 128 
Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 5 
Valid votes: 121 
Required majority: 31 
Votes obtained: 

Mexico 61 
Argentina 58 
Ecuador 1 
Peru 1 

• 29. Having obtained the required majority, 
Mexico and Argentina were elected Members of 
the Board. 
30. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of Africa and the 
Middle East. 
• 31. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 63 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 58 
Required majority: 30 
Votes obtained: 

Saudi Arabia 55 
Gabon 3 

[3 ] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty • 32. Having obtained the required majority, 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
Saudi Arabia was elected a Member of the Board. 

-3 



GC(XVI)/OR. 158 


33. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
elect a Member from the area of South East Asia 
and the Pacific. 
• 34. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 61 
Valid votes: 61 
Required majority: 31 
Votes obtained: 

Indonesia 61 

• 35. Having obtained the required majority, 
Indonesia was elected a Member of the Board. 
36. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
fill the remaining vacant seat on the Board. 
• 37. The result of the vote was as follows: 
Ballot papers returned: 62 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 60 
Required majority: 31 
Votes obtained: 

Federal Republic of 59 
Germany 
Italy 1 

• 38. Having obtained the required majority, 
the Federal Republic of Germany was elected a 
Member of the Board. 
39. The PRESIDENT pointed out that, under 
Article VI. D of the Statute, the Members just 
elected to the Board would hold office from the end 
of the sixteenth regular session of the General 
Conference until the end of the eighteenth regular 
session. He congratulated Argentina, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Indonesia, Mexico and 
Saudi Arabia on their election and thanked the 
tellers for their work. 
THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME FOR 1973-78 AND 
BUDGET FOR 1973 (GC(XVI)/494) 

40. Mr. CROOKS (Australia), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the Agency's 
programme for 1973-78 and budget for 1973 
(GC(XVI)/494). 
• 41. Draft resolution A (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1973), draft resolution B 
(Operational Budget allocations for 1973) and 
draft resolution C (The Working Capital Fund in 
1973), attached to document GC(XVI)/494, were 
adopted in turn. 
SCALE OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 
1973 (GC(XVI)/495) 

42, Mr. CROOKS (Australia), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 

introduced the Committee's report on the scale of 
Members' contributions for 1973 (GC(XVI)/495). 

• 43. The draft resolution in that document 
was adopted. 
44. Mr. de LA ROCHEFORDIERE (France) 
recalled that during the fifteenth regular session 
the French delegation had explained why the new 
method of assessing the contributions of Member 
States did not appear to it to conform to the 
Agency's Statute. [4] 
45. The French delegation had found further 
reasons for not approving the draft resolution 
relating to the scale of Members' contributions 
for 1973; it had in fact found that, as had been 
noted by other delegations during the Committee's 
deliberations, a new concept had been introduced, 
that of adopting participation in the Agency's 
activities as a criterion for determining the scale 
of contributions, [5] 
46. That new provision, which was not in 
conformity with the Statute, appeared to be 
dangerous for the Agency, and had the draft 
resolution in document GC(XVI)/495 been put to 
the vote, the French delegation would have cast 
its vote against its adoption. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 

47. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members 
and two alternates elected by the Conference, The 
members were at present Mr. Bittencourt (Brazil) 
and Mr. Fodor (Hungary), the alternates being 
Mr, Lamb (Australia) and Mr. Pahr (Austria). 
Only Mr. Bittencourt was able to continue to 
serve on the Committee, so that the election of 
a new member and two new alternate members by 
the Conference was required. He suggested that 
Mr, Belacik (Czechoslovakia) be elected as a 
member of the Committee, and Mr. Clancy 
(Australia) and Mr, Taliani (Italy) as alternate 
members. 
• 48. Mr. Belacik (Czechoslovakia) was 
elected a member of the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee; Mr, Clancy (Australia) and 
Mr. Taliani (Italy) were elected alternate 
members. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL 
FUND FOR 1973 (GC(XVI)/487/Rev. 4) 


49. The PRESIDENT referred the Conference to 
document GC(XVI)/487/Rev. 4 in which the 
Director General had stated that by 6 p. m. on 
Friday, 29 September, pledges of voluntary 
[4] GC(XV)/COM.l/OR. 95, paras 2-4. 
[5] See document GC(XVI)/COM. l/OR. 98, 
paras 76-81. 
_ 4 



GC(XVI)/OR. 158 


contributions to the General Fund for 1973 had 
amounted to $1 619 693. Since then no newpledges 
had been received. Forty-six Member 
States were therefore pledged to contribute more 
than half the target of $ 3 million. 

50. Nevertheless, according to the table 
contained in the document several Members that 
had made generous contributions in previous years 
were not yet in a position to make known their 
contributions for next year so that there was good 
reason to believe that by the end of the year the 
situation would have improved considerably. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

51. Mr. CORKERY (Australia) expressed the 
gratitude of his delegation to the President of the 
United Mexican States and to the Mexican 
Government for extending to the General 
Conference a warm welcome in keeping with their 
traditional hospitality. 
52. Mr. MANZ (Austria), speaking on behalf 
of the delegations from Western Europe, 
congratulated the President of the Conference on 
the authority and courtesy that he had shown in 
presiding over the debates, and expressed his 
hearty appreciation to the Mexican Government 
and people for the truly generous hospitality they 
had offered to the participants at the sixteenth 
regular session, 
53. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil), speaking on 
behalf of the delegations of Latin America, said 
how much they had appreciated the remarkable 
way the President had directed the business of 
the session in the illustrious setting of the 
conference centre placed at the disposal of the 
General Conference by the Mexican Government. 
He wished the President of the United Mexican 
States and the Mexican people every success in the 
advances they were bringing about with such 
courage and intelligence. 
54. Mr. BERLIS (Canada) speaking in the name 
of the Members in North America, associated 
himself with the thanks and good wishes that had 
been offered to the President of the Conference, 
the President of the United Mexican States and 
the Mexican people. 
55. He had also noted in particular the skill and 
competence with which the delicate problems posed 
by the organization of a session of the General 
Conference away from Headquarters had been 
resolved, thanks to the co-operation between the 
Secretariat and the authorities of the host country. 
56. Mr. GABRAH (Ghana) said how much the 
delegations of Africa and the Middle East had 
admired the calmness and authority of the 
President of the Conference in the exercise of a 
difficult task; it was true that for its work the 
General Conference had had the benefit of a 
particularly cordial atmosphere created with 
exceptional tact by the Mexican authorities. 
57. Mr. TRIVEDI (India) declared it an honour 
to have been asked by the delegations of the 
Members in Asia to convey their congratulations 
to the President of the Conference and to express 
to the Mexican Government their regret at having 
to leave its admirable country. 
58. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland), in the name 
of the countries of Eastern Europe and of the 
socialist countries, also expressed thanks to the 
President and stressed how much the delegations 
of those countries had been impressed by the 
rapid progress being made by Mexico in the 
cultural, scientific and industrial spheres. 
59. The PRESIDENT replied that his country 
appreciated the honour it had received in being 
able to act as host to the Conference and in seeing 
one of its own citizens elected as President for 
the session. As far as he was concerned, the 
spirit of co-operation shown by the delegates, the 
assistance of the Director General and the 
efficiency of the Secretariat had rendered much 
lighter for him a task that would otherwise have 
been extremely arduous. 
60. It had been particularly pleasant for him to 
welcome Bangladesh, which had been admitted to 
Agency membership by acclamation, and it was 
his hope that that decision would serve to 
accentuate the Agency's universality. 
61. He stressed the importance that had been 
attributed during the debates to environmental 
protection and the need for further dissemination 
of knowledge of the benefits obtainable through the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Also of great 
importance had been the safeguards agreement 
negotiated between the five non-nuclear-weapon 
States Members of EURATOM, EURATOM 
itself and the Agency, as well as the co-operation 
agreement between OPANAL and the Agency. 
62. Mexico had become a champion of the 
application of effective safeguards to the uses of 
nuclear material. There were no safeguards, 
however, that could be of any avail against the 
growing despair of less fortunate peoples unless 
all Governments and all international organizations 
vigorously attacked the heart of the most 
elementary problems, which were also the most 
explosive ones, namely poverty, ignorance and 
disease. 
63. Political independence was empty without 
economic independence, and the rich countries were 
not devoting their resources very willingly to the 
construction of a more just world in which the gap 
between rich and poor would progressively narrow. 
64. In lands geared to production, it was 
necessary at the same time to take measures 
against the brutality of the consumer society, 
which tended to destroy the essential in order to 
generate the superfluous in the midst of a much 
larger world where even the barest necessities 
were out of reach. Thanks to progress in means 
of communication and education, everyone knew 
how the privileged lived, and the feelings of 
-5 



GC(XVI)/OR. 158 

frustration of those less favoured could not but 
increase. 

65. It was that situation which rendered economic 
development urgent: the rich countries would have 
to show a better understanding, and give the less 
advanced countries an opportunity to enjoy a fair 
share of international trade and share with them 
the benefits of economic growth. 
66. Humanistic culture was gradually losing its 
dominance. The world of today belonged to the 
scientists and technocrats, to whom the 
creative urge was, alas, often foreign, and who 
cared little for men as human beings. 
67. The abyss separating the experimental 
sciences and the social sciences was a matter of 
great concern, for man was not finding ways of 
living in peace with the progress being achieved 
by his technology. 
68. Moreover, to achieve coexistence between 
nations it was not enough to base relations on a 
set of standards designed to maintain the type of 
balance that belonged to the last century, or to 
establish an illusory balance of nuclear terror. 
69. The international law of today must be 
founded on prosperity; its development should 
correspond to that of a world gradually becoming 
unified, thanks to improved means of 
communication, and witnessing the progressive 
emergence of a planetary community. 
70. Not only nuclear war and nuclear 
armaments were to be condemned, but also the 
destruction brought about by conventional arms. 
The contemporary armaments industry was 
finding a new clientele; violence gave rise to 
violence and terrorism to counter-terrorism. 
The aggressive actions involved were like the 
links of a single chain, and it was not really 
possible to discern their causes. 
71. He was certain that when delegates 
returned to their countries and resumed their 
regular work, they would continue to strive 
unceasingly for the realization of the aims that 
constituted the raison d'etre of the Agency. 
72. He concluded by extending the best wishes 
of the Mexican people and Government to all 
delegations, which by their presence had added 
a new page to the history of Mexico and had 
contributed by their work to the construction of 
a better world. 
73. The DIRECTOR GENERAL assured the 
President and delegations that the views 
expressed during the session, both with respect 
to the progress of nuclear energy in Member 
States and the content of the Agency's 
programmes, would be subjected to careful 
study by the Secretariat. The Secretariat deeply 
appreciated the valuable contribution made by 
the President to the work of the session and he 
(the Director General) wished to ask him to 
convey to the President of the United Mexican 
States and the Mexican authorities and people his 
sincere thanks for the role they had played in 
making the meetings a success. 
74. The PRESIDENT, in accordance with 
Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, invited 
delegates to observe a minute of silence dedicated 
to prayer or meditation. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. 
75. The PRESIDENT declared the sixteenth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
• The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 
-6 



