GC(XVII)/OR. 159 
5 April 1974* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 18 September 1973, at 10.45 a. m. 

Temporary President: Mr. FLORES DE LA PENA (Mexico) 
President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item, of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

1 Opening of the session 1 -3 
2 Election of the President 4 -9 
3(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 10-1 1 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 12-1 6 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 17-2 0 
6 Applications for membership of the Agency 21 - 36 

Statement by the Representative of the 37-3 8 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 21 September 1973. 
** GC(XVII)/497. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC(XVII)/OR. 159. 

THE RECORD 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the 
seventeenth regular session of the General 
Conference open, 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he invited the delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation, particularly on the important matters 
which were commanding the attention of mankind: 
progress in the use of nuclear techniques for the 
general good; the drafting of a charter of the 
rights and obligations of nations designed to 
eliminate the gulf which separated the strong and 
the weak; renunciation of the use of brute force 
for the overthrow of governments which were the 
result of free expression of the will of the people. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for one 
minute. 
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
those present, particularly Mr. Kreisky, Federal 
Chancellor of the Republic of Austria, and 
Mr. Kirchschlager, the Minister for Foreign 
Affairs, who were honouring the opening meeting 
of the session with their presence. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President of the 
Conference. 
5. Mr. ANAK AGUNG (Indonesia) nominated 
Mr. R. W. Boswell, the delegate of Australia. 
He recalled the work done by Mr. Boswell in the 
physical sciences, particularly in radiophysics 
and electronics. He also mentioned Mr. Boswell1 s 
numerous activities as director of Government 
laboratories and his appointment as Permanent 
Head of the Australian Department for National 
Development in 1965. Mr. Boswell was a member 
of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission 
(AAEC) and Chairman of the Council of the Snowy 
Mountains Hydroelectric Authority. In 1972 he 
had been appointed Chairman of the AAEC and 
Governor from Australia on the Agency's Board of 
Governors. 
6. Mr. BEESLEY (Canada) and Mr. FUJIYAMA 
(Japan) supported the nomination. 
• 7. Mr. Boswell (Australia) was elected 
President of the General Conference for its 
seventeenth regular session by acclamation. 
• Mr. Boswell (Australia) took the chair. 
8. The PRESIDENT thanked all delegations for 
their support in electing him President of the 
Conference, in particular the delegates of 
Indonesia, Canada and Japan. 
9. He wished to pay a tribute to his predecessor, 
Mr. Flores de la Peha, the delegate of Mexico, 
for the able manner in which he had opened the 
session. Although it was only the second time he 
himself had attended a session of the General 
Conference, he hoped that he would be able to 
direct the discussions of the seventeenth session 
successfully. He also expressed the hope that the 
session would enable all the Members of the Agency 
represented to co-operate fruitfully in nuclear 
energy activities. 
APPOINTMENT'OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE 

10. The PRESIDENT proposed, in accordance 
with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, that a 
Credentials Committee should be appointed 
consisting of the following nine Members: 
Australia, Colombia, Greece, Pakistan, 
Philippines, Poland, Tunisia, the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics and the United States of 
America. 
• 11. The proposal was accepted. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

12. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 34 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference was 
required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the 
election of the Chairmen of the two Main 
Committees. He therefore proposed to suspend 
the plenary meeting for a short time to enable the 
two Committees to elect their Chairmen. 
• The meeting was suspended at 11. 25 a. m. 
and resumed at 11. 35 a. m. 
13. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President of the Conference. 
14. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) nominated the 
delegates of Japan, Madagascar, Romania, Saudi 
Arabia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics, the United States of America and 
Uruguay. 
15. Mr. SCHMILL ORDONEZ (Mexico) 
seconded those nominations. 
• 16. The delegates of the Members nominated 
were elected to the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

17. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 40 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference was 
required to elect four additional members to the 
General Committee. He invited nominations. 
18. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) nominated the 
delegates of Canada, France, Morocco and the 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. 
-2 



GC(XVII)/OR. 159 


19. Mr. GOHAR (Arab Republic of Egypt) 
seconded those nominations. 
• 20. The delegates of the Members nominated 
were elected to the General Committee, which was 
thus duly appointed in compliance with the provisions 
of Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY (GC(XVII)/498, 509) 

21. Mr. ORTIZ-LOPEZ (Costa Rica) said that he 
wished to sponsor the application of the German 
Democratic Republic for membership of the Agency 
which was the subject of document GC(XVII)/498. 
He recalled that the Board of Governors had considered 
the application and had recommended that 
the Conference approve the German Democratic 
Republic for membership; such approval would, 
he was sure, strengthen peaceful co-existence and 
contribute to technical progress in the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy. 
22. Mr. KETTAB (Algeria) said he fully 
supported the Board's recommendation and believed 
that the German Democratic Republic would make a 
useful contribution to the work of the Agency. 
23. Mr. ALI (Bangladesh) said he also supported 
the German Democratic Republic's application for 
membership of the Agency. 
24. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference 
wished to adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XVII)/498. 
• 25. It was so decided. 
26. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference 
also wished to adopt the draft resolution concerning 
the application for membership by the Mongolian 
People'' s Republic contained in document 
GC(XVII)/509. 
• 2V. It was so decided. 
28. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania) congratulated the 
observers of the German Democratic Republic and 
the Mongolian People's Republic on the admission 
of their States to the Agency. He was sure that 
the participation of the two States in the Agency's 
future activities would improve and strengthen 
international co-operation. 
29. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said he was very satisfied at the 
admission of the German Democratic Republic and 
the Mongolian People's Republic to the Agency. 
The Soviet Union had consistently stood up for 
recognition of the legitimate rights of the German 
Democratic Republic, whose admission to the 
Agency confirmed the existence of a socialist 
German State, which had been one of the first 
States to become party to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [1]. 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
The Mongolian People's Republic had also ratified 
NPT and had signed a safeguards agreement with 
the Agency. The admission of the two States to 
the Agency would undoubtedly strengthen the 
principle of universality of the Agency and improve 
international co-operation in the nuclear field. 

30. Mr. ORLANDO RODRIGUEZ (Cuba) warmly 
congratulated the German Democratic Republic and 
the Mongolian People's Republic on their admission 
to the Agency. 
31. He noted with sorrow the absence of the 
Chilean delegation, whose elected democratic 
Government had just been overthrown by a military 
coup d'6tat, and invited the delegates of the 
socialist Members, the Members in Latin America 
and all Members which believed in justice and 
equality to observe a minute of silence in homage 
to the memory of President Allende, the heroic 
defender of his people's liberty. 
32. Mr. HILBERT (Observer, German 
Democratic Republic) expressed his gratitude to 
all those delegates who, in accordance with the 
principles embodied in the Charter of the United 
Nations and the noble objectives of the Agency's 
Statute, had supported the admission of the 
German Democratic Republic to the Agency; he 
was particularly grateful to those who, for many 
years, had striven to secure for the German 
Democratic Republic the same treatment within 
the Agency as that enjoyed by other States. 
33. The Conference's decision coincided in time 
with very positive trends, at the international 
level, towards a detente and greater security. The 
German Democratic Republic, now to become a 
Member of the Agency, would do all it could to 
promote international co-operation in the 
exclusively peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
34. The German Democratic Republic had for 
many years displayed its keen interest in the 
Agency's activities and had given proof of its 
intentions by acceding to all multilateral agreements 
designed to limit armaments and strengthen 
international confidence; it had ratified NPT and 
strictly complied with the provisions of the safeguards 
agreement which it had concluded with the 
Agency on 6 March 1972. [2] 
35. The German Democratic Republic, with its 
scientific and technological potential, was able 
and willing to make a useful contribution to the 
implementation of the Agency's working programme 
for the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
36. Mr. DASH (Observer, Mongolia) thanked 
those Members that had supported the application 
for membership submitted by his Government. 
Mongolia intended to carry out its obligations 
under the Statute and to participate as fully as 
possible in the Agency's activities in a spirit of 
co-operation with all States, regardless of their 
economic and social systems. 
[2] Reproduced in document INF CIRC/181. 
-3 



GC(XVII)/OR. 159 

STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE 
SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

37. Mr. WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI (Director-
General of the United Nations Office at Geneva) 
recalled that the Agency and the United Nations had 
common responsibilities in many fields of activity. 
He emphasized in particular the impact on the 
United Nations' activities of the work undertaken 
by the Agency to further peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy pursuant to resolutions adopted by 
the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, 
held in 1968 under the auspices of the United 
Nations. [3] In addition, the safeguards agreements 
concluded in connection with NPT had direct 
repercussions in the political sphere, and account 
would undoubtedly be taken of that fact in the 
conferences on disarmament and European 
security. Lastly, the market survey for nuclear 
power carried out by the Agency [4] demonstrated 
that the Agency was continuing to collaborate 
closely with those United Nations bodies which had 
the task of helping to reduce the glaring differences 
between the living standards of different peoples. 
The United Nations was proud to be thus associated 
with the Agency's work and to be co-operating with 
it in the interests of all. 
38. He then read the following message from the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, to the Conference: 
(1) "On the occasion of the seventeenth 
session of the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, I wish 
to convey to it sincere and warm wishes for 
success in its efforts to consolidate the 
Agency's achievements and plan new advances 
in all its major fields of action. 
(2) "It is gratifying to know that the Agency 
has continued to make steady progress in the 
negotiation and conclusion of safeguards 
agreements required for the implementation 
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons and that many such agreements 
have now entered into force. I welcome, 
in particular, the safeguards agreement 
with EURATOM and the non-nuclearweapon 
EURATOM States signed in Brussels 
last ApriL These advances represent very 
significant contributions to nuclear nonproliferation 
and to peace and security. It 
is my earnest hope, therefore, that every 
possible effort will be made to further 
strengthen and accelerate this positive trend. 
(3) "Of course, questions related to safeguards 
are not the only ones of interest to •
the United Nations. The recent, welldocumented 
report of the Agency [5] clearly 
shows how close the working relationship 
between the United Nations and the International 
Atomic Energy Agency is and how 
numerous their points of contact are. 

(4) "In this connection, I wish to refer to the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities 
aimed at promoting the further development 
of peaceful applications of nuclear energy, 
especially in the developing countries. I 
note that in 1973 the Agency outlays for 
technical co-operation are to increase as 
compared with the previous year and that 
they will be almost twenty-five per cent 
higher than in 1971, thus helping to overcome 
monetary difficulties and offset 
inflationary trends. During the same period, 
furthermore, the UNDP component in the 
Agency's programme of technical assistance 
has increased considerably. 
(5) "In view of the importance and urgency 
of effective programmes relating to the protection 
of the world environment, I find it 
encouraging that the Agency has intensified 
its own programme in this field, particularly 
as regards the safe management of nuclear 
waste, and that the Director General has 
been authorized to enter into arrangements 
with the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) for the carrying-out of 
activities or the implementation of projects 
relating to the impact of nuclear energy on 
the environment. As regards the use of 
nuclear techniques in environmental studies, 
I understand that concrete projects have already 
been submitted by the Agency to UNEP 
and that each of them relates to recommendations 
of the 1972 United Nations Conference 
on the Human Environment. 

(6) "I am confident that the present session 
of the Agency's General Conference will 
make significant progress in the development 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. I 
should like also to take this opportunity to pay 
a special tribute to the Director General of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Dr. Eklund, for his ability and dedication to 
the advancement of the ideals and goals of 
the Agency. 

(7) "To you all, my cordial wishes of 
success in our common endeavour. " 
The meeting rose at 12. 35 p. m. 

[3] See United Nations document A/7 27 7. 
[4] For details, see document GC(XVII)/506. 
[5] GC(XVII)/500. 

-4 



GC (XVII)/OR.160 
8 April 1974* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 18 September 1973, at 3.40 p.m. 

President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject iragr; iphs 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation 1 -2 
of items for initial discussion 
Appointment of the Director General 3 -10 
9 Statement by the Director General 11 -82 
10 General debate and report for 1972-73 83 -153 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 83 -106 
South Africa 107-117 
Indonesia 118 -135 
United Kingdom 136 -153 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 20 September 1973. 
** GC(XVII)/512. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC(XVII)/OR.160 

THE RECORD 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION 
OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION (GC(XVII)/497) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee recommended it to 
approve an agenda for the session consisting of all 
the items on the provisional agenda in document 
GC(XVII)/497, and also to allocate items for 
initial discussion as indicated in that document. 
• 2. It was so decided. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(GC(XVII)/499) 

3. The PRESIDENT observed that, as stated in 
document GC(XVII)/499 on the appointment of the 
Director General, on 12 June 1973 the Board of 
Governors had appointed Mr, Sigvard Eklund to 
the post, to serve for a term of four years to run 
from 1 December 1973. Pursuant to Article VII. A 
of the Statute, the Board requested the Conference 
to approve the appointment, and accordingly 
recommended adoption of the draft resolution set 
out in the document. 
4. Mr. BANCORA (Argentina), speaking on 
behalf of Latin American Members, expressed 
satisfaction at the reappointment of the Director 
General for a further term of four years by the 
Board. Mr. Eklund1 s fourth period in office must 
constitute a record in the United Nations. He was 
gratified that he had not been wrong in supporting 
Mr. Eklund's candidacy twelve years previously, 
when the Director General was already known as a 
scientist, but not then as an administrator. 
5. Everyone knew how difficult it was to deal 
with international organizations. It had not been 
easy to find someone with all the requisite gifts 
for such an arduous task, but the Director General 
had shown himself able to select programmes and 
projects which fulfilled the fundamental aims of 
the Agency. 
6. He wished to thank the Director General for 
his visits to Member States, for his achievements 
in the provision of technical assistance and in 
particular for the market survey for nuclear 
power. [1] He wished him continued success in 
the future and pledged him full support. 
7. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said that it was a pleasant task for him 
to support the re-election of Mr. Sigvard Eklund 
on behalf of his own Government, Bulgaria, Cuba, 
Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, 
Hungary, the Mongolian People's Republic, Poland 
Romania, the Ukranian Soviet Socialist Republic 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. He 
had met the Director General many times and was 
happy to state that he was an objective and talented 
[1] For details, see document GC(XVII)/506. 
organizer in the domain of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Mr. Eklund1 s tact, application 
and scientific competence made him the most 
satisfactory man for the task. 

• 8. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XVII)/499 was adopted by acclamation. 
• At the invitation of the President, Mr. Eklund 
entered the meeting, 
9. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Eklund that 
the Conference had approved his appointment to 
the post of Director General. He was pleased to 
be the first to congratulate him, and invited him 
to take the oath of office prescribed by the Agency's 
Staff Regulations [2]. 
10. Mr. EKLUND took the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, 
discretion and conscience the functions 
entrusted to me as Director General of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, to 
discharge these functions and to regulate my 
conduct with the interests of the Agency only 
in view, and not to seek or accept instructions 
in regard to the performance of my duties 
from any Government or other authority 
external to the Agency. " 

STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

11. The DIRECTOR GENERAL expressed his 
heartfelt gratitude to delegates and their Governments 
for the confidence in him which his 
re-election implied. It was a great privilege to 
be asked to continue to work with them for the 
Agency, and he would do his utmost in seeking to 
implement their decisions. 
12. It would always be his aim to make the 
Secretariat as efficient an instrument as possible 
for carrying out the decisions of the Board and the 
Conference. As the latter were the policy-making 
organs of the Agency, he had abstained from 
making policy declarations of his own, except on 
those occasions when the Conference had been 
requested to approve his appointment for a new 
term. In that tradition, he wished to take the 
opportunity to share his thoughts on a few subjects 
which he considered to be of paramount importance 
for the future of the organization. 
13. Since the Second World War new organizations 
and bodies had been set up to deal with almost 
every imaginable problem, sometimes even to deal 
with the same problem, but from different angles. 
Not one had yet declared its purpose fulfilled; 
instead, there was a search for new tasks to 
maintain the considerable machinery which had 
been created. 
[2] INFCIRC/6/Rev. 2, Regulations 1.11 and 
1.12. 

-2 



GC(XVII)/OR.160 


14. At a time when atomic energy commissions more substantial resources devoted to those 
in Member States were being reorganized, activities where the Agency's work could have the 
disbanded, or given new "non-nuclear" tasks, it greatest impact. 
was appropriate to raise the question of the need 
for the continued existence of the IAEA with its 
present functions. Nuclear techniques were now 
routine operations in scientific and technical 
disciplines. Nuclear power had also become an 
attractive commercial alternative to conventional 
power and an integral part of the expansion plans 
of many utilities. Was the field of nuclear energy 
really so nearly unique that a special organization 
was required at an international level? There 
were compelling reasons for answering the 
question in the affirmative. 

15. First and foremost there was the reference 
in the Agency's Statute to making the benefits of 
nuclear energy available throughout the world, 
bearing in mind the special needs of the developing 
countries, and to applying safeguards against 
military use. Sixteen years after the establishment 
of the organization, he still considered those two 
provisions to be the corner-stones of the Agency's 
activities. The safeguarding function had received 
increased impetus from the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [3]. The 
Agency was under a legal obligation to continue its 
safeguarding activities, which could well serve as 
an example for future systems of verification and 
control of arms limitation or disarmament 
agreements. 
16. As regards assistance to developing countries, 
the Agency had been gratified to witness the "takeoff" 
in the nuclear field of some developing 
countries. However, for the majority, nuclear 
technology and the benefits that could accrue from 
its utilization were still goals to be achieved. 
17. The rapid development of nuclear power and 
the increased concern for the preservation of the 
human environment had made it imperative to 
achieve an international consensus regarding rules 
for the safe operation of nuclear plants, including 
the handling of radioactive waste. The results of 
the Agency's work could assist in gaining public 
understanding of nuclear power in many Member 
States. 
18. Finally, there was the field of information 
and the Agency's International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS). INIS had so far demonstrated the 
Agency's capacity to operate a major scientific 
indexing service. The ultimate success of the 
system, however, would depend on the extent of 
its utilization by Member States. 
19. The activities mentioned were by no means 
an exhaustive list of what might be called "vital 
programmes". In his view, they adequately justified 
the continuing existence of the Agency. That 
did not mean that the Agency should be satisfied 
with the status quo. Each programme should be 
examined with the criterion of usefulness in mind. 
A number of tasks could thus be eliminated and 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
20. The future role of nuclear power assumed 
special significance in the context of debates about 
the so-called "energy crisis". In certain areas, 
energy systems were vulnerable because of 
reliance on imported fuel. The price incentive 
had to a large extent lost its effect in the oil 
market. 
21. The difficulties in securing conventional fuel 
supplies favoured the only technically feasible 
alternative at the present time, namely nuclear 
power. The introduction of nuclear power plants 
had temporarily been slowed down by environmental 
litigation. Thoughtful environmentalists 
were beginning to realize, however, that on 
balance nuclear power had substantially fewer 
detrimental environmental consequences than any 
other form of power production. It should also be 
remembered that in nuclear reactors the costs of 
environmental protection measures had already 
been "built in"; to make other thermal stations 
"clean" in the same sense would involve substantial 
costs, for instance, for de-sulphurization 
equipment or for oil with a low sulphur content. 
22. As nuclear power began to meet a significant 
part of the electricity requirements in several 
countries, it was becoming a subject for discussion 
in many forums which in the past had concerned 
themselves primarily with conventional sources of 
energy, for instance the World Energy Conference 
and the Economic Commission for Europe (of the 
United Nations). The Agency was being asked to 
share its experience in the nuclear field with those 
bodies. Fruitful co-operation could take place only 
if the Agency were able to speak the language of 
the utilities and had staff combining experience 
of the whole power production field. That need had 
also been evident during the market survey, and 
would be reflected in the Agency's recruitment 
policies. 

23. The future development of nuclear power 
would depend upon the world's ability to use 
fissionable material in the most rational way. 
The Agency should seriously consider evaluating 
alternative reactor strategies in order to assess 
their impact on the utilization of resources and on 
the environment. In that way, assessments would 
be made, for example, of fast and advanced 
converter reactor systems, and of the potential 
use of thorium as fuel. 
24. Most States with nuclear programmes must 
concern themselves with future supplies of 
enriched uranium. He urgently appealed to 
suppliers to make available, through the Agency, 
sufficient quantities of enriched uranium for power 
reactors for transfer to developing countries under 
less stringent conditions than at present. Mexico 
had been the first country to request the Agency to 
act as intermediary in the supply of nuclear fuel 
for a power reactor; other countries might follow 
its example. 
-3 



GC(XVII)/OR.160 

25. Enrichment facilities were, for the time 
being, limited to five countries. The enriched 
uranium situation was critical in certain parts of 
the world. It was to be hoped that additional 
co-operative ventures would be started in order to 
alleviate the situation. 
26. The introduction of nuclear power in the 
developing countries presented the Agency with a 
new challenge. The market survey, the results 
of which had recently been published, represented 
one way in which the organization could be of 
assistance to countries which had reached that 
stage of development. It was to be hoped that 
national energy bodies and financing and industrial 
organizations would find the document useful in 
their planning activities. The results of the 
market survey would need to be up-dated and 
expanded in the light of new information becoming 
available. However, the basic methods, procedures 
and tools, e. g. computer programmes, 
developed during the course of the survey would 
continue to be applicable and useful for the 
continuing assistance which the Agency could give 
to Member States. 
27. In that context, it had been very encouraging 
for the Agency to learn that on 1 September 1973 
the Philippine authorities had decided to start the 
construction of a 600-MW(e) nuclear unit on Luzon. 
28. Public concern about the environment had 
ebbed somewhat since the United Nations 
Conference on the Human Environment held at 
Stockholm in 1972. He sensed a less emotional, 
more realistic appreciation of the problems, and 
hoped that Governments would continue to lend 
their support to national, regional and international 
efforts, in that order of priority. 
29. The Agency's work on nuclear safety and 
environmental protection had been strengthened 
through voluntary contributions and some 
re-ordering of priorities. As an impartial 
international organization, the Agency could be of 
assistance to Member States by working out 
standards, codes of practice and regulations which 
could be referred to by atomic energy authorities. 
30. The Agency had noted the trend in some 
national Governments to separate promotional and 
regulatory activities in the nuclear energy field 
and the suggestion made that the internal 
organization of the Agency should be changed to 
reflect this. It should be recalled that under its 
Statute the Agency was required to carry out both 
promotional and regulatory activities. He had not 
found it appropriate to put forward in his statement 
any organizational suggestions for the 
Agency's environmental work in the future. 
However, the importance which Member States 
attached to that complex field and the extent to 
which it involved negotiations with other international 
organizations had made necessary a study 
on appropriate organizational consequences. The 
study would be undertaken and included in the next 
six-year programme and budget for 1975, to be 
presented at next year's General Conference. 
31. Several in-depth studies on nuclear safety 
were in progress in Member States. He hoped that 
the Agency would receive the results to enable it 
to serve as a common demominator for the views 
and findings, which were of such fundamental 
importance. The Agency should also assist 
licensing authorities in Member States by studying 
various problems arising in the safety assessment 
of nuclear plants. 
32. In the area of waste management, there were 
many opportunities for increased international 
collaboration. It had been estimated that a nuclear 
power programme comprising 30 000 MW(e) 
justified the setting up of one reprocessing unit. 
That meant the operation of a maximum of six to 
eight reprocessing plants for the whole of Europe 
by 1985. Economies of scale might bring the 
optimum number below that figure. The location 
of the reprocessing plants should be closely 
related to the question of radioactive waste 
disposal sites. The Agency had a task of great 
importance in defining criteria for disposal sites 
which, in a crowded continent like Europe, should 
be conceived of as regional or international. The 
whole question should be pursued vigorously by 
the Agency. 
33. The 1972 London Convention on the Prevention 
of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes 
and Other Matter had referred to the Agency as 
the competent body to define high-level radioactive 
matter which should not be dumped at sea and had 
also called upon the parties to take full account of 
the Agency's recommendations when issuing 
permits for dumping other radioactive matter. 
The Board was now considering draft recommendations, 
which the Agency hoped to transmit early 
in 1974. 
34. The newly-established United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) had expressed 
interest in supporting certain proposals made by 
the Agency. 
3 5. He would continue to seek collaboration and 
support from UNEP, but at present it appeared 
that its financial support to the Agency could only 
be marginal. The major burden of expanding 
safety and environmental activities would have to 
be borne by the Agency's Regular Budget. 
36. Scientific meetings might be called the 
backbone of many Agency programmes and their 
importance in fulfilling the statutory mandate "to 
foster the exchange of scientific and technical 
information" should never be underestimated. 
However, there was a universal tendency for one 
meeting to give rise to a further one, so that a 
chain reaction was started. National and regional 
bodies also contributed to the "proliferation of 
international meetings". 
37. The time had come to be much more selective, 
to have far fewer, but better prepared, meetings 
on topics which were currently of great interest. 
The economies thus obtained could be used to 
secure the participation of particularly wellqualified 
experts, to cover the additional costs of 
4 



GC(XVII)/OR. 160 


holding a meeting in a developing country, or to 
extend travel grants to participants from developing 
countries. 

38. A sizable reduction in the number of meetings 
would also free staff for other work in their programme 
area, such as advisory missions to 
countries asking for assistance. For that purpose 
the Agency should be able to recruit people of the 
highest professional standards, who were in touch 
with the latest advances in science and technology. 
39. In seeking policy guidelines, the Agency had 
so far depended upon ad hoc panels of experts 
convened as and when considered necessary. A 
more coherent approach might be to establish a 
standing committee or working group on certain 
problems, such as siting, safety, the licensing of 
nuclear plants, etc. The group would examine the 
policy, legal and technical aspects concerned. 
Other areas could also be covered. The views of 
the Conference on the suggestion would be welcome. 
40. Then there were the Agency's extramural 
activities, namely the Seibersdorf Laboratory, the 
International Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity 
at Monaco (the Monaco Laboratory) and the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste 
(the Trieste Centre). 
41. A considerable proportion (24%) of the work 
at Seibersdorf was devoted to agricultural research 
and development in support of the programme of 
the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in 
Food and Agriculture. That programme had 
recently been scrutinized by a group of experts 
who had unanimously endorsed it. 
42. Another portion (16%) of the resources at 
Seibersdorf was set aside for tasks related to the 
Agency's safeguarding obligations, a share that 
would increase considerably in the future. 
43. Other activities at Seibersdorf should be the 
object of a thorough review, for which he intended 
to ask for the help of a group of experts. 
44. The Board had noted the intention to extend 
the work of the Monaco Laboratory to include the 
study of some non-radioactive pollutants, mainly 
with the help of nuclear techniques. The expansion 
would be funded by UNEP, on the basis of a joint 
proposal by the Agency and UNESCO. 
45. Activities in the field of theoretical nuclear 
and atomic physics at the Trieste Centre had been 
highly successful. The approach followed by the 
Agency, and later through the operation of the 
Centre by the Agency and UNESCO, could be 
applied to other branches of science as well. With 
the support of the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP), UNESCO was sponsoring 
symposia on mathematics and theoretical meteorology 
at the Centre. The agreement between the 
Agency and UNESCO and the Italian Government 
was expiring in 1974, and preliminary talks were 
under way for an extension. Should present plans 
for a "world university" be realized, the Trieste 
Centre might be associated with it as one of its 
"centres of excellence". If that were the case, the 
whole question of the Agency's participation in and 
contribution to the Centre should be re-examined. 

46. A step towards fuller implementation of NPT 
had been taken in April 1973 when the agreement 
between the Agency and the non-nuclear-weapon 
States Members of the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) had been signed in 
Brussels. Preliminary talks on safeguards in 
connection with NPT had been continuing with a 
number of countries, including the United States 
of America and the United Kingdom, with regard 
to their offer to place their peaceful nuclear 
installations under Agency safeguards. The 
acceptance of Agency safeguards by certain 
nuclear-weapon States for various installations 
was a sign of confidence and goodwill, and went 
some way towards proving the general acceptability 
of the Agency's safeguards work. 
47. He personally was much concerned at the 
rate of actual implementation of NPT. Seventyeight 
non-nuclear-weapon States had now ratified 
the Treaty, 45 safeguards agreements in connection 
with NPT had been concluded, while others were 
overdue. As had been the case at previous sessions 
of the General Conference, a special office had 
been opened on the Conference premises to assist 
States wishing to conclude such agreements with 
the Agency. Of the 11 000 MW(e) of nuclear power 
installed in non-nuclear-weapon States, only 
3000 MW(e) were covered by agreements in 
connection with NPT, though another 5000 MW(e) 
were covered by other Agency safeguards agreements. 
The situation would improve as soon as 
NPT was implemented in the States Members of 
the European Communities, where at present the 
nuclear power installed amounted to 3000 MW(e), 
but unfortunately the time-table for ratification of 
the Treaty or the safeguards agreement by all the 
non-nuclear-weapon States in the Communities 
was not yet clear. There were still several key 
countries which had not ratified NPT or had 
disassociated themselves from it. Of the seven 
countries in the world with populations of over 
100 million, only two had ratified NPT, namely 
the Soviet Union and the United States. 

48. The continued testing of nuclear weapons 
was of course not an encouragement to countries 
which were being urged to accede to NPT. A 
complete test ban would seem to be an appropriate 
way for nuclear-weapon States to show their 
willingness to honour their obligations under 
Article VI and the Preamble of NPT. The 
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, the progress of 
which seemed hopeful a year ago, now had to face 
the difficulties raised by the rapid development of 
nuclear arms technology. 
49. An agreement to cut off the production of 
special fissile material for weapons purposes 
would be a positive step, and had received support 
in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament. 
The Agency's services could, under the 
terms of its Statute, be used in the transfer of 
materials no longer used for military purposes to 
other States for their peaceful programmes. 
-5 



GC(XVII)/OR.160 

50. There had been some positive developments, 
albeit outside the NPT framework. Perhaps the 
most important of those was the recognition by 
many threshold non-nuclear-weapon States that 
their best interests were not served by acquiring 
nuclear weapons. The Treaty for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Tlatelolco 
Treaty) [4] had been given new impetus by the ratification 
of Protocol II by France and the People's 
Republic of China. The declaration in 1965 by India 
offering to reprocess fuel for countries in the 
region and for the Agency was a reflection of the 
same spirit. 
51. The 1975 Review Conference on NPT would 
give Governments a chance to assess the progress 
of the non-proliferation regime established by the 
Treaty. He felt that the Agency would be able to 
go to that Conference with confidence in its performance 
in connection with the Treaty. More work 
than was generally realized had been done in 
applying analytical methods, technical knowledge 
and sound judgement to achieve a balance between 
what was desirable and what was possible in the 
field of safeguards. 
52. In that connection he attached great 
importance to the network of safeguards analytical 
laboratories, whereby certain States could 
participate in the regulatory work and not just be 
themselves the object of verification. 
53. Looking further into the future there were 
many problems which should be prepared for now. 
The amount of plutonium in storage, use and 
circulation in all non-nuclear-weapon States would 
increase during the next ten years from a few 
hundred kilograms to over 50 tons. Could the 
Agency's safeguards system cope with that growth? 
Should the Agency do more about the physical 
security of materials? What would be the effects 
of substantial developments in the field of fusion 
on safeguards? 
54. The organizational aspects of the Agency's 
safeguards effort would need to be re-examined in 
order to achieve maximum efficiency in discharging 
its growing responsibilities and he intended to ask 
for the advice of outside experts in that connection. 
55. The recent meeting of the Pugwash movement 
in Finland had unanimously commended the Agency's 
work in implementing safeguards in connection with 
NPT, and had urged that the authority of the Agency 
should be strengthened and supported. In that 
context he wished to stress that a sine qua non for 
the widespread use of nuclear power was that peace 
should be maintained. 
56. It was extremely important to keep a balance 
between the Agency's regulatory and promotional 
activities; the latter category included those 
programmes which were of special interest to the 
developing countries. Apart from the Operating 
[4] 
Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
Fund, important resources were being made 
available to the Agency by a number of States with 
a view to allocation to projects for assisting the 
developing countries; and it was highly encouraging 
to find that such projects, and their governmental 
counterpart support, had increased considerably 
both in number and size. 

57. He personally considered the Agency's 
technical assistance to be of the greatest importance 
for developing countries; even though little 
in monetary terms, it had been enough to make it 
possible in many cases to embark on a line of 
research or prepare for a pre-investment 
application of substantial significance. 
58. Outstanding examples in that respect were 
the results achieved by the Trieste Centre, at 
which, since its establishment, some 130 fellows 
from 44 developing countries had actively participated 
in research work. 
59. The market survey, to which he had already 
referred, was another example of assistance 
whose benefits could not be fully appreciated at 
present but which undoubtedly would be considered 
as a most important contribution in the future to the 
introduction of nuclear power in developing 
countries. 
60. During the last ten years, the rate of increase 
in agricultural production in 42 developing countries 
had been less than the rate of population growth. 
Under those circumstances a considerable fraction 
of the nuclear energy resources of those countries 
was being devoted to agricultural problems. In 
those activities the assistance given by the Joint 
FAO/IAEA Division was highly appreciated but 
was always found insufficient in the context of the 
magnitude of the problem. He had not asked for an 
increase in the Agency's share of the budget for the 
Joint Division, as he believed that it should be for 
FAO first to make a larger contribution. Faced 
with the deteriorating food situation, he had, 
however, become convinced that the Agency should 
devote increased resources to a short-term 
research and development programme aimed at 
assisting developing countries in their efforts to 
improve their unsatisfactory, vulnerable and 
unstable nutrition situation. 
61. For the first time, more than 90% of the 
target for voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund had been reached; however, the value of the 
contributions had been eroded by further changes 
in currency exchange rates, and by inflation. He 
had been instructed by the Board to appeal to 
Member States to contribute to the General Fund 
in an amount larger than their assessed ratio of 
the established target of $3 million. 
62. The Secretariat had begun a study, requested 
by the Board, of all possible methods of financing 
the provision of technical assistance by the Agency, 
including financing from the Regular Budget. 
63. The Agency was enjoying rewarding collaboration 
with several agencies in the United Nations 
family, such as FAO, IMCO, WHO and WMO. He 
-6 



GC(XVII)/OK.160 


was, however, concerned at the ever-increasing 
work load involved in supplying different bodies in 
the United Nations family with information already 
given to them but now required in another form of 
presentation. He was grateful to the Agency's 
Board for having established a simplified procedure 
in reporting to the Economic and Social Council of 
the United Nations (ECOSOC), and he hoped for 
continued understanding in his efforts to avoid 
loading the Secretariat with unnecessary paperwork. 

64. The establishment in Vienna of the Institute 
of Applied Systems Analysis would, he hoped, result 
in close collaboration with the Agency, especially 
in the study of energy systems. 
65. The Agency could also look back on a long 
and close association with the Nuclear Energy 
Agency (NEA) of the Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD). The joint 
surveys on uranium resources and the joint food 
irradiation project were just two examples of 
activities which had been much appreciated by the 
States Members of the two organizations. 
66. The membership of NEA now included 20 
western European States and Japan, with Canada 
and the United States as Associate Members. 
Rather than establish joint regional undertakings, 
NEA now planned to concentrate on major nuclear 
energy problems such as radiation protection, 
long-term availability of nuclear fuel and longterm 
waste management. 
67. The Members and Associate Members of 
NEA were also Members of the Agency and were 
taking part, within the framework of the latter, in 
projects dealing with the same major nuclear 
energy problems as those just mentioned. Unless 
care was taken, that could give rise to duplication 
and the formation of a sort of rich man's club, 
representing 80 to 90% of world nuclear capacity 
by 1980. Any breakdown into groups was something 
the Agency should continue to avoid. The 
Agency's success in handling difficult problems 
and reconciling divergent views was due to the 
willingness of all its Members to seek a consensus 
as a single unit. 
68. Because of the effects of currency fluctuations 
and inflation, the Agency's total budget was higher, 
but its programme showed virtually no growth as 
compared with the last two years. He deeply 
regretted that static situation, which was prevailing 
for the second consecutive year, especially in the 
light of the rapid growth of nuclear power in 
numerous Member States, a situation which in fact 
should result in an expansion of the Agency's 
activities. 
69. In the Board, Member States had so far 
responded positively by accepting a supplementary 
appropriation, in order to do something to protect 
approved programmes against the effects of 
currency fluctuations, and in addition the Secretariat 
had been able to absorb part of the losses 
through savings. The point had now been reached, 
however, where the only way to make significant 
further economies was to cut programmes, and to 
stop the taking of any fresh initiatives. He was 
sure that no Member State would wish the Agency 
to adopt that course. 

70. Programme budgeting had been carried 
further in the Agency than in any other United 
Nations organization. Member States could now 
evaluate in detail what particular programme 
components cost in relation to the budget as a 
whole. The new programme presentation also 
permitted some evaluation of what had been 
achieved in the past. It was now possible for 
Member States to give their views on the relative 
priorities to be accorded to the various activities, 
and he very much hoped that delegates would take 
the opportunity of doing so. 
71. He looked on the Scientific Advisory Committee 
(SAC) as an idea-generating body. During 
the present session, an informal meeting of the 
members of SAC attending it would discuss agenda 
items for, and the frequency and timing of, 
meetings of SAC and, in general, would consider 
how best to use the collective skills and competence 
represented by its membership. He himself 
considered that it was becoming more and more 
important to have technologists and economists 
participating in the work of SAC. 
72. The most valuable asset of the Agency was 
its staff. Without that asset none of its programmes 
and objectives could be carried out. 
With a competent, devoted and enthusiastic staff, 
even difficult tasks could be undertaken and brought 
to a successful outcome. 
73. In that context he wished to draw attention to 
the virtual breakdown of the present Professional 
salary system, which was beginning to affect the 
morale of the staff. Governments would have to 
take a decision on the proposals to be submitted to 
the General Assembly of the United Nations at its 
current session, aimed at rectifying the present 
unsatisfactory situation. The long overdue review 
of the salary system would have to await the 
establishment of the International Civil Service 
Commission. In the meantime, a proposal had 
been made to incorporate several classes of post 
adjustment in the base salary. In all fairness to 
the staff, that was something which should be done. 
74. The amended version of Article VI of the 
Statute was now in force [5] and would be reflected 
in the new and enlarged Board, which would show 
a fuller representation of developing Members. 
The Secretariat had in the past enjoyed a close 
relationship with the Board and the Resident 
Representatives of Member States. With the 
enlarged membership, an additional effort would 
be called for to maintain the good working atmosphere 
and spirit of co-operation that had made 
the Board such an efficient governing body. 
75. A suggestion had been made that during the 
current session the Conference should change its 
Rules of Procedure in order to take account of the 
[ 5] See document INFCIRC/159/Rev. 3. 
-7 



GC(XVII)/OH. 160 

implications of the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute, and also in order to simplify the Rules in 
the light of the experience gained during 16 sessions 
of the Conference. [6] He would consider it a sign 
of strength if the Conference were able to take 
that action. 

76. The Austrian Government continued its 
tradition of assisting and supporting the Agency in 
different ways. Construction work had started on 
buildings for the Agency's permanent headquarters 
in the Donaupark. Occupancy was now scheduled 
for early 1978. 
77. He wished to welcome the German Democratic 
Republic and the Mongolian People's Republic as 
new Members of the Agency. They were as a 
matter of fact no newcomers, as they had both 
concluded agreements with the Agency in connection 
withNPT [7]. 
78. The Agency was closely following the 
development of international nuclear law and, 
where appropriate, contributing to its development. 
Such was the case with the 1963 Vienna Convention 
on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, which, 
unfortunately, still lacked one ratification to enter 
into force; the 1962 Brussels Convention on the 
Liability of Operators of Nuclear Ships had 
suffered the same fate [8j. As those Conventions 
had been adopted over ten years ago, the question 
now arose whether they should remain a dead 
letter or whether new Conventions should be drafted. 
79. Another initiative in nuclear law had taken 
the form of a suggestion that the Agency should 
embody in an appropriate legal instrument the 
principles governing co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. That would be a document 
to which atomic energy authorities could refer 
when drafting bilateral co-operation agreements 
with States. 
80. In nuclear law, as well as in other areas of 
the Agency's activities, the active participation of 
Member States was, of course, essential. A 
comprehensive body of nuclear law was only of use 
if it was in force in a significant number of 
Member States, just as an extensive computerized 
information system was of value only if utilized to 
the full. 
81. It had become a cliche to say that the Agency 
was facing years of challenge ahead. The real test 
for the organization, at any time, was whether it 
fulfilled a need and was useful to its Members. 
The Agency must have the courage to stop activities 
which had become mere time-worn routines, to 
embark on new initiatives, and to expand the scope 
of its programmes. 
[6] 
See document GC(XVII)/503. 
[7] 
Reproduced in documents INFCIRC/181 and 
188 respectively. 
[8] 
The texts of the two Conventions are to be 
found in Legal Series No. 4 (STI/PUB/102). 
82. To that end the constructive suggestions, the 
support and the understanding of Members of the 
Board and the General Conference were needed. 
In accepting a new term of office, he relied upon 
the continuation of that assistance, thus far so 
freely and generously given by Member States. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1972-73 
(GC(XVII)/500, 500/Corr,l, 510) 

83. Miss Dixy Lee RAY (United States of America) 
wished to commend the Director General for his 
outstanding leadership of the Agency over the past 
twelve years. Her delegation was delighted to join 
with the other delegates in the unanimous support 
for the reappointment of Mr. Eklund to a fourth 
term in office. It also paid a tribute to members 
of the Agency's staff who had served with such 
diligence and distinction. 
84. Next month, the United Nations Association 
of the United States planned a salute to the Agency 
as part of its annual celebration of the anniversary 
of the United Nations. As a contribution to the 
event the United States Atomic Energy Commission 
(USAEC) was opening a new exhibit in Washington. 
Mr. Eklund was planning to participate in those 
events and to visit a number of nuclear installations 
in the United States. The Agency had a number of 
significant programmes in the environmental, 
waste management, and nuclear safety fields, 
among others, and the United States looked forward 
to the opportunity to exchange ideas on those 
important subjects, 
85. The President of the United States had asked 
her to extend to the delegates his best wishes for 
a productive and rewarding meeting. The activities 
of the Agency related directly and significantly to 
President Nixon's concern for world peace and his 
determination to meet urgent energy needs without 
endangering the environment. 
86. In the United States, President Nixon had 
taken decisive action to meet the energy challenge. 
He had recently requested an extensive reorganization 
of the Government agencies dealing with 
energy policy, natural resources, and research 
and development. He had established an Energy 
Policy Office in the White House and had proposed 
to the Congress the creation of three Federal 
agencies: a Department of Energy and Natural 
Resources, which would be responsible for the 
balanced utilization and conservation of the 
country's resources, an Energy Research and 
Development Administration, which would use the 
present research and development structure of the 
Atomic Energy Commission, and a Nuclear Energy 
Commission, which would have the appropriate 
regulatory functions and responsibilities for health 
and environmental safety. 
87. In his June message to Congress setting forth 
those proposals the President had also announced 
that he was initiating a Federal energy research 
and development effort, to cost US $10 000 million 
over a five-year period beginning in 1974. To 
give impetus to that drive, he had directed that an 
-8 



GC(XVII)/OR.160 


additional $100 million be authorized in the current 
year to accelerate existing projects and to undertake 
new initiatives in a number of research and 
development areas. 

88. The energy problems facing the United States 
had variously been described as a crisis or a 
dilemma, but it was preferable to view them as a 
challenge and an opportunity to apply to the whole 
field of energy the research and development 
techniques which had proved successful in the 
country's atomic energy programmes and in other 
complex technological projects. 
89. In the United States nuclear energy was just 
beginning to fulfil its promise as a power resource 
for civilian purposes. The commercial operation 
of nuclear power plants reflected nearly 30 years 
of discussion and development. During that period 
the light-water reactor had established itself as a 
major new source of electrical energy that was 
both economical and safe. The development of a 
liquid-metal fast-breeder reactor had now been 
assigned the highest national priority in the matter 
of nuclear power production. The breeder reactor 
was expected to become available in the 1980s. 
The development of fusion power should present a 
new option perhaps by the year 2000, by which 
time nuclear power might account for about half of 
the world's electric generating capacity. 
90. Vital as those efforts in nuclear technology 
were, the United States recognized that it must 
meet the energy challenge on a broad front that 
went far beyond the nuclear sciences. The scarcity 
of oil and gas supplies had forced it to give 
increasing attention to other sources of energy 
which had not been fully developed in the era of 
relatively cheap, domestic petroleum products. 
The Federal Government and American industry 
were now studying ways of better utilizing the 
country's substantial coal reserves. There was 
also renewed interest in developing geothermal 
energy, and some advanced research had already 
started on harnessing solar energy and other 
natural sources of power. One of the key features 
of the proposed Energy Research and Development 
Administration was that the new agency would have 
authority to conduct research and developmental 
work on all those potential energy sources as well 
as on atomic energy. 
91. Although the United States looked forward 
with confidence to rapid growth in the use of 
nuclear power, it was determined that that development 
should not result in greater risks to man or 
to his environment. The USAEC was devoting a 
substantial portion of its research and development 
resources to evaluating and reducing potential 
hazards of nuclear power plants. It was further 
reducing the already minuscule impact of radioactivity 
resulting from nuclear power plant 
operation and devoting greater attention to the 
thermal effects of cooling water used in those 
plants. The proliferation of nuclear power plants 
also placed in a new perspective the transportation, 
management and ultimate disposal of radioactive 
wastes. Stricter regulations had been imposed on 
the shipment of those materials and the introduction 
of new methods of solidifying and storing radioactive 
waste materials was being stepped up. 

92. The Agency had already taken a significant 
step with its recently completed, in-depth market 
survey of the power requirements of 14 developing 
countries, in Asia, south-east Europe and Latin 
America. The report of the survey - which was to 
be considered in detail during the present session was 
an outstanding piece of work and an excellent 
example of the contribution the Agency could make 
to world energy efforts. The United States was 
convinced that the study would be useful both to the 
developing countries in assessing their power needs 
and to the nuclear industry. It believed that open 
competition in the market would determine which 
types of power reactors could help developing 
countries meet their growing power needs in the 
most economical way. 
93. In conducting the survey, the Agency had 
acquired both the manpower and the supporting 
elements, such as specialized computer programmes, 
that would enable it to evaluate the 
possible role of nuclear power in developing 
countries. It would be a waste of valuable resources 
if those resources should now be 
dissipated. The study made it clear that, in the 
years ahead nuclear power would become a very 
real option for a number of developing countries. 
As they weighed the possibilities and problems of 
nuclear power, those countries would need 
assistance in a variety of ways - in the training of 
personnel, detailed planning of network expansion, 
drafting of legislation and regulations, and 
evaluation of environmental impact. Surely, the 
Agency could play a major role in helping to supply 
or secure such assistance; the completed survey 
should not be regarded as the end of the Agency's 
involvement with the potential for nuclear power 
in developing countries. 

94. Since its inception, the Agency had regarded 
nuclear safety as one of the most urgent and 
important items on its agenda. The United States 
had supported and encouraged every improvement 
in the Agency's nuclear safety programmes. 
Recently the United States had proposed a modest 
increase in Agency staff and some revisions in 
procedures designed to enhance the Agency's ability 
to conduct safety reviews requested by Member 
States on projects proposed or being built in their 
territory. That kind of advice was essential for 
countries just getting started in the nuclear energy 
business. The Agency was the only international 
agency that could give such advice and it was to be 
welcomed that the Director General had appointed 
an internal task force to work out recommendations 
as to how the Agency's programme could be 
modified to provide such assistance. 
95. The United States had devoted major efforts 
to the development of standards, reactor designs, 
construction practices and operational techniques 
designed to ensure that safety was maintained at 
a high level. Later in the present month, the 
United States would be host to a workshop on 
regulatory principles and perspectives for representatives 
of a number of countries who were 
-9 



GC(XVII)/OR. 160 

interested in learning about some of those 
techniques. It was glad to share that information 
because it believed that any improvement in safety 
achieved anywhere was of benefit everywhere. 
She understood that representatives of the Agency 
would be attending the workshop. 

96. The United States recognized that the Agency 
had a highly significant role to play in taking 
actions designed to protect the environment. 
Everyone working in the nuclear field was fully 
aware of the inescapable environmental problems 
associated with the development of new energy 
resources of any type. The United States was 
convinced, however, that nuclear energy was the 
only alternative to fossil fuel at present available 
as a source of significant increments of power 
during coming decades, and that its environmental 
effects could be properly controlled. 
97. It was equally convinced that any successful 
effort to attack the environmental problems 
associated with nuclear power would require not 
only energetic and imaginative work but also close 
international co-operation. By their nature, those 
problems were international in scope and hence 
many of the Agency's services in that connection 
were of direct value to all mankind. 
98. Her delegation recognized with gratification 
that the Agency already had a strong programme 
in matters concerning nuclear environmental 
protection, which had begun almost as soon as the 
Agency had come into existence and had steadily 
expanded. The Government of the United States 
had supported all aspects of that programme and, 
during recent years, had taken part in other efforts 
by the Agency to deal with the environmental 
impact of nuclear energy. 
99. The United Nations Conference on the Human 
Environment at Stockholm in June 1972 and the 
London Convention on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 
last December had given further impetus to the 
Agency's environmental programmes. Her delegation 
supported the environmental programme 
recommended by the Board of Governors in the 
budget for 1974 [9] and anticipated that it would be 
supplemented in future years by financial support 
from the United Nations Environment Fund. The 
United States strongly urged all Member States to 
support adequate budgetary provision for that 
programme when the 1974 budget came up for 
consideration later in the Conference. 
100. In the opinion of her delegation, the Agency 
represented a unique multinational focus for 
research in problem areas which might ultimately 
be capable of solution only on an international 
basis. It therefore concurred in the emphasis 
being placed by the Agency on supporting and coordinating 
research in radiological safety and 
waste management, especially in view of the need 
for continuous attention to changing national and 
[9] See document GC(XVII)/505, paras E. 10.1E. 
10.18. 
international requirements. The United States 
supported the programme of the Monaco Laboratory, 
to which it had made special contributions 
of equipment worth about $100 000 during the last 
four years. It was very pleased that the Board of 
Governors had endorsed the Director General's 
proposal, developed by the Agency and UNESCO, 
that the Monaco Laboratory's programme be 
expanded to include the use of nuclear and other 
techniques to monitor specified non-radioactive 
marine pollutants. It would encourage financing 
of that programme by the United Nations Environment 
Fund. 

101. The objectives of NPT, including the Agency's 
responsibility for administering the Treaty's safeguards 
provisions, continued to have the strongest 
support of the United States. It was a source of 
satisfaction that the European Communities and 
States Members thereof had signed a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency. Her delegation hoped 
that all the countries involved would promptly 
ratify the agreement and NPT. 
102. Although the United States was not required 
under the Treaty to accept international safeguards 
in its territory, negotiations were now actively in 
progress concerning its offer to permit the Agency 
to apply its safeguards to United States nuclear 
activities, excluding those with direct national 
security significance. The United States had 
offered to permit Agency safeguards to be applied 
in the United States, when they were being applied 
broadly in the other highly industrialized nonnuclear-
weapon countries, in order to demonstrate 
its belief that there was no risk to proprietary 
information by the application of the Agency's 
safeguards, and to meet the concern felt by some 
that they might suffer commercial disadvantage 
from NPT. 
103. The United States would continue to support 
the Agency's efforts to develop technically meaningful 
and widely acceptable procedures to meet 
its safeguards responsibilities and urged other 
Member States to do the same. As the use of 
nuclear power became more widespread, the 
Agency's safeguards responsibilities would increase 
and the safeguards programme would need 
continued support, both through Members ensuring 
an adequate budget and through their making 
available their best people and most advanced 
safeguards research results. 
104. The United States delegation would support 
the 1974 budget as recommended by the Board of 
Governors, as it believed the budget represented 
a well-balanced use of the resources that were 
expected to be available. 
105. The United States delegation fully supported 
the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
The Director General had called attention to the 
rising costs involved in the provision of technical 
assistance. It hoped that the $ 3 million target for 
voluntary contributions to the Operational Budget 
for 1974 would be fully met by Member Governments, 
at least at the level recommended by the 
General Conference, and if possible above it. 
- 10 



GC(XVII)/OR. 160 


Subject to Congressional appropriations, the 
United States planned to continue contributing 
generously to the target and to make additional 
in-kind grants for study in the United States, for 
the provision of services by its experts, and for 
equipment grants to approved technical assistance 
projects. The United States also looked forward 
to discussion in 1974 of an increase in the target 
for 1975. Her Government was pleased to renew 
its pledge, for the fifteenth consecutive year, to 
donate up to $50 000 worth of special nuclear 
materials for use in Agency projects in research 
and for medical therapy. 

106. With regard to the United States materials 
supply policy, the USAEC's uranium enrichment 
facilities, which currently supplied a large share 
of the world's needs, would be able to meet 
anticipated requirements for enrichment services 
only through the early 1980s, despite a current 
improvement programme representing an investment 
of almost $1000 million. Like other nations 
which would rely increasingly on nuclear power, 
the United States wanted to make certain that there 
would be no need to curtail those nuclear power 
programmes because enrichment services were 
not fully available. The United States, drawing on 
one or more of several alternatives available to it, 
would move in ample time to ensure that such 
services would be available to meet both its own 
needs and the rapidly expanding requirements of 
the international market. 
107. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) wished also to 
express his great personal pleasure and that of 
his delegation and of the South African Government 
in the unanimous reappointment by the Board of 
Governors of Mr, Sigvard Eklund for a further 
four-year term as Director General of the Agency. 
It was a striking fact that since Mr. Eklund's 
original appointment some 12 years ago, no other 
contender for that vitally important post had been 
seriously considered. It was to Mr. Eklund's 
lasting credit that the Agency's enviable record of 
sound and prudent administration continued to set 
an example in the United Nations family. 
108. Over the past year commendable and 
successful efforts had been made by the Director 
General and his staff to redirect the energies of 
the Agency towards new goals and priorities, 
conforming to the needs of the day. Of increasingly 
vital importance had been the intensified programme 
relating to the protection of the environment 
and the safe management of nuclear waste. 
In particular, the question of the disposal of radioactive 
waste at sea required urgent attention and 
the London Conference on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution had in fact given the Agency the specific 
task of defining high-level radioactive matter 
unsuitable for dumping in the seas. That was 
tangible recognition that the Agency was the 
appropriate body to shoulder those great responsibilities. 
Of course, such activities would cost 
money and it was highly encouraging that the 
Director General's appeal for special contributions 
to finance the Agency's additional environmental 
activities in 1973 had elicited a substantial 
response from several Member States, including 
South Africa. 

109. To ensure that the Agency's role in the 
important fields of nuclear safety, waste management 
and environmental protection remained 
unchallenged, it was of the highest importance that 
a co-ordinated and continuing programme of 
nuclear safety and environmental protection should 
be established. That programme would have as 
its goal not simply the execution of specific tasks 
referred to it from time to time by some particular 
organization or conference, but - more significantly the 
highly complex task of advising Governments of 
Member States on the multitude of problems 
concerning waste disposal and related matters. He 
had in mind the establishment of a permanent 
working group or committee consisting of technical 
experts in nuclear safety and environmental 
protection. Such a body could give direction and 
purpose to a vitally important aspect of the 
Agency's activities which at present could at best 
be described as a series of projects, rather than 
a co-ordinated forward-looking programme. 
Through it the Agency would be fully prepared to 
meet the many challenges in the field of nuclear 
safety which the inevitable and tremendously 
accelerated adoption of nuclear power was bound 
to create in the years ahead. 

110. Such a development was an inescapable 
consequence of what was commonly termed the 
"energy crisis", which had already affected some 
of the Member States. Many references to future 
power shortages had been made from the General 
Conference rostrum in years gone by, but now, 
suddenly, the spectre of a world critically short 
of energy had become an immediate reality. 
Nuclear energy would unquestionably play a leading 
role - if not the leading role - in riding out the 
storm. But it was also evident that the situation 
constituted an integral crisis for industrial as well 
as developing countries, and a careful mixture of 
various types of energy, having regard to varying 
local factors, would be required. Energyresearch 
and development was, however, widely 
scattered throughout the United Nations family. 
The United Nations itself, for instance, dealt with 
geothermal energy, while UNESCO had recently 
held a conference on solar energy. There seemed 
to be a need for a centralized clearing-house 
where future energy requirements, particularly in 
the developing countries, could be considered 
objectively on a comparative basis. While not 
advocating any basic departure from the Agency's 
nuclear role, he did suggest that, if it was to play 
an effective role in providing the developing 
countries with balanced guidance and advice in 
regard to nuclear power, it must be fully familiar 
with sources of energy other than nuclear. 
111. On the other hand, the situation needed to be 
viewed in its true perspective. To call it a crisis 
was perhaps to dramatize it, for the present 
conditions were to some extent rather localized 
and transitory. The real crisis was yet to come probably 
towards the end of the century - and 
would consist in the serious depletion of all known 
energy resources rather than in an immediate 
- 11 

GC (XVII)/OR. 160 

shortage of energy as such. It would appear that 
the prospects of adequately augmenting energy 
supplies from environmentally "clean" sources 
such as those of solar or hydro origin were 
dubious and that the effort must therefore be 
concentrated largely on established sources. 
Because electricity was very convenient to employ 
as a secondary form of energy, the increase in 
generation of electrical energy would be substantially 
greater than that of other forms, and 
nuclear power would unquestionably account for 
the lion's share. The world's uranium reserves 
were, as well known, not evenly distributed and 
it therefore behove those countries fortunate 
enough to be endowed with significant reserves, 
to bend every effort towards meeting demand and 
extending the world's supplies. His own country 
was keenly aware of its responsibilities in that 
regard and was ceaselessly prospecting and undertaking 
research designed to ensure maximum 
possible utilization of nature's gift of uranium. 

112. His delegation warmly approved the steps 
taken to foster and promote prospecting activities 
and techniques, but it believed that there was a 
need for a longer view - a view which extended 
beyond immediate preoccupations to the day when 
the real crisis of depleted energy sources would 
arrive. Nuclear scientists had for many years 
been investigating the difficulties of controlled 
nuclear fusion and there was a steadily increasing 
measure of co-operation between Member States 
in that field. However, there was no evidence of 
overall co-ordination and international encouragement 
of that activity. His delegation earnestly 
hoped that the programme of Agency meetings 
would, from next year onwards, reflect a much 
more direct realization of the need to work more 
urgently on that potential key to the energy 
problems of the future. 
113. The universal problem was that of funds. 
Price increases, relentless inflation, the 
uncertainties of the international monetary 
situation had all conspired to make 1973 an 
exceedingly difficult year for the Agency in the 
implementation of its plans, despite the best 
efforts of the Director General and his staff to 
economize wherever possible. The Agency has 
been obliged to seek supplementary appropriations 
to enable it to meet its immediate financial 
obligations. The problem of financing was 
becoming more complex and difficult each year 
and it was essential that a solution be found. He 
realized that that was no easy matter, but he 
trusted that all possible alternatives were being 
explored, such as, for example, the partial 
financing of the budget in local currency. 
114. Nowhere had the effect of the unstable 
international financial situation been felt more 
keenly than in the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. South Africa had always attached the 
greatest importance to that activity and had always 
met all its financial obligations under the system 
of voluntary contributions. It had also been able 
to finance, on a bilateral basis, projects within its 
geographic region which the Agency had been 
unable to fund from its own resources. Some 
years ago, South Africa had taken the lead in the 
Board of Governors in getting the target for 
voluntary contributions raised to a more realistic 
figure. It noted with approval that for the first 
time in the history of the Agency, approximately 
91% of the target would apparently be met in the 
present year. His delegation believed that a 
realistic target, fully subscribed, was of greater 
benefit to all concerned than an unrealistic figure 
under sub scribed. In that connection, he was 
happy to be able to state that, with a view to 
restoring the real value of the target, the South 
African Government had decided, in response to 
the Director General's appeal, to pledge an 
additional voluntary cash contribution of $1500 to 
the General Fund for 1974, over and above its 
assessed target ratio of $15 600. South Africa 
would not view unfavourably a recommendation by 
the Board next year for a reasonable rise in the 
target for 1975. He expressed the hope that before 
long the full target figure would be reached and 
perhaps even exceeded. 

115. On 1 June 1973 the amendment to Article VI 
of the Agency's Statute had entered into force and 
would result in a larger, more representative 
membership of the Board. On behalf of the South 
African delegation he expressed the hope that the 
newly constituted Board would carry out its duties 
with the same degree of diligence, impartiality 
and goodwill as the earlier one. 
116. On the subject of the Agency's safeguarding 
activities it was common knowledge that the 
responsibilities of the Department of Safeguards 
and Inspection had increased greatly during the 
past year and would increase even further in the 
year ahead. In the circumstances it was most 
encouraging to note that it had nevertheless been 
found possible to limit the manpower requirements 
of that department to reasonable numbers. He 
felt confident that with the further standardization 
of safeguards implementation, and with the regular 
application of modern methods and techniques, 
that trend would continue. 
117. In conclusion, he was glad to note an item 
on the agenda relating to the amendment of the 
Rules of Procedure so as to enable Conference 
procedures to be somewhat simplified. His 
delegation had long felt that those procedures 
might be streamlined and it welcomed the Director 
General's initiative in that connection. 
118. Mr. ANAK AGUNG (Indonesia) said that he 
would first like to congratulate the Director 
General on his reappointment for a further term 
of office. During the long years that he had 
occupied the post of Director General, Mr. Eklund 
had been a brilliant and competent administrator, 
and his contribution to the functioning of the 
Agency had made it one of the most smoothlyrunning 
organizations in the United Nations family. 
119. Evaluating the Agency's annual report and 
the budget for 1974, it was clear that difficult 
years lay ahead in view of the financial difficulties 
associated with the prevailing monetary crisis 
and currency fluctuations. Yet that obstacle could 
12 



GC(XVII)/OR.160 


be overcome, if a joint effort was made to find a 
solution to the problem. Without impairing the 
progress of the Agency, it was necessary to 
evolve ways and means of cutting down expenditure, 
in such a way that priorities were given only to 
those projects that were essential for the Agency, 
and also to impose stricter control of the budget. 

120. Steps should also be taken as soon as 
possible, in conjunction with the other members 
of the United Nations family which had been 
affected to the same extent by the monetary 
problem, to develop a satisfactory plan to overcome 
those difficulties. 
121. There could be no doubt that the financial 
difficulties with which the Agency was faced 
resulted from a world-wide currency crisis which 
it was beyond the competence of any individual 
country or group of countries to solve. His 
delegation was therefore opposed to any solution 
by which every currency realignment was followed 
by a supplementary budget aimed at obligatorily 
increasing the assessed contribution of Member 
States. Such a policy would be totally unacceptable 
to Indonesia, which was a developing country and 
had already suffered greatly through the currency 
crisis. 
122. Except for the increase in safeguards 
activities, which was out of proportion with other 
Agency activities, his delegation fully supported 
the annual report. It was gratifying to see the 
results of the nuclear power market survey, which 
would be of great value to the countries concerned 
in determining their power policy. It was hoped 
that the Agency would in due course undertake a 
second survey to cover those countries which it 
was not possible to include in the first one, among 
them Indonesia. 
123. His delegation appreciated the technical 
assistance rendered to the developing countries, 
which was the best the Agency could do in face of 
its financial difficulties, due either to the fact that 
the target for the voluntary contributions had not 
been reached, or to the heavy increase in costs as 
a result of inflation and monetary instability. 
124. It was commendable that in technical 
assistance a great deal of attention had been given 
to the application of isotopes and radiation in 
agriculture and medicine; such was fully in line 
with the Statute and ranked among the ultimate 
aims of the Agency. Considerable activity had 
also been developed by the Agency in the fields of 
nuclear engineering and technology, in addition to 
the prospecting for, mining and processing of 
nuclear materials. Also important were the 
research contracts, and it was hoped that more 
funds would be allocated to that item. 
125. The fact, however, that practically nothing 
had been said in the annual report about regional 
co-operation and associated projects suggested 
that in that connection the Agency was experiencing 
some problems, possibly of a financial nature. In 
view of the fact that the project was relatively new, 
it was only fair to give the Agency ample time to 
develop it. He hoped, however, that within the 
regional co-operation framework the transfer of 
knowledge and technology would be given further 
consideration and that it could be activated and 
accelerated, especially as concerned results or 
experience gained in large-scale projects financed 
by UNDP, more particularly in agriculture, and 
under bilateral agreements on the transfer and 
exchange of technology between countries, for 
instance between India and Indonesia under the 
sponsorship of UNIDO. That process could also 
take the form of the exchange of experts and 
placement of trainees. 

126. He would like to suggest that in the future 
the Secretariat should add to the report an overall 
review of the achievements of the four or five 
years prior to the year of the report concerned, 
so that it could be judged how the Agency was 
progressing. To enable an objective evaluation to 
be made, the effect of price increases and similar 
factors should be taken into account. 
127. Progress in the developing countries in the 
use of nuclear power ought not to be seen as a 
process divorced from the world trend towards a 
switch from conventional power to nuclear power. 
The annual report showed that the world's installed 
nuclear capacity in 1980 would be 315 000 MW, as 
compared with 73 000 MW in 1972. Such an increase 
was, of course, a tremendous achievement. 
128. But there was, unfortunately, another side 
to the problem. The rapid development of nuclear 
power brought with it the problem of safeguards, 
which had for some reason become the responsibility 
of the Agency and was now felt to be a 
growing burden by the majority of Member States. 
129. The Agency's budget for 1974 contained 
significant facts regarding the rapid increase in 
the safeguards activities of the Agency, and the 
concomitant increase in its budget. For example, 
staff salaries in the Department of Safeguards and 
Inspection would be increased by 60% over the 
three years between 1972 and 1974, travel 
expenses by 40%, and the cost of equipment by 
50%, while the number of Professional staff would 
go up by 60% over the same period. Yet the other, 
no less important activities of the Agency remained 
at the same level as in 1972, and in the case of 
technical assistance were even declining. Furthermore, 
promotional activities under the Regular 
Budget showed an increase of only 20% in the 
budget, which was not necessarily the actual 
figure to be attained in view of the price increases 
caused by inflation and currency realignment. 
130. In the course of four months there had been 
two proposals for an increase in the estimates 
for the Regular Budget for 1974, to compensate 
for increased costs. [10] Those two increases 
in the Regular Budget in such a short time implied 
that the Agency's activities under the Regular 
Budget, especially the safeguards programme, 
were to continue without due regard for the 
financial hardships faced by the majority of 
[10] GC(XVII)/505/Mod.1, para. 3(a). 
- 13 



GC(XVII)/OR. 160 

Member States and despite their wishes with 
regard to technical assistance, a programme 
which was just as important as the Agency's other 
activities. 

131. He wished to stress that in pointing out the 
imbalance in the Agency's budget he was not 
objecting to safeguards as such, but felt that the 
priority assigned to the safeguards programme 
should be reconsidered and readjusted so that a 
more reasonable balance could be restored 
between all activities of the Agency. 
132. As far as the technical assistance budget 
was concerned, the only solution at the present 
juncture was to increase the ceiling for the voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund covering 
the technical assistance budget to a target above 
the level of the $3 million provided for in the 
1974 budget. 
133. In addition to the imbalance in the budget, 
there was another problem preventing technical 
assistance from developing in a satisfactory 
manner. It had been fully recognized by representatives 
of many advanced countries that the 
provision of technical assistance should be one of 
the principal activities of the Agency. That recognition 
was evident from the willingness with which 
those countries made their voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund, It was sad to note, however, 
that the voluntary contributions were insufficient 
to cover the cost of the technical assistance, if 
the objective of expanding the technical assistance 
rendered to the developing countries by the Agency 
in line with their needs was to be attained. In his 
Government's opinion, the problem could be solved 
by including the financing of technical assistance 
in the Regular Budget, a concept which was not 
new in the Agency's history, as was known from 
the resolution which the Board had adopted in 
1963 [11], which had the same purpose as a draft 
resolution Indonesia had submitted to the Board 
in June 1973, and which had resulted in the Board's 
deciding to request the Secretariat to study the 
possibilities and implications of all modes of 
financing the provision of technical assistance by 
the Agency, particularly from the Regular Budget. 
His delegation hoped to take up the matter again 
in the Programme, Technical and Budget 
Committee. 

134. Touching briefly on developments in 
Indonesia during the past year, he said that the 
Indonesian National Atomic Energy Agency's 
programme continued to stress the promotion of 
research in, and applications of, atomic energy, 
which were of relevance to the national development 
plan. During the past year the use of radioisotope 
tracer techniques for determining the 
movement of silt in harbours had been initiated. 
Another promising field of research was the use of 
radiation to produce new varieties of rice by 
improving the locally available varieties. Both 
those activities were being supported by funds 
[11] 
Reproduced in document GC(VII)/236, 
Appendix A. 
from UNDP. Further, the regulatory functions of 
the National Agency had been enhanced by the 
initiation of inspection of facilities utilizing 
radiation in Java, Sumatra and Kalimantan. In the 
field of energy, there had been another seminar 
on the introduction of nuclear power, which had 
confirmed previous findings that the introduction 
of nuclear power would be competitive only in the 

1980s. That was also in line with the findings of 
the Agency's market survey carried out in 14 other 
developing countries. Although Indonesia had 
abundant oil resources, the steadily increasing 
price of oil would justify the eventual use of 
nuclear power, especially if an economically 
exploitable uranium deposit could be found in 
Indonesia. 

135. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Director 
General and the Deputy Director General for 
Technical Assistance and Publications for their 
visit to Indonesia, which enabled them to acquaint 
themselves at first hand with Indonesia's activities 
and programmes in the field of atomic energy. 
136. Mr. ALLEN (United Kingdom) expressed his 
delegation's pleasure at the fact that Mr. Eklund 
had agreed to accept the post of Director General 
for a further period. 
137. Over the past year there had been growing 
concern about world energy supplies, a problem 
in the solution of which the development of nuclear 
power would undoubtedly play an important role. 
Currently, nuclear power met less than 1% of the 
world's total energy requirements, but the 
proportion would grow quite quickly. It was 
therefore essential to ensure that the excellent 
safety record of nuclear power was maintained 
and that the people who would benefit from the 
increased energy supplies had the true facts about 
nuclear power put impartially before them. The 
Agency would have a significant part to play in 
those two areas. 
138. In countries with nuclear power programmes, 
considerable new capacity was already under 
construction or being planned for the next decade, 
while - as the Agency's recent market survey had 
indicated - developing countries were examining 
the possibilities of nuclear power in relation to 
their overall power requirements. Wise exploitation 
of the potential of nuclear power would entail 
improved fuel utilization and continuing attention 
to environmental and safety questions. 
139. The past year had been a particularly 
difficult period in the Agency's financial affairs. 
The budget had been hit by external factors, while 
there had been strong internal pressures from some 
Member States for budgetary increases to reflect 
changes in the world scene. Technical assistance, 
safeguards and environmental problems were all 
important aspects of the Agency's work, and it 
was more necessary than ever to establish realistic 
priorities and avoid duplication of effort. The 
United Kingdom was ready to make its full assessed 
contribution to the 1974 Regular Budget and, 
encouraged by the response to the 1973 target for 
voluntary contributions, to make its full voluntary 
- 14 



contribution for 1974 in sterling and give what 
support it could in kind. It was also ready to give 
sympathetic consideration to proposals for 
increasing the target for voluntary contributions 
for 1975. 

140. Following the United Nations Conference on 
the Human Environment, the London Convention 
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping 
of Wastes and Other Matter had placed on the 
Agency further responsibilities in respect of radioactive 
waste disposal into the sea. The Agency 
was to be congratulated on the speed with which it 
had formulated recommendations on the management 
of radioactive waste. 
141. Aware of the environmental implications of 
nuclear power generation, some Member States 
had voluntarily contributed about $ 1 50 000 to help 
finance the Agency's expanded environmental 
protection programme, while the Agency had convened 
a number of expert panels to advise on 
environmental questions. In addition to its 
financial contribution, the United Kingdom would 
continue to give the Agency the benefit of its 
experience in that important field. 
142. In the United Kingdom, the nine Magnox 
reactors being operated by the Electricity Generating 
Boards had continued to perform reliably, 
very economically - compared with powergenerating 
plants using other fuels - and with high 
availability. The first advanced gas-cooled 
reactor stations of the Electricity Generating 
Boards were planned to start operations in 1974. 
With the conclusion of the current construction 
programme, 10% of the United Kingdom's electricity 
requirements would be met by nuclear 
power. In other words, nuclear power's annual 
contribution towards meeting the United Kingdom's 
energy needs would be equivalent to some 
25 million tons of coal or 1 5 million tons of oil. 

143. During the past year, the British nuclear 
construction industry had been restructured to 
enable it to respond to future demands at home 
and abroad. It was expected that most new power 
stations ordered in the United Kingdom would be 
nuclear; at the same time, in view of the increasingly 
international character of the nuclear 
industry, the ground had been prepared for 
strengthening and extending collaborative ties. 
144. The results of tests on fuel for the advanced 
gas-cooled reactor (AGR) and of studies to determine 
the optimum coolant composition had been 
particularly satisfying. In addition, work had 
continued on the steam-generating heavy-water 
reactor and the high-temperature reactor. As 
regards the United Kingdom's largest programme, 
the sodium-cooled fast reactor, construction of 
the 250-MW(e) prototype at Dounreay had been 
completed and commissioning was under way. 
145. Work on the safety of nuclear power reactors 
had continued and, on the basis of 20 years of 
development and operational experience, increasing 
attention was being devoted to the environmental 
GC (XVII)/OR. 160 

implications of nuclear power generation, including 
fuel reprocessing and waste management. 

146. In the field of nuclear fuel, the United Kingdom, 
in partnership with the Netherlands and the 
Federal Republic of Germany, was building up 
capacity for providing enriched uranium by the 
centrifuge separation method, the joint target 
for 1980 being 2000 tonnes of separative work 
capacity. Experience of centrifuge construction 
and operation indicated that the centrifuge method 
would be a reliable and fully competitive method 
of enrichment. 
147. Encouraging technological progress had been 
made at the Culham Laboratory and elsewhere in 
the field of electricity generation through controlled 
thermonuclear reactions. It had been decided that 
efforts should be expanded somewhat, it being 
assumed that the United Kingdom would collaborate 
fully with the other countries working in the field, 
particularly those belonging to the European 
Communities. The stage was being reached when although 
actual power stations were still a long way 
off - big and expensive machines were needed to 
continue the good progress made in recent years, 
and there was considerable opportunity for 
collaboration among the countries which were 
developing the necessary technology. 
148. Turning to safeguards, he congratulated the 
delegations of those States which had become 
party to NPT during the past year and noted with 
pleasure that certain States which had hitherto 
hesitated about becoming party to NPT appeared 
to be re-examining the question. 
149. The United Kingdom welcomed the signing, on 
5 April, of the safeguards agreement between the 
Agency, EURATOM and the non-nuclear-weapon 
States Members of EURATOM. It opened the way 
for the ratification of NPT by the States concerned 
and might encourage other States to follow their 
example. Under the agreement, which had rightly 
attracted a great deal of attention, account would 
be taken of the technical effectiveness of 
EURATOM1 s existing control system resulting in 
an integrated system under which each controlling 
authority could ascertain, in co-operation with the 
other, whether its similar but distinct safeguards 
requirements were being fulfilled. The nuclear 
activities of the seven non-nuclear-weapon States 
Members of EURATOM would be subject to both 
EURATOM and Agency safeguards. 
150. Meanwhile, since 1 January, EURATOM 
safeguards were being applied in the United Kingdom 
with the result that the number of facilities 
for which EURATOM's inspectors were responsible 
had nearly doubled and British nuclear operators 
had been required to adjust to the discipline of 
new procedures. Substantial progress had been 
made and, subject only to those exclusions 
necessary for national security reasons, the whole 
of Britain's nuclear programme had been submitted 
to that discipline. Regular reports on the use, 
stocks and movements of civil nuclear materials 
were being submitted and visits by EURATOM 
inspectors had begun. Such progress would not, 
- 15 



GC(XVII)/OR. 160 

however, have been possible without the expertise 
and practical good sense of the EURATOM Safeguards 
Directorate. 

151. The United Kingdom now hoped to negotiate 
with the Agency and EURATOM an agreement for 
Agency co-operation with EURATOM in the application 
of safeguards in the United Kingdom, the 
objective being to create a single, coherent system 
on the lines of the one arrived at in the agreement 
with the non-nuclear-weapon States Members of 
EURATOM but modified to take account of national 
security exclusions and the agreed principles 
discussed in the Safeguards Committee on 
5 February 1971. It was the United Kingdom's 
intention to initiate consultations before the end of 
the year with that objective in view and to cooperate 
fully in negotiating a system for the application 
of safeguards to the United Kingdom's civil 
nuclear programme which would accord with the 
voluntary offer made by the United Kingdom 
Government on 4 December 1967. 
152. On the question of timing, he recalled that 
reference was made in the offer to "such time as 
international safeguards were put into effect in 
the non-nuclear-weapon States in implementation 
of the Treaty". The United Kingdom, encouraged 
by the progress already made within EURATOM 
and looking forward to similar progress elsewhere, 
adhered to the timing provision which he had just 
quoted. 
153. The past year had been one of great activity 
and no mean achievement in the field of safeguards. 
Looking ahead to the review of NPT due to take 
place in 1975, there was every reason for confidence 
that the Treaty would have made the world 
safer and promoted the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
• The meeting rose at 6.1 5 p.m. 
- 16 



GC(XVII)/OR.161 

International Atomic Energy Agency 8 April 1974* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday 19 September 1973, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. R. W. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report for 1972-73 1-9 4 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Finland 1 -8 

Federal Republic of Germany 9-22 

Yugoslavia 23 - 35 

Italy 36 - 41 

Argentina 42 - 44 

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 45 - 75 

Belgium 76 - 84 

Hungary 85 - 94 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 26 September 1973. 

** GC(XVII)/512. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC(XVII)/OR. 161 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1972-73 
(GC(XVII)/500, 500/Corr.1, 510) (continued) 

1. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) said he was glad 
the long-discussed question of the amendment to 
Article VI of the Statute had been solved. [1] 
However, he wanted once more to underline the 
need to interpret that Article, as well as the other 
articles of the Statute, with some degree of 
flexibility but without deviating from the spirit of 
the text; such an approach was often of greater 
help in adapting to developments than a long 
amendment procedure. 
2. Referring to the Agency's role in international 
relations, he noted that in an atmosphere 
of detente, where questions of safety and 
co-operation had become a vital preoccupation at 
all levels, it seemed that after a long period of 
intransigence and distrust an era of trust and 
co-operation was at hand. However, the very 
hope of such a development was giving rise to 
fears and anxiety in some nations (especially the 
smaller ones), which were wondering what role 
they would be called upon to play in international 
affairs. 
3. In trying to answer that question, the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations had 
pointed out that international co-operation was 
more necessary than ever and that, quite apart 
from the realm of politics and security, there 
were many problems which could be solved only 
through the action of multilateral bodies. [2] That 
applied particularly to the case of the Agency. 
4. There could be no doubt that the Agency was 
concerned with problems which had a great bearing 
on international events - using atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes, finding ways of meeting the 
energy shortage, applying nuclear techniques in 
science and technology, and improving economic 
and social conditions. To fulfil its mission, the 
Agency had to perform two essential tasks: 
first, it had to help in increasing the safety of man 
and his environment and, second, it had to 
develop and apply a system of safeguards so that 
atomic energy could not be used for military 
purposes. 

5. The Agency's Members recognized the 
importance of safeguards and were willing to bear 
the burden which they entailed, although most of 
them had decided not to possess nuclear weapons. 
For those reasons, the safeguards system should 
be such as to involve as few difficulties as 
possible. Unfortunately, that aim did not seem to 
have been achieved fully yet. At the same time, 
[1] See document INFCIRC/159/Rev. 3. 
[2] See Official Records of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations Twenty-Eighth 
Session, Supplement No. 1A (A/9001/Add. 1), 
second paragraph. 
it was perhaps unrealistic to assume that a 
simpler system could be developed quickly. 

6. In his opinion, the Agency should pay 
increasing attention to solving practical problems 
relating to the utilization of nuclear energy while 
national administrations solved problems of a 
more general nature. Only two of the meetings in 
the programme for 1974, which included 88 panels, 
seminars and symposia, were directly connected 
with questions of administration; perhaps it would 
be appropriate to recommend that more attention 
be devoted to such questions and that the number 
of purely scientific meetings be reduced. 
7. If the Agency was to meet its responsibilities, 
every Member State had to play its part in the 
collective effort. Every Member had to help the 
Agency overcome its financial difficulties and 
carry out one of its main functions, namely the 
provision of technical assistance. In that 
connection, he expressed the satisfaction his 
delegation had felt at the constructive decision 
taken by the Board in June with regard to the 
financing of technical assistance. 
8. He was pleased to announce that Finland had 
decided to make a contribution to the General Fund 
in an amount approximately 30% higher than that 
corresponding to its assessment under the 
Regular Budget. 
9. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) congratulated the Director General on 
his reappointment [3], To a great extent it was 
his personal merit that the Agency was considered 
one of the best managed and most effectively 
functioning international organizations. The 
Agency's role had been increasing in importance 
over the years. The construction of nuclear 
facilities had become a necessity, and it was 
accepted that atomic energy would have to meet 
the increasing demand for energy throughout the 
world. 
10. To enable the Agency to perform the new 
tasks expected ot it, institutional reforms had 
been proposed and the amendment of the Statute 
approved by the Conference in 1970 [4] had come 
into force. Those changes corresponded 
generally to the wishes of the advanced nonnuclear-
weapon States, which had made great 
progress in the utilization of nuclear energy, and 
to those of the developing Members, which were 
thus better represented on the Board. The 
increase in the number of representatives on the 
Board partly reflected the increase in the number 
of States Members of the Agency. In that 
connection, he stated that, following the 
conclusion of the treaty on the basis of relations 
between the Federal Republic of Germany and the 
German Democratic Republic, his Government 
had approved the German Democratic Republic's 
application for membership of the Agency and was 
[3] See Resolution GC(XVII)/RES/298. 
[4] By Resolution GC(XIV)/RES/272, para. 1. 

GC(XVII)/OR.161 


willing to co-operate with the German Democratic 
Republic within the framework of the Agency in 
pursuing the Agency's objectives. 

11. Turning to the question of the use of nuclear 
energy in the Federal Republic of Germany, he 
said the national nuclear programme was part of a 
comprehensive programme reflecting both overall 
energy policy and environmental policy. Nuclear 
energy activities might be illustrated by the 
following facts: 10 nuclear power stations were 
in operation and 20 either under construction or 
in an advanced planning stage, nearly all of them 
equipped with light-water reactors - moreover, 
German industry had already received several 
export orders. The share of nuclear power in the 
total installed capacity would amount to more than 
20% in 1978. The main emphasis of the nuclear 
development programme was on the advanced 
reactor types: high-temperature reactors and 
fast breeder reactors. One prototype of each 
system was under construction. It had also been 
decided - by the Netherlands, the United Kingdom 
and the Federal Republic, acting as partners - to 
build two demonstration facilities for uranium 
enrichment on the basis of the centrifuge technique, 
each with .an annual separation capacity of 200 tons; 
the aim was to demonstrate the competitiveness of 
that technique, in which the three partner States 
had the fullest confidence. 
12. The cost of the fourth nuclear programme of 
the Federal Republic, covering the years 1973-76, 
would be DM 6000 million. Special importance 
was attached to international co-operation, in 
which industry would play an increasing role, to 
ensure the rapid application of new techniques. 
One part of the new programme was devoted to 
co-operation with the developing countries and to 
the development of nuclear techniques especially 
useful to them. 
13. As regards the programme of the Agency, 
the Government of the Federal Republic had 
repeatedly stressed the importance it attached to 
the Agency's promotion of the utilization of nuclear 
energy in the developing countries. Aid in the 
construction of nuclear power stations, the 
training of skilled personnel and the establishment 
of a legal infrastructure would have to be accorded 
increasing importance in the Agency's activities, 
in order to provide for the production of the energy 
required for a high standard of living and advancing 
industrialization in those countries. 
14. The Agency had carried out an important 
market survey on prospects for nuclear energy in 
developing countries. His country was prepared 
to make available to the Agency computer time 
and experts to evaluate the material compiled 
during that survey. It would also be useful for 
other States to participate, if they so wished, in 
that study and for the Agency to bring the data 
collected up to date from time to time. 
15. The importance attributed by the Federal 
Republic to the technical assistance programme 
could be seen not only from the size of its contribution 
to the General Fund but also from the 
fact that its voluntary contribition had been 
increasing each year and was to be increased 
further in 1974. It intended to provide 30 one-year 
fellowships and to send at least 15 experts, cost 
free, on Agency missions to developing countries. 

16. In collaboration with the Agency and FAO, 
it was trying to improve the protein content of 
crops. It was also willing to provide financial 
support and equipment for other research projects; 
an anti-tsetse-fly programme in Africa and the 
preparation of vaccines against tropical diseases 
were being considered. Under an agreement with 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste, it was inviting scientists from 
developing countries to the Max-Planck Institutes 
at Heidelberg and Stuttgart. 

17. His Government intended to make in 1974 a 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund of 
$200 000, or 12% more than the amount corresponding 
to its base rate of assessment. As to 
1975, his delegation was prepared to support a 
higher target for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund. However, it should be borne in 
mind that assistance to developing countries did 
not take the form only of financing from the 
General Fund, voluntary contributions in kind and 
UNDP projects. A large proportion of the 
activities financed from the Regular Budget were 
geared to the requirements of the developing 
countries and it would be useful if the next draft 
budget showed the total efforts devoted to 
technical assistance. 
18. He emphasized the need to pay serious 
attention to the critical attitude of the public as 
regards nuclear energy and its relation to 
environmental protection; the Agency should 
examine how it could, with its world-wide 
authority, contribute to better understanding. 
It could also make a useful contribution in that 
connection by drafting technical rules and safety 
standards and advising developing countries on 
reactor safety and licensing and control procedures. 
The Government of the Federal 
Republic had drawn up a research programme on 
reactor safety for which considerable funds had 
been allocated and was prepared to co-operate in 
that field with all interested States. 
19. In the matter of safeguards, the signing of 
the agreement between the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM) and the nonnuclear-
weapon States Members of EURATOM on 
the one hand the the Agency [5] on the other had 
enabled the Government of the Federal Republic 
to submit that agreement and the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [6] 
to Parliament for approval. 
20. His delegation noted with satisfaction the 
intention of the United States to open negotiations 
concerning the submission of their civilian 
[5] Reproduced in document INF'CIRC/193. 
[6] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-3 



GC(XVII)/OR. 161 

nuclear activities to Agency safeguards, an 
example which would be followed by the United 
Kingdom and, he hoped, by other nuclear Powers. 
The beginning of talks between Japan and the 
Agency about a safeguards agreement was another 
encouraging sign. The Federal Republic would 
continue to support the Agency's programme for 
the development of safeguards techniques, the 
results of which might also help in solving 
problems of disarmament and environmental 
protection. 

21. He was pleased to note that the Agency had 
elaborated recommendations for the physical 
protection of nuclear material. Although that 
matter was the responsibility of individual 
countries, an international exchange of experience 
could be useful and the Agency might provide an 
appropriate forum. Too little consideration had 
so far been given to the dangers that might arise 
from the sub-national diversion of nuclear 
material, which could also lead to international 
conflicts. 
22. The Agency was faced with considerable 
difficulties in connection with the 1973 budget and 
in drawing up the budget for 1974. The need for 
supplementary funds was due to price increases 
and the monetary realignments which had occurred 
during the year, and both partners - the Governments, 
many of which had made cuts in their 
national budgets, and the Agency - must bear 
their share. He was sure that the Agency and its 
Director General would understand the reasons 
for the strict limits set on expansion of the 
Agency's activities. In view of the Agency's wise 
and cautious policy in matters of programmes and 
finances over the years, his Government wished 
to show its confidence in its work and was willing 
to approve the proposed revised budgets for 1973 
and 1974. 
23. Mr. DENES (Yugoslavia) said that he was 
especially pleased to be able to congratulate 
Mr. Eklund on his re-election. The Yugoslav 
delegation supported all the basic ideas expressed 
in his statement of the previous day and would 
join him in all efforts designed to ensure that the 
Agency carried out its work as efficiently as 
possible, particularly its original tasks of putting 
the advantages of nuclear energy at the disposal of 
the whole world, notably the developing countries, 
and of applying safeguards against the diversion of 
nuclear material for military purposes. In that 
connection, his delegation held the view that an 
equilibrium should continue to be maintained 
between promotional and regulatory activities. 
24. While it supported the report for 1972-73, 
the Yugoslav delegation wished to see a constant 
increase in Agency funds for the financing of 
research and other scientific work. An effort 
should be made to accelerate economic and 
technical progress in all countries, particularly 
the developing ones. In that connection, the 
financing of work in the field of environmental 
protection, primarily protection from the effects 
of nuclear power stations, the number of which 
was increasing daily, constituted a priority task. 
The Agency should therefore continue to devote its 
attention to problems associated with power 
station construction and safety. 

25. Nuclear science and the use of atomic 
energy in Yugoslavia had developed on a scale 
commensurate with the country's capabilities and 
in the light of the experience and knowledge gained 
through the Agency. In connection with its 
collaboration with Yugoslavia, the Agency had 
expressed very favourable opinions regarding the 
efforts of Yugoslav research workers and 
scientific establishments, which was a great 
credit to Yugoslavia. 
26. In conjunction with the Agency, Yugoslavia 
had organized several useful panels, which had 
been attended by the representatives of a large 
number of Member States of the Agency. Yugoslavia 
wished to continue that practice in view of 
its geographical situation and the role which it 
played in international relations, and it was 
prepared to spend funds for that purpose. 
27. The implementation of the resolutions 
adopted by the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States [7] had been entrusted to the Agency, which 
had in the intervening period made every effort to 
fulfil its task. As a country that had attended the 
Conference, Yugoslavia wished to state its 
appreciation of the Agency's role and its hope that 
the objectives of the Conference would be fully 
realized. 
28. The Yugoslav delegation was willing to 
support all programmes which contributed to the 
development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
In that connection he wished to draw the attention 
of delegates to the very interesting suggestion put 
forward by the Romanian delegation at the sixteenth 
session of the General Conference concerning the 
elaboration and adoption by the Agency of an international 
legal instrument which would lay down the 
principles of international co-operation in matters 
relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
29. He emphasized that safeguards should not be *> 
accorded greater importance than technical 
assistance and environmental protection. 
30. With respect to the Agency's budget for the 
period ahead and the difficulties facing the Agency, 
he held the view that efforts should be redoubled 
to obtain funds both from within the organization 
and from external sources. There should also be 
a reallocation of the Agency's funds in favour of 
technical assistance. The Yugoslav delegation 
would continue to speak out in favour of the 
developing regions of the world and in the interest 
of scientific and technical progress in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. In the opinion of the 
Yugoslav delegation, it would be particularly 
useful to increase expenditure on research projects. 
However, the choice of avenues of research 
to be pursued constituted a problem at several 
nuclear establishments, and assistance from the 
[7] See United Nations document A/7277. 
-4 



GC(XVII)/OR. 161 


Agency, supported by experts of internationalreputation, would be much appreciated.

31. He was particularly happy to announce that 
the Yugoslav Government had decided to increase 
its voluntary contribution having regard to the 
plans and recommendations of the Agency. Also, 
it was continuing to meet its obligations towards 
the Agency on time and hoped that the other 
Member States would do the same. 
32. The Yugoslav delegation took special 
pleasure in welcoming the German Democratic 
Republic and the Mongolian People's Republic to 
the Agency. The approval of their applications 
was an important step towards universality of the 
Agency's membership, which Yugoslavia had 
always supported. At the same time, it shared 
the fears expressed by the Director General 
regarding breakdown into groups [8], whether 
inspired by regional interests, a common ideology 
or a common stage of development. Universality 
was and remained the main strength of the Agency, 
and Member States should unite their efforts to 
achieve it completely. 
33. Yugoslavia was in favour of all measures 
having the effect of strengthening the democratic 
nature of the Agency and creating a better climate 
of mutual understanding and collaboration. It 
considered that all delegates, regardless of the 
size, wealth or ideology of the countries they 
represented, should feel that they had equal rights. 
A large number of complex problems had been 
handled by the Agency with considerable tact, and 
Yugoslavia hoped to see that democratic trend 
further enhanced in the future. 
34. The Yugoslav delegation considered it 
necessary and of great importance to express its 
firm conviction that the Agency, with its policymaking 
organs, the Secretariat and the Director 
General, would succeed in collaboration with its 
Member States in resolving all the problems 
involved in the more rapid development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
35. Yugoslavia's policy was one of non-alignment 
and of international understanding and confidence, 
designed to develop co-operation between countries 
and peoples and thereby to avoid inequality and 
injustice. It was a policy based on multilateral 
assistance with a view to overcoming the gap 
between advanced and under-developed countries, 
a basic problem of the modern world. It was for 
that reason that Yugoslavia wished to see the 
Agency play an ever more active role in solving 
such problems. It would give the Agency its full 
support in the future. 

36. Mr. DUCCI (Italy) expressed satisfaction at 
the entry into force of the new version of Article VI 
of the Statute, which would permit better representation 
of regional groups in the Board and 
ensure that justice was done to those countries 
[8] See GC(XVTI)/OR. 160, para. 67. 
which had made most progress in the field of 
nuclear energy. 

37. He warmly thanked those countries which had 
chosen Italy as one of the most advanced Member 
States in the field of nuclear technology and took 
the opportunity to stress the importance which his 
Government attached to the rendering of assistance 
to developing countries and international cooperation 
in the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy. In that connection he recalled that such 
co-operation was the objective of certain 
provisions of NPT and expressed the hope that the 
provisions of Articles IV, V and VI would be 
implemented with a view to achieving general and 
complete disarmament. An important step 
forward had been the signing in April, at Brussels, 
of the agreement between EURATOM, the nonnuclear-
weapon States Members of EURATOM and 
the Agency. 
38. As regards the Agency's various activities, 
the Italian delegation supported without reservation 
the action initiated in the field of environmental 
protection, and especially the study of the impact 
of nuclear energy on the environment. It was to 
be hoped, in addition, that the Agency would 
continue to follow closely the development of 
techniques for controlling nuclear materials, so as 
to achieve - on one hand - maximum efficiency in 
the area of radiation protection and - on the other Agency 
safeguards entailing a minimum of 
inconvenience. 
39. As regards technical assistance, the 
contribution which nuclear energy could make to 
solving many of the problems of the developing 
countries - especially in agriculture and medicine was 
well known. The financing of such activities 
remained a difficult problem, however and it 
seemed to his delegation that a study should be 
made of the different possibilities in that 
connection, including financing of the provision of 
technical assistance from the Agency's Regular 
Budget. 
40. He was happy to announce that the amount 
assigned by Italy's'National Committee for 
Nuclear Energy for the award of fellowships to the 
nationals of developing countries had been raised 
by about 10%. 
41. In conclusion, he expressed his pleasure at 
the re-election of Mr. Eklund and the Italian 
Government's sincere wishes for a successful 
further period of office. 
42. Mr. BANCORA (Argentina) said that the 
Argentine programme relating to the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy had already been outlined on 
various occasions; he would therefore only 
mention that the Atucha reactor would have gone 
critical by the end of the year. It would provide 
power for the grid system in Argentina, which 
would thus become the first country in Latin 
America to utilize electric power of nuclear origin. 
Furthermore, Argentina's National Atomic Energy 
Commission had entered into negotiations with 
Canada and Italy with a view to establishing a 
-5 



GC(XVII)/OR.161 

second reactor in Argentina, the construction of 
which was due to begin before the end of the year. 

43. His delegation gave its whole-hearted 
support to the Agency's activities, especially those 
concerned with safeguards. In his view, it was 
extremely important that safeguards be applied in 
an effective manner; moreover, the mode of 
application should be the same in all cases, and it 
was regrettable that the safeguards provided for 
under NPT did not apply fully to the States already 
possessing nuclear weapons. 
44. His delegation had complete confidence in 
the Agency as regards the ways in which it 
proposed to discharge its responsibilities, and one 
could only hope that the requisite funds would be 
forthcoming. There were three ways in which the 
Agency's financial embarrassment could be 
remedied: first, the wealthier Members could 
make the necessary funds available, although they 
had not so far responded to the requests addressed 
to them on that subject; second, all Members 
could be asked to increase their contributions, 
although an additional burden would thereby be 
imposed on the developing countries (Argentina, 
for its part, would make a contribution of $24 600, 
even though inflation there was much greater than 
in Europe); third, an appropriate selection could 
be made among the programmes of activities. In 
that connection he strongly recommended that the 
Secretariat carry out only the programmes likely 
to be of immediate social benefit and refrain from 
embarking on Utopian projects. 
45. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) congratulated the Director General on 
his appointment for a further period of four years. 
The Soviet Union was highly satisfied with the 
efforts that he had made in the course of 12 years 
to enable the Agency to discharge its important 
functions, and wished him renewed success in his 
work. 
46. The present session was being held in a 
favourable international atmosphere, characterized 
by a transition from the "cold war" to a progressive 
relaxation of tension and to consolidation 
of the principles of peaceful coexistence between 
countries. The consistent implementation by the 
Soviet Union of the peaceful programme adopted 
by the twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist 
Party of the USSR and the greater trust between 
peoples that had been manifested over the previous 
few years had left their mark on all aspects of 
international life. 
47. The agreement on the prevention of nuclear 
war and other agreements which had been 
concluded between the Soviet Union and the United 
States on the occasion of Mr. Brezhnev's recent 
visit to the United States and which represented 
the outcome of visits made by him to France and 
the Federal Republic of Germany were of great 
importance from the point of view of future 
improvements in the international political climate. 
Specific measures of far-reaching importance had 
been taken to curb the armaments race and to 
reduce the risk of nuclear war. Favourable 
prospects were opening up for a reduction in 
military expenditure and a corresponding increase 
in the funds available for economic, scientific and 
cultural development, for improving the living 
standards of the peoples of the world, and for 
increasing aid to the developing countries. There 
was every reason to believe that the present 
relaxation of tension was not just a passing 
phenomenon but the beginning of a great change in 
international relations. There could be no doubt 
that the favourable developments in the international 
arena corresponded to the fundamental 
interests of all peoples, including the non-aligned 
countries. 

48. The improvement in the political climate 
opened up new possibilities for the more rapid 
expansion of international co-operation in all 
fields, including atomic energy. Quite clearly, it 
would have a similar favourable impact on the 
activities of the Agency, whose international 
authority was steadily increasing as it contributed 
more and more to the promotion of the peaceful 
applications of atomic energy throughout the world. 
49. Once again the Soviet delegation wished to 
stress that the Agency could fulfil its basic function 
only if NPT was systematically implemented. 
That important instrument presented the maximum 
possibilities for international co-operation in 
activities relating to the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The Soviet Union was convinced that the 
increase in the number of States Parties to NPT 
was helping to strengthen peace and international 
security and facilitating the development of 
collaboration in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
That was why he felt that the Agency should 
continue to make efforts to persuade as many 
countries as possible to accede to NPT. In recent 
years the Agency had taken various measures to 
discharge its functions in connection with NPT. 
For example, the Board had approved safeguards 
agreements with 43 non-nuclear-weapon States. 
In fact, practically all countries with programmes 
for the peaceful uses of atomic energy had already 
submitted their peaceful nuclear activities to 
Agency safeguards or were preparing to do so. 
50. However, there were several problems 
arising in connection with the safeguards provided 
for under NPT which ought to be settled without 
delay. In order that the principle of nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons might be applied 
systematically, it was necessary for all States 
Party to NPT, including those not yet engaged in 
any peaceful nuclear activities, to fulfil their 
obligations by concluding the necessary agreements 
with the Agency. 
51. At the beginning of 1973 the Agency had 
concluded a safeguards agreement with EURATOM 
and non-nuclear-weapon States Members of 
EURATOM. There was now nothing to prevent 
Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands from ratifying 
NPT and implementing that agreement. It was to 
be hoped that Japan would not delay either in 
concluding a safeguards agreement with the Agency 
and ratifying NPT. 
6 



GC (XVII)/OR. 161 


52. The Secretariat had embarked upon an 
extensive safeguards programme aimed at 
developing inspection techniques and extending 
inspections to the whole nuclear fuel cycle. It 
was very important that the programme, which 
was of great practical significance for the Agency, 
should be completed on schedule. 
53. In view of the fact that the Agency was 
playing an increasing role in organizing international 
co-operation in the peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy, that it had assumed extensive 
control functions in connection with NPT and that 
it had seen the number of its Member States grow 
as the years went by, it had become essential to 
broaden the base of the Board by enlarging its 
membership. Having regard to the wishes 
expressed by several States Members of the 
Agency, the Soviet Union had accepted the amendment 
to Article VI of the Statute, which the 
Conference had approved at its fourteenth regular 
session and which provided for a significant 
increase in the size of the Board. The Soviet 
delegation was convinced that the Board thus 
enlarged would continue to direct the activities of 
the Agency efficiently and to discharge the duties 
assigned to it. 
54. In the future the Agency should be able to 
carry out its functions even more effectively as 
the number of its Members grew year by year and 
it became increasingly universal. The Soviet 
delegation was particularly gratified at the 
admission to the Agency of the German Democratic 
Republic and Mongolia. That decision contributed 
to the development of international co-operation 
in the field of the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy and broadened the scope of the Agency's 
relations with the countries of the world. There 
could be no doubt that those two countries would 
participate actively in the work of the Agency. 
55. While approving the Agency's activities as a 
whole during the period 1972-73, the Soviet 
delegation deplored the substantial rise in 
unproductive Agency expenditure caused by 
inflation and the devaluation of the dollar. The 
Conference was being asked to consider a further 
budget increase of US $2. 5 million, caused 
exclusively by the gradual devaluation of the 
currency in which the budget was drawn up. One 
could not help wondering how much longer the 
present situation would last and why countries 
should have to bear the consequences of monetary 
instability. A continuation of the trend would 
greatly hamper the Agency's normal work and 
entail a considerable increase in expenditure to 
the detriment of its useful activities. The Soviet 
delegation could not accept such a state of affairs 
and considered that the Secretariat should, 
possibly in consultation with other international 
organizations, take the steps necessary for putting 
an end to it. 

56. As regards international co-operation in the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy, the initiative 
taken by the Soviet Union in making available to 
all countries the results of its scientific and 
technical work in the nuclear field, in controlled 
thermonuclear fusion and in other disciplines was 
well known to all delegates and highly appreciated 
throughout the world. 

57. Work in nuclear science and technology was 
acquiring an increasingly international character. 
There were problems of universal importance 
concerning many disciplines whose solution 
required co-ordination of the efforts of many 
countries. That was perhaps due in part to the 
fact that technology was assuming greater 
importance than research, but even more to the 
increasingly high cost of such work and of the 
various modern facilities needed to do it. The 
cost of such facilities amounted to tens or even 
hundreds of millions of roubles, and their 
construction required a great deal of time and 
effort. Consequently, any mistake made during 
the preparatory stages proved extremely costly, 
and it was becoming almost impossible even for 
the large industrial States to undertake such work 
alone. 
58. The Soviet Union was firmly convinced that 
scientific and technological co-operation in its 
present form would have to be replaced by international 
collaboration, progressively closer 
co-ordination and the elaboration of joint projects. 
The example of the socialist States demonstrated 
how fruitful such close scientific and technological 
ties could be. Joint research and other ventures 
occupied an important place in the overall 
programme for economic integration adopted by 
the socialist States Members of the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA). 
59. During the past year, the Members of CMEA 
had continued to collaborate and to work towards 
integration in the field of nuclear science and 
technology. They had begun with the establishment 
of an international body for solving problems of 
co-ordination in the development of nuclear power 
in Member States and the production of equipment 
for the nuclear industry. The international body 
in question would be responsible for exploiting the 
technical and industrial potential of the Members 
as regards the production of equipment and plant 
for nuclear power stations, the distribution of 
orders among industrial enterprises and the 
rendering of technical and financial assistance to 
those enterprises. The CMEA Members had 
already created two similar international bodies: 
"Interatominstrument" and a scientific collective 
which was carrying out theoretical and experimental 
studies relating to large water-moderated 
and -cooled reactors. 
60. The scientific and technical activities under 
bilateral agreements concluded by the Soviet 
Union with other socialist States and with various 
industrial countries such as the United States, 
France and Italy were also being intensified. In 
that connection, it was worth noting that the 
character and objectives of such collaboration had 
recently changed: whereas the essential purpose 
had previously been the exchange of scientific and 
technical information and of the results of 
research work, it was now long-term collaboration 
aimed primarily at the elaboration and execution 
-7 



GC(XVII)/OR. 161 

of joint projects. The agreements in question 
provided for collaboration in important fields like 
nuclear science and technology, controlled 
thermonuclear fusion, fast breeders and the 
theoretical study of the fundamental properties of 
matter. 

61. The aim of collaboration in those fields was 
to solve as soon as possible the problems raised 
by the constantly increasing demand for energy in 
all countries; it was thus of paramount importance. 
He wished to dwell on two aspects of agreements 
concluded recently by the Soviet Union. 
62. Firstly, in the fields of collaboration 
envisaged - especially in the agreements with the 
United States - the Soviet Union had reached a 
very high degree of development, being among the 
most advanced countries in some of them. That 
could best be illustrated by mentioning the main 
work done in the Soviet Union since the previous 
regular session. During the summer of 1973, the 
BN-350 fast breeder had gone into service at the 
Shevchenko nuclear power station. It was 
operating at a power of 300 MW(th), while the 
station personnel was continuing to work on various 
systems and preparing them for operation at the 
rated power. The Kola nuclear power station, 
with the water-moderated and -cooled reactor 
WWER-440, had also gone into service, and the 
main fitting and adjustment operations prior to the 
entry into service of the 1000-MW(e) first unit of 
the Leningrad nuclear power station had been 
completed. Further advances had been made in 
controlled thermonuclear fusion and plasma 
physics. The most promising results were those 
which had been obtained by investigators in the 
Soviet Union and other countries in studies of 
plasma behaviour in Tokamak-type devices. The 
largest device of its kind, "Tokamak-10", which 
might be the last laboratory device before the 
construction of a demonstration thermonuclear 
reactor, was at present being built in the Soviet 
Union. At the same time, the possibility was 
being studied of inducing thermonuclear reactions 
by means of powerful pulsed sources such as 
lasers, relativistic electron beams and theta-pinch 
devices. New results of great importance for the 
theory of elementary particles had been obtained 
in the course of fundamental research work 
involving the use of accelerators at the Joint 
Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna, at the 
Institute of High-Energy Physics, Serpukhov, and 
at various other establishments, where Soviet 
scientists were working together with colleagues 
from many other countries. 

63. Secondly, the results of work done on a 
bilateral basis and of work carried out at Soviet 
scientific establishments would, as in the past, be 
communicated to all countries through conferences 
and symposia, through scientific and technical 
publications, and through the International Nuclear 
Information System (IMS), in which the Soviet 
Union was playing an active role and which it 
strongly supported. The information transmitted 
by INIS constituted a form of indirect technical 
assistance which should not be underestimated. 
64. In the field of technical assistance, the 
Soviet Union was providing - under bilateral agreements 
and through international organizations substantial 
economic, technical and scientific aid 
to developing countries in Asia, Africa and Latin 
America. The Soviet Union had concluded 
bilateral collaboration agreements with only two 
countries by the mid-1950s; since then the number 
of countries had risen to 45. The assistance 
provided by the Soviet Union had enabled those 
countries to construct 490 major industrial 
facilities and other establishments of importance 
for their economies, and 500 more facilities would 
be constructed during the current five-year period. 
65. The Soviet Union was also helping to train 
the nationals of developing countries. Some 
300 000 specialists had received instruction from 
Soviet experts at jointly constructed and operated 
facilities. 
66. Ever since the Agency's establishment, the 
Soviet Union had played an active role in its 
technical assistance programme, which continued 
to occupy an important place among the Agency's 
activities. That role took the form of annual 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund, the 
awarding of fellowships to specialists from 
developing countries and the provision of experts' 
services. 
67. He wished to point out that the Soviet Union's 
voluntary contributions had increased by a factor 
of four since 1967. They had enabled the Agency to 
provide developing countries with various types of 
equipment, apparatus and supplies. During the 
previous two years alone, the Soviet Union had in 
that way been instrumental in constructing several 
complex and unique facilities in Member States. 
68. In the technical assistance programme, an 
important place was accorded to the training of 
specialists from developing countries and the 
improvement of their qualifications. The Soviet 
Union had provided many opportunities to that end, 
and over 350 000 persons had received training in 
the Soviet Union through fellowships, seminars and 
study tours - some of them arranged in collaboration 
with the Agency. 
69. Consistently following its policy of technical 
assistance for the developing countries, the Soviet 
Union had decided to raise its voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund to 400 000 roubles in 
national currency, for use in providing developing 
countries with equipment, apparatus and supplies 
from the Soviet Union. 
70. At the twelfth regular session the Soviet 
Union had announced its readiness to provide 
uranium enrichment services for non-nuclearweapon 
countries with a view to the promotion of 
nuclear power generation in those countries. 
Since then, several agreements had been concluded 
to that end and talks were in progress with a 
number of countries and enterprises. 
71. The Soviet Union was willing to provide 
enrichment services for nuclear power generation 
-8 



GC(XVII)/OR. 161 


to an increasing extent and on a long-term basis, 
thereby undoubtedly helping to overcome the 
difficulties caused by the increasingly acute energy 
crisis, especially in the developing countries. 
Such services would be provided either on a 
bilateral basis or through the Agency, which had 
already received a draft standard contract. 

72. Special emphasis should be laid on the 
importance of the Agency's programme for 
protecting the environment against the effects of 
nuclear radiations. In the Soviet Union, 
environmental protection was an integral part of 
the programme of building communism. It was in 
that context that the question had been considered 
in September 1972, when the Supreme Soviet had 
decided on steps to be taken for the more thorough 
protection of nature and the rational utilization of 
natural resources. 
73. Releases of radioactive gases to the 
atmosphere from the nuclear power stations of the 
Soviet Union were several hundred times less than 
the levels recommended by the International 
Commission on Radiological Protection. Moreover, 
the methods employed for the burial of radioactive 
wastes at the various stages of the fuel cycle were 
such as to preclude completely any diffusion into 
the environment. However, not all countries were 
observing the indispensable standards of radiological 
hygiene, and there was consequently a risk 
that the development of nuclear power could lead 
to generalized pollution. 

74. In that connection the Soviet Union particularly 
welcomed the signing in December 1972 of the 
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution 
by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (London 
Convention). Under that convention the disposal 
of radioactive wastes into the seas and oceans was 
permitted only if the radioactivity involved was 
less than the limits established by the Agency. The 
Soviet Union had played an active part in the 
relevant activities of the Agency in that sector. 
It should not be forgotten, however, that the 
development of nuclear power would result in a 
rapid increase in the total amount of radioactive 
waste, and the problem of its disposal could assume 
the same order of magnitude as the problem of 
developing nuclear power itself. The Agency 
could play an important part in solving the 
problems of radioactive waste disposal by 
organizing international collaboration between 
experts. 
75. Finally, his delegation wanted to stress 
again that the Soviet Union would continue to 
advocate the intensive development of international 
co-operation in the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy, in accordance with the objectives and 
principles embodied in the United Nations Charter, 
in the Agency's Statute and in NPT. It was to be 
hoped that the present session of the General 
Conference would contribute to the extension and 
strengthening of that co-operation. 
76. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium) realized that, as a 
result of the international monetary situation, 
financial difficulties had arisen for the Agency and 
that certain increases in the budget estimates were 
inevitable. Nevertheless, he was not in a position 
to approve every proposal to increase the budget 
and hence the contributions of Member States. 
Governments were faced by the same financial 
difficulties as international organizations, and he 
accordingly thought it more necessary than ever 
to confine the Agency's programme to tasks of the 
highest priority. 

77. That being so, he believed the programme 
on nuclear safety and environmental protection 
deserved special attention, since the Agency had 
a vital role to play. The development of the 
nuclear industry was causing concern on the part 
of the public, which feared the dangers of pollution. 
It was for the Agency to allay those fears, which 
would have no grounds if the necessary safety 
measures were taken and if installations were 
located in such a way as not to detract from the 
appearance of the sites. 
78. With regard to the pollution of water, the 
Agency had already been given new assignments 
and there would probably be others still. It had 
been proposed to entrust the Agency with certain 
tasks relating to the pollution by radioactive 
substances of salt water - under the London 
Convention and the Convention for the Prevention 
of Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and 
Aircraft (Oslo Convention) - and fresh water under 
a convention which was still in preparation. 
79. In addition, if effect was given to the 
proposals of the Scientific Advisory Committee 
and the consultations between the Agency, the 
Monaco Oceanographic Institute, UNESCO and the 
United Nations Environment Fund, the activities 
of the International Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity 
would be extended to include a study of 
pollution of the marine environment by nonradioactive 
substances. The new activities were 
of importance both for developed and for developing 
countries, and they should be financed essentially 
from funds placed at the disposal of the institutions 
responsible for combating pollution. 

80. In another important Agency activity, the 
provision of technical assistance to Member 
States, financing presented a problem, and he 
realized that the diminished purchasing power of 
money was a matter of concern to the beneficiaries 
of such assistance. When assessing the real value 
of technical assistance, however, one should 
consider the technical assistance effort as a whole, 
including both multilateral and bilateral assistance. 
81. In the case of Belgium, for example, the 
total amount of public and private funds allocated 
for assistance to developing countries in 1972 had 
been $391 million, corresponding to 1. 12% of the 
gross national product; assistance from public 
funds would amount to $220 million in 1973. 
82. In the nuclear field, the Belgian programme 
of technical assistance for 1973 included: 
(a) 
At the multilateral level (in co-operation 
with the Agency but independent of Belgium's 
-9 



GC(XVII)/OR. 161 

financial contribution to the General Fund) six 
Type II fellowships, one expert mission 
on biological analysis to Chile, and one 
expert mission on radiological protection to 
Zaire (preliminary to a longer mission in 
1974); and 

(b) 
At the bilateral level - the visit of three 
technicians to the Kinshasa Nuclear Research 
Centre, and the offer of eight training 
fellowships to India, eight to Pakistan and 
two to four to Zaire. 
83. Belgium was trying not only to maintain its 
effort in terms of real value, in the face of rising 
costs, but also to increase it every year. Thus, 
in 1974, in addition to the offer of six Type II 
fellowships under the Agency's programme, it 
would give financial assistance to an amount of 
800 000 Belgian francs for the organization in 
October 1974 of a course on the physics of nuclear 
burn-up in reactors; it would also finance a 
mission of one or two Belgian experts on the 
Agency's behalf; further, at the bilateral level, it 
was offering eight fellowships to Indian nationals 
and eight to Pakistan nationals. In addition to 
maintaining the three technicians at the Kinshasa 
Centre, his country's programme for Zaire 
included a gift of equipment to the value of 
2-3 million Belgian francs. 

84. As regards safeguards, and especially the 
safeguards agreement concluded in accordance 
with Article III. 1 and 4 of NPT, he said that, in 
keeping with the promise he had made at the time 
of the signing of NPT, on 5 April 1973, both NPT 
and the safeguards agreement would be placed 
before the Belgian Parliament for approval in 
October. 
85. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary) said he was 
pleased to note that the international situation had 
developed favourably since the preceding session. 
It was clear that mankind had no other choice but 
to strengthen peace by eliminating armed conflicts 
and in particular the danger of a thermonuclear 
war. The socialist countries had long been 
fighting for those objectives, and the Conference 
of Non-Aligned Countries held recently in Algiers 
had taken a similar stand. Those countries needed 
peace in order to develop and efficiently exploit 
their natural resources. It was also gratifying 
that the peoples of Europe were endeavouring to 
unite their efforts in the interest of security. 
86. Hungary was convinced that the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and the maintenance of 
peace in the world at large were inseparably linked 
with the Agency's activities. It followed that the 
Agency should make the best use of the favourable 
changes which had taken place on the international 
scene. The influence of those changes could 
already be seen in the reaffirmation of the principle 
of universality in the Agency. The Hungarian 
delegation welcomed the admission to membership 
of the Agency of the German Democratic Republic, 
which had remarkable achievements to its credit 
in politics, economics and the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. His delegation was also happy to 
greet the Mongolian People's Republic as a new 
Member of the Agency. 

87. Hungary regretted that all countries had not 
yet signed or ratified NPT and that safeguards 
were not yet being applied everywhere. 
88. It was to be hoped that the collaboration 
between States with different social systems would 
promote the progress and well-being of their 
respective peoples. An important factor in that 
regard was energy production, which would be 
stepped up appreciably as a result of the construction 
of nuclear power stations. The imminent 
acute energy crisis called for closer international 
collaboration. 
89. Parallel with the conclusion of bilateral 
agreements, an increasingly important role in 
specialized fields was being played by international 
organizations. That fact had been demonstrated 
at the twenty-seventh session of CMEA, which had 
devoted great attention to energy questions, 
including the growing use of nuclear energy. He 
noted with satisfaction that CMEA and the Agency 
were taking an increasing interest in each other's 
activities. The first year of collaboration between 
the States participating in "Interatominstrument" 
had yielded satisfactory results. 
90. As emerged from document GC(XVII)/500, 
the Agency was endeavouring to expand its general 
activities. Hungary hoped that the Agency would 
make every effort to carry out its tasks under the 
Statute. It was aware of the financial difficulties 
faced by the Agency and was willing to support any 
measure which would enable it to make more 
efficient use of the available resources. It also 
knew that the devaluation of the dollar and inflation 
had sharply increased the Agency's staff costs. 
It would perhaps be useful if the other organizations 
concerned with the international programmes in 
which the Agency was actively participating helped 
to overcome the financial difficulties by making 
adequate contributions. For example, it might be 
considered whether a part of the costs of the 
United Nations Environment Programme could not 
be borne by FAO. 
91. During the past year, Hungary had made 
considerable progress in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. It was now designing its first 
nuclear power station, which would raise the 
country's installed power capacity by 880 MW by 
about 1980. Hungarian scientific institutions, and 
in particular the Central Physics Institute of the 
Academy of Sciences, were contributing substantially 
to the solution of problems associated with 
the construction of a nuclear power station based 
on a 1000-MW water-moderated and -cooled 
reactor; an international team at the Institute was 
carrying out studies on a critical assembly of that 
type. Hungarian scientists were also studying the 
operating conditions for the primary and secondary 
cooling-water circuits. 
92. Hungarian agricultural, industrial and public 
health institutions were making increasing use of 
radioisotopes. The production of isotopes in 1975 
- 10 



GC(XVII)/OR. 161 


would be 350% of that in 1970. A high-intensity 
radiation source for the sterilization of medical 
products was to be acquired with the assistance of 
UNDP and the Agency. Radiation sources were 
already being used, on an experimental basis, in 
the preservation of semi-prepared food products 
and other foodstuffs. Several research contracts 
had been concluded with the Agency for that 
purpose. 

93. The Agency had organized two research 
co-ordination meetings in Hungary, one on the 
radiation preservation of biological tissues and 
the other on plant protection. A meeting of a 
panel of experts from European countries to study 
radiological protection of the environment had 
produced satisfactory results, especially with 
regard to international co-operation in preventing 
excessive pollution of the river Danube. A 
symposium on radiopharmaceuticals organized by 
CMEA had been held after the IAEA/WHO 
Symposium on New Developments in Radiopharmaceuticals 
and Labelled Compounds, which 
had taken place in Copenhagen in March, so that 
the two symposia could complement each other. 
Interest in INIS was increasing steadily. 

94. Hungary was engaged in a variety of 
activities similar to those of the Agency, and 
contacts had been established in almost all of the 
fields in question. As a contribution to the 
Agency's activities, Hungary had submitted a list 
of subjects for the study of which it could accept 
fellows. It hoped thus to contribute, in the spirit 
of the Statute and on the basis of voluntary contributions, 
to the development of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 
• The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 
- 11 



GC(XVII)/OR.162 
8 April 1974* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday, 19 September 1973, at 3. 30 p. m. 


President: Mr. R. W. BOSWELL (Australia) 


Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
10 General debate and report for(continued) 
1972-73 1-123 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Brazil 
Japan 
Mexico 
Pakistan 
Sweden 
France 
Israel 
Viet-Nam 
Philippines 
Zaire 
Sri Lanka 
1 213747 
5666 
768088 
10711820 
36 
46 
55 
65 
75 
79 
87 
106 
117 
123 

A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1973. 
GC(XVII)/512. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1972-73 
(GC(XVII)/500, 500/Corr.1, 510) (continued) 

1. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) assured the 
Director General of the continued friendship and 
support of the Brazilian authorities during his 
fourth term of office. 
2. It was evident from an examination of the 
draft budget for 1974 that the technical assistance 
programme was the programme which had 
suffered most from recent currency realignments 
and world-wide inflation. Of the main activities 
of the Agency, the technical assistance programme 
was the only one to have been subject to increasing 
erosion due to the monetary crisis and its consequences. 
Appropriations for activities in which 
developing countries were only marginally 
interested had steadily increased. 
3. His delegation welcomed the initiative taken 
by the Board of Governors in requesting a study of 
the possibilities and implications of all modes of 
financing the provision of technical assistance by 
the Agency, including in particular financing from 
the Regular Budget. For a long time it had been 
a constant aspiration of developing countries to 
increase the resources available for technical 
assistance. To that end a large number of them 
paid their voluntary contributions on the same 
scale as or a higher scale than their assessments 
for contributions to the Regular Budget. In the 
long term the proper solution, in his view, would 
be the inclusion of technical assistance in the 
Regular Budget, and his delegation was looking 
forward to the results of the study initiated by the 
Board. 
4. In the short term some other solution would 
have to be found. In that connection, the Director 
General had been indefatigable in his efforts to 
obtain larger voluntary contributions from the 
developed countries, not only in cash but also in 
the form of equipment and fellowships. 
5. The International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) was being fully utilized by the 
Nuclear Information Centre of the Brazilian 
National Nuclear Energy Commission. The Centre, 
which was automated to the greatest possible 
extent, was serving an increasing number of users. 
Information from it was even reaching scientists 
in neighbouring countries. 
6. In the field of dosimetry, special mention 
should be made of secondary standards dosimetry 
laboratories; they had so far been of particular 
interest to the World Health Organization, because 
of the important medical applications involved but 
there were other important applications which 
were within the Agency's competence and which 
should be developed by other secondary standards 
laboratories duly recognized by the Agency. The 
Agency might wish to give attention to the matter. 
7. Another field of interest for Brazil was the 
application of radioisotopes in agriculture. Thanks 
to the co-operation of the Agency and of the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Brazil 
was entering the second year of a large-scale 
five-year agricultural project in Piracicaba - the 
most important project of its kind in Latin 
America. 

8. Turning to the main activities in the nuclear 
energy field in Brazil, he said that, to determine 
the potential capacity of Brazilian industry to 
manufacture components for nuclear installations, 
a firm of architects and engineers (Bechtel 
Corporation) had been engaged to make a study in 
depth of the ability of Brazilian industry to apply 
its know-how to nuclear technology within a very 
short time. 
9. The Commission had been studying the 
technology of all reactor types with present or 
future possibilities, starting with light-water and 
heavy-water reactors. With a view to the future, 
and above all to the better utilization of uranium 
as fuel, the Commission was endeavouring to 
assimilate the technology of sodium- and heliumcooled 
fast breeder reactors. To that end it had 
built a soium loop and was carrying out, in 
association with France and the United States of 
America, a development programme which was 
expected to produce results in the 1990s. In 
addition, a programme of co-operation between 
the Commission and the Federal Republic of 
Germany had been of particular significance. 
10. Brazil was proceeding with its large-scale 
programme of prospection for nuclear minerals. 
In that connection two important factors had to be 
considered: the great size of the country and the 
need for an inventory of its resources in the short 
term. Thirty-seven projects were being implemented, 
in regions of easy access, with the object 
of localizing large uranium deposits. There was 
a budget of $11 million for prospection alone in 
1974, and the figure proposed for 1975 would be 
over $20 million, which would place Brazil 
immediately after the United States of America 
in uranium prospecting. 

11. The construction of the country's first 
nuclear power station - with a 626 MW(e) 
pressurized-water reactor - was continuing at 
Angra dos Reis according to schedule. The 
review of the preliminary safety analysis report, 
a task engaging a substantial number of technical 
staff, was near completion. The co-operation of 
the Agency and of the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission had been received, and Brazil had 
invited other countries to send technical observers 
to profit from the Commission's experience. 
12. The Agency was facing a very serious 
financial situation, due mainly to currency realignments. 
The financial crisis was not an act 
of God, like an earthquake, but was being provoked 
exclusively by some developed countries. Its 
result, however, as far as the Agency's budget was 
concerned, was being felt to an unfair extent by 
the developing countries, which although the 
victims of the currency realignments, were being 
requested to cover the budgetary deficit. Some 
-2 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 


developed countries had profited by the currencyrealignments, 
but were at the same time requesting 
the developing countries to foot part of the 
bill. His delegation would abstain on the contingency 
fund question as a protest against the proposed 
solution. 

13. The future of nuclear energy in developing 
countries would depend largely on the types of 
reactor available. The introduction of lightwater 
reactors depended entirely on whether 
developing countries could be assured of long-term 
contracts for enrichment on favourable terms. 
Nuclear power in many countries had made remarkable 
progress under the nuclear power promotional 
policy adopted by the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission. If, as appeared to be the case, the 
situation had now altered and the conditions of new 
long-term contracts for enrichment services had 
become more severe, adverse effects might be 
expected. It was almost impossible for a developing 
country to foresee exactly what its nuclear fuel 
needs would be over the next ten years. The best 
that could be done would be to give the upper and 
lower limits for the quantity of fuel required. 
Down-payments should be reduced to about 10% of 
the cost associated with the first core. The 
current non-discriminatory policy should be maintained. 
A firm market was required before any 
new enrichment plant was installed, and the best 
way to ensure its existence was by means of 
realistic contracts in keeping with the prevailing 
local conditions. 
14. One important difficulty that threatened the 
development of nuclear energy in many countries 
was undoubtedly the expected scarcity of enriched 
uranium. In many cases the difficulty was aggravated 
by veiled or manifest political considerations. 
15. Important steps had been taken to cope with 
the problem. They included the following: the 
offer by the United States of America to co-operate 
under certain conditions with technological knowhow 
in the establishment of multinational ventures 
based on the diffusion process; the decision of 
France, Italy and other countries associated in 
Eurodif to establish a new enrichment facility, also 
based on diffusion; and the multinational project 
for the development of the ultracentrifuge method, 
which was expected to be an economic way of 
enriching uranium. 
16. Despite such steps, it was likely that many 
developing countries would be left with inadequate 
assurance of access to supplies of enriched 
uranium. 
17. Brazil looked primarily to the Agency to 
provide, through the combined efforts of all 
Members, a co-operative basis for the supply of 
enriched uranium and, with the co-operation of the 
great Powers, an assurance that supply difficulties 
would not constitute a barrier to their development. 
18. As regards the relationship between development 
and the environment, it was important to 
remember that a developing country faced with 
problems of poverty, nutrition, education, clothing, 
housing, medical care and employment had to 
compromise between the need to raise man's 
productivity in order to secure his well-being and 
the pollution arising from industrial development. 

19. To improve living conditions, Brazil was 
considering every possible way of increasing 
power generation, while making every effort to 
protect the environment. The present emotional 
approach to some aspects of pollution and energy 
production was dangerous for the developing 
countries. 
20. In spite of the great difficulties encountered 
over the years, the Agency had rendered and was 
continuing to render invaluable service to Member 
States, particularly in the field of technical assistance. 
21. Mr. FUJIYAMA (Japan) pointed out that, 
parallel with the rapid progress being made in 
other fields of science and technology, there had 
been a period of steady development in the various 
peaceful uses of atomic energy which had contributed 
greatly to the welfare of mankind. With the 
possibility of a shortage of conventional energy 
resources in the near future, the world's dependence 
on nuclear energy was becoming increasingly 
obvious. His delegation believed that the role and 
importance of the Agency, which was dealing with 
such important issues as technical assistance, safeguards 
and protection of the environment, were 
becoming greater than ever. 
22. The days were past when atomic energy was 
the concern mainly of a small number of developed 
countries. The Agency's technical assistance to 
the developing nations in matters relating to 
nuclear energy was assuming increasing significance. 
In order to support the Agency's programmes 
for the provision of technical assistance 
to the developing countries, the Japanese Government 
had since 1959 been making annual voluntary 
contributions corresponding to Japan's base rate of 
assessment, the contributions made up to the 
current year amounting to $870 000. 
23. In the awareness that recent international 
monetary realignments and world-wide inflationary 
trends had had adverse effects on the real level of 
the Agency's technical assistance programmes, his 
Government was ready to give favourable consideration 
to proposals for increasing to an 
appropriate extent the target for contributions to 
the Agency's General Fund for 1975. It would 
decide on the amount of its voluntary contribution 
for 1974 after a full evaluation of the aforementioned 
effects. 
24. The Government of Japan had acted as host 
to a number of training courses and seminars 
sponsored by the Agency, and during the past 18 
years Japan had - mainly in collaboration with 
either the Agency or UNDP - accepted 225 trainees 
in the atomic energy field. It had also carried out, 
in line with its own technical assistance policies, 
bilateral assistance programmes involving training 
and the provision of equipment for nuclear research, 
mainly for the benefit of Asian countries. 
-3 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

25. It went without saying that atomic energy had 
to be developed and utilized in harmony with the 
human environment. The solution of problems 
relating to the safety of atomic facilities and to the 
disposal of radioactive wastes was an essential 
prerequisite for the development and utilization of 
atomic energy. It was recognized that the Agency 
was playing, and would continue to play, an 
increasingly important role in that connection. 
26. In 197 2 a firm foundation had been laid for 
expanded international co-operation in environmental 
matters. The progress made had been 
reflected in the holding of the United Nations 
Conference on the Human Environment (the 
Stockholm Conference) [1] and in the adoption of 
the Convention on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 
(the London Convention). One outcome of the 
Stockholm Conference had been the establishment 
by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 
1972 of the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP), whose Governing Council had first met in 
June 1973. The London Convention in particular 
had very great relevance to the Agency's activities 
in connection with the disposal of high-level radioactive 
wastes resulting from the development and 
utilization of nuclear energy. The Japanese 
Government had signed it in June 1973 and was now 
preparing to ratify it. Under the London Convention, 
the Agency had been assigned the task of 
drawing up and recommending standards in connection 
with the marine dumping of radioactive wastes. 
Consequently, the Agency's role in the environmental 
field was expanding significantly. Experts 
from Japan had participated in the consultants' 
meeting and the panel held by the Agency during 
the previous spring to define "high-level" radioactive 
wastes and other "high-level" radioactive 
materials which might be considered unsuitable 
for marine dumping. 

27. In the previous year, the Director General 
had announced the Agency1 s expanded programme 
relating to the environment. Japan was ready to 
co-operate with the Agency in that important task. 
The Government of Japan had made a special 
contribution of some $8000 to help in financing the 
Agency's expanded programme, recognizing that 
special contributions would be the only possible 
source of funds for the purpose as far as the 
current year was concerned. As a nation which 
was itself seriously tackling environmental 
problems, Japan sincerely supported the strengthening 
of the Agency's activities in that area. 
28. At the Stockholm Conference, Japan had 
supported the establishment of UNEP in a desire 
to help promote extensive international cooperation 
in solving environmental problems. It 
had pledged a contribution amounting to 10% of the 
United Nations Environment Fund over a period of 
five years. He welcomed the holding of talks 
between the Agency and UNEP on the Agency's 
[1] See Report on the United Nations Conference 
on the Human Environment published in United 
Nations document A/CONF. 48/14. 
expanded programme relating to the environment 
and hoped that those discussions would lead to 
effective co-operation between the two organizations. 


29. Work connected with safeguards constituted 
an important part of the Agency's activities. So 
far, transfer agreements had accounted for the 
greater part of the Agency's safeguards activities 
and had played an essential role in their development. 
In connection with five agreements on 
co-operation in the field of atomic energy, concluded 
with Australia, Canada, France, the United 
Kingdom and the United States, Japan had also 
concluded transfer agreements, placing the application 
of the safeguards required under those agreements 
in the Agency's hands. He believed that in 
so doing his country had made a very important 
contribution to the development of the Agency's 
safeguards system. 
30. The most important event with regard to safeguards 
during the past year had been the signing 
of a safeguards agreement by the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM), the non-nuclearweapon 
States of EURATOM and the Agency. In 
view of the importance of EURATOM's Member 
States in the world's nuclear industry, the incorporation 
of the safeguards on nuclear activities in 
the non-nuclear-weapon States of EURATOM in 
the Agency's safeguards system could be considered 
an epoch-making development. 
31. Japan itself was at present engaged in exploratory 
talks with the Agency concerning safeguards 
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). When the Government 
of Japan had signed NPT in February 1970, it had 
stressed that, before ratification, it intended to 
examine its terms carefully in order to ensure that 
Japan would not be subject to unfavourable treatment 
vis-a-vis other nations in the application of 
safeguards. It also wanted to consider the progress 
achieved in nuclear disarmament and in 
problems relating to Japan's security. It was the 
view of his Government that the spirit and substance 
of the safeguards agreement concluded with 
EURATOM and its non-nuclear-weapon Member 
States, which had been elaborated within the framework 
of the material reproduced in document 
INFCIRC/153, should be equally applicable to the 
safeguards agreement with Japan and that recognition 
of that point was vital to the successful conclusion 
of a safeguards agreement between the 
Agency and Japan. 
32. As regards future expansion of the Agency's 
safeguards activities, given the limitations on 
budget and staff, he welcomed the emphasis in the 
Annual Report on research and development designed 
to improve safeguards techniques, such as 
the improvement of unattended surveillance devices 
and the preparation of a safeguards technical 
manual. In view of the increasing number of 
atomic energy establishments and the increasing 
amounts of nuclear material being transported, he 
believed that further efforts should be made to 
simplify and rationalize safeguards procedures. 
-4 



33. For the Agency safeguards system to become 
truly universal and comprehensive, it was necessary 
that the nuclear-weapon States should also 
understand the real purpose of the Agency's safeguards. 
In that context, it was to be welcomed 
that two of those States, the United Kingdom and 
the United States, had announced that they would 
accept the application of Agency safeguards to all 
their nuclear activities, excluding only those with 
direct national security significance, and that they 
had begun talks with the Agency on the terms of a 
voluntary submission agreement. He firmly 
believed that all other nuclear-weapon States should 
do the same. 
34. Agency safeguards in connection with NPT 
had been discussed at length by many experts in 
the Board's Safeguards Committee (1970). In subsequent 
negotiations with many Member States the 
Agency had accumulated abundant data on the subject 
and, as a result of its negotiations with 
EURATOM, a new approach had developed. The 
Agency's decision to convene a panel meeting in 
the autumn of 1973 to review the changing situation 
and to consider various problems which had arisen 
since the meetings of the Safeguards Committee 
(1970) was, therefore, highly opportune. Welcoming 
that initiative, the Japanese Government 
had proposed holding the meeting in Tokyo. He 
hoped the discussions of that panel would contribute 
to the further development and rationalization of 
the international safeguards system. 
35. Since its establishment, the Agency had done 
much valuable work in connection with the use of 
atomic energy to promote the well-being of mankind. 
The importance of nuclear energy for man 
would certainly increase in the future, and the 
Agency's activities would accordingly expand and 
become more diversified. To carry on those 
activities, the Agency would naturally require a 
solid financial and organizational basis. The 
recent currency realignments and the current 
inflationary trends should not be allowed to hinder 
the Agency in performing its important tasks by 
creating a shortage of funds. Japan was of the 
opinion that any budgetary insufficiency should 
first be compensated for by way of economies. 
However, it considered that at present minimum 
additional contributions were unavoidable in order 
to make up for shortfalls caused by factors beyond 
the Agency's control. 
36. On the organizational side, the amendment 
to Article VI of the Agency's Statute meant that an 
enlarged Board of Governors would be constituted 
during the current session of the Conference. He 
welcomed that development since it would ensure 
that the interests of all Members were adequately 
represented and that the global nature of the 
Agency's activities would be reflected more satisfactorily. 
37. Mr. SCHMILL ORDONEZ (Mexico) said that, 
like all countries of the world, Mexico was at 
present facing a number of problems requiring 
urgent and effective solution. The country was 
aware that it was in the midst of various processes 
of change and that it had to draw on its own re-
GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

sources and those which the international community 
could make available to it in order to complete 
the programmes which it had devised for strengthening 
its political democracy, improving its 
educational system, balancing the distribution of 
its national income among various sectors of the 
population, making use of its natural resources in 
a rational and effective manner, encouraging 
scientific research and its application to social 
and economic life, extending the benefits of culture 
to the most remote districts as well as to the 
large urban centres, promoting industry and, in 
short, improving and raising the level of the life 
and culture of the Mexican people to a maximum 
degree. 

38. With those purposes in mind, the Government 
of Mexico was carrying out a long-term 
programme designed to ensure the increased use 
of nuclear science and technology, which were 
indispensable factors in accelerating economic 
and social development. 
39. Since Mexico was a country characterized 
by rapid economic development and a very high 
population growth rate (one of the highest in the 
world), there was a need for large quantities of 
energy. It had so far solved its energy problems 
mainly by means of oil, which it was producing 
domestically in a highly efficient manner; 90% 
of the country's energy consumption was based on 
the use of oil, the other 10% being derived from 
sources such as coal and hydro power. However, 
the growth rate of the population was at present 
3. 5% a year and, as a result of improvements in 
the living standard of the population and the increase 
in the gross national product, the demand for 
energy was growing even more rapidly. 
40. In view of that situation, the Government of 
Mexico had decided to turn to uranium as a basic 
source of energy for the production of electricity. 
41. It had been estimated that during the period 
1981-1990 Mexico would have to build power plants 
with a total capacity of 30 000 MW, 25 000 MW of 
which would have to be based on oil or nuclear fuel. 
42. For those reasons, the Government had in 
1972 ordered a 660-MW reactor for installation in 
the Laguna Verde region of Veracruz State. It 
would supply electric power to the central grid. 
Work on its installation was already under way. 
Also in 1972, and under the same programme, the 
Government had decided to acquire a second unit, 
with the same power and other characteristics; it 
would be installed near the first reactor and used 
for the same purpose. 
43. The Mexican long-term programme for the 
establishment of nuclear power plants applied to 
the entire country and was aimed at supplanting 
oil in the production of electricity and making it 
available in other important technological and 
economic fields - for example, in the petrochemical 
industry. 
44. Mexico was fully aware of the impending 
world energy crisis and was taking measures to 
-5 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

avoid it as far as possible; in doing so it had 
received from the Agency very effective technical 
assistance and the assurance of still further assistance. 
For that reason Mexico had carried out 
all its obligations towards the Agency faithfully 
and punctually. 

45. In the same context, plans were being 
developed for exploiting the country1 s uranium 
deposits and for producing as efficiently as 
possible the nuclear fuel required for the operation 
of its reactors. Mexico had received effective 
and timely technological assistance from the 
Agency for that purpose and expected to become 
largely self-sufficient in that area. 
46. For all those reasons, and in recognition of 
the great importance of Agency technical assistance 
to the developing countries, Mexico supported the 
policy of substantially increasing technical assistance, 
with distribution throughout the world of 
nuclear know-how and technology, and in that way 
reducing the imbalance - which had been observed 
by the Agency - between the expenditure on inspection 
and surveillance and that on technical assistance. 
The Mexican delegation considered that 
technological assistance was very important, perhaps 
even more so than safeguards, for the establishment 
of the conditions necessary for world 
peace. 
47. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan), after warmly congratulating 
the Director General on his unanimous 
re-election for a further term of office, said that 
the Conference was meeting in the shadow of three 
major issues. The world was confronted by 
problems associated with the threat to peace and 
security, by a deepening energy crisis, and by the 
prospect of serious shortages of food and other 
agricultural commodities. His delegation believed 
that the success of the Agency in the coming decade 
would be measured largely by the manner in which 
it responded to the challenges represented by those 
issues. In the disarmament field, some progress 
had been made through the placing of a limit on the 
number of offensive and defensive weapons; 
however, the freezing of numbers had been more 
than compensated for by greater sophistication in 
weapons and their delivery systems, with the result 
that the threat had not diminished, and might even 
have increased. Pakistan hoped that the super 
Powers concerned would intensify the search for a 
settlement, not only in their own enlighened selfinterest 
but for the very survival of mankind. As 
long as the nuclear arms race continued, in terms 
of quantity and quality, openly or in disguise, the 
prospects for NPT remained dim, irrespective of 
how well the Agency applied its safeguards. While 
the key to global security lay in the hands of the 
super Powers, the non-nuclear-weapon States - and 
particularly the so-called near-nuclear developing 
countries - could set a good example in building 
world peace. The countries of Latin America, 
through the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (the Tlateloleo Treaty)[2], 
[2] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
had set a precedent which could well be followed 
in other regions in order to keep them free from 
nuclear weapons. It was in that spirit that the 
President of Pakistan, speaking at the inauguration 
of the Karachi nuclear power plant in November 

1972, had proposed the establishment of a nuclearfree 
zone in the South-Asian subcontinent. 

48. The whole world was conscious of the energy 
crisis, which had not developed overnight nor been 
caused by arbitrary steps taken by certain oilproducing 
countries. The factors responsible for 
the crisis included the limited supply of goodquality 
fossil fuels, the sharp escalation in the 
price of capital goods required by oil-producing 
countries for their development, and serious concern 
about pollution. At all events, the present 
acute stage of the energy crisis had made nuclear 
power not only a realistic alternative, but an absolute 
necessity. The Agency's role in resolving 
the energy crisis was thus a vital one. The advanced 
countries with their financial and technological 
resources would find appropriate solutions 
to their energy problems; the countries which 
would suffer most were the fuel-deficient 
developing countries, which would be unable to pay 
for highly priced fuel oil or capital-intensive 
nuclear power plants. That was why the Agency's 
activities in the sphere of nuclear power for 
developing countries now assumed a new and added 
significance. He wished to commend the Agency 
for undertaking a nuclear power market survey in 
14 developing countries; the survey had highlighted 
the fact that in the 1980s the proportion of 
nuclear power in those countries would exceed 70% 
of the total thermal capacity required. His delegation 
agreed with the Director General that that 
should become an on-going Agency activity. 
Indeed, Pakistan wanted the Agency to go further 
and take bold initiatives in helping the developing 
countries to evolve strategies for solving their 
energy problems through the optimum use of 
nuclear power. Pakistan was convinced that 
nuclear power would play a key role in accelerating 
the economic and industrial development of the 
country, and it was estimated that the atom would 
contribute nearly one half of the power produced 
by the end of the century. The Karachi nuclear 
power plant had already demonstrated an over 80% 
availability factor during the first year of its 
operation and had encouraged the responsible 
authorities to plan a second nuclear plant, with an 
output of 500-600 MW, to be completed around 
1980. Work had already started on a fuel fabrication 
plant to meet the requirements of the 
Karachi nuclear power plant, and the construction 
of a heavy-water production facility in the country 
was being actively planned. Pakistan was carrying 
out intensive prospecting for uranium, partly 
within the framework of a UNDP-assisted project 
which was being executed by the Agency and partly 
by its own resources. There were firm indications 
of significant reserves of uranium, which it 
was hoped to develop and exploit with the cooperation 
of friendly countries. He felt that the 
Agency might step up its activities relating to 
uranium prospecting, particularly in the developing 
countries, so that the projected requirement 
-6 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 


of an additional 1. 5 million tons of uranium 
reserves by 1990 could be met. 

49. It was painfully apparent that, in spite of 
world-wide industrial and technological advances, 
the basic need to increase agricultural production 
remained. At the previous session of the 
Conference, Pakistan had proposed that the Agency, 
in co-operation with FAO, launch a well planned 
and co-ordinated programme to help the developing 
countries in speeding up their food and agricultural 
production. The events of the past year had only 
served to emphasize the importance of such an 
endeavour. He believed that the Agency could 
play a most useful role in promoting the application 
of nuclear techniques and radiation in the field of 
agriculture, and thus make a significant contribution 
to the economies of the developing countries. 
Following the suggestions put forward by an Agency 
mission to Pakistan in 1972, the Government had 
launched a long-range programme involving mutation 
breeding for developing new varieties of 
essential crops, work aimed at the optimum utilization 
of water and fertilizers, the preservation of 
food and food grains through radiation, and other 
projects. It was planning to establish, in the 
northern part of the country, a third centre for 
the application of atomic energy in agriculture. 

50. He welcomed the increase in the membership 
of the Board from 25 to 34; it would provide more 
opportunities for the developing and other nonnuclear 
countries to participate in the work of the 
Board. He was especially pleased at the addition 
to the Board of new Members, such as the Federal 
Republic of Germany and Italy, under 
Article VI. A. 1 of the Statute. 
51. He had no doubt that all the new Members of 
the Board - particularly those from developing 
regions - would make an effective contribution to 
the formulation of the programmes and policies of 
the Agency, and thus enable the organization to 
perform its promotional and regulatory functions 
more effectively. He believed that, in view of the 
enlargement of the Board and in the light of the 
experience gained over the past 16 years, it should 
be possible to simplify the Rules of Procedure in 
the interests of economy and efficiency. 
52. His delegation was satisfied with the Agency's 
technical assistance activities, which, in spite of 
serious limitations on resources, had made an 
effective contribution to the programmes of the 
developing countries. In view of the rapidly ex-
panding need of those countries for technical advice 
and assistance in planning and implementing their 
nuclear energy programmes, Pakistan hoped that 
ways and means could be found of increasing the 
funds allocated to technical assistance. He was 
pleased that the Director General was considering 
making greater use of Secretariat staff for advisory 
missions. His delegation wished to suggest that 
more liberal use be made of the expertise which 
was becoming available in the developing countries. 
53. The International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste had proved to be one of the 
Agency's most successful projects, towards which 
the Italian Government had made very generous 
contributions. He felt that the time had come to 
consider extending its activities to the developing 
regions of Latin America, Africa and Asia through 
the establishment of affiliated sub-centres. 

54. As a result of inflationary pressures and the 
uncertain world currency situation, the Agency had 
been forced to ask for supplementary budget 
appropriations. He believed that all Member 
States, and particularly the economically most 
powerful countries, should make the necessary 
resources available to the Agency and so enable it 
to discharge its obligations in the promotional and 
regulatory fields. The Director General had already 
taken several measures to effect economies. 
The Pakistan delegation felt that there was room 
for consolidating the programme of the Agency so 
that certain activities of special interest to groups 
of advanced countries could either be transferred 
to regional organizations or be carried out with 
their financial and organizational support. It 
believed that the Agency should be more selective 
in its projects and concentrate on fewer programmes 
with a view to making a real impact 
rather than spread its resources thinly over an 
excessively wide range of activities. 
55. Finally, he wished to assure the Director 
General and the Agency of Pakistan's wholehearted 
support in the years to come. 
56. Mr. PETRI (Sweden) extended his warm 
congratulations to the Director General on his reelection. 
57. The seventeenth regular session of the 
General Conference was taking place a time when 
many countries were considering the benefits and 
problems of the large-scale application of nuclear 
power. It was gratifying to note that the Agency 
was actively engaged in the current deliberations 
and was assuming its proper normative role in the 
nuclear field. Sweden had one of the world's 
most ambitious nuclear power programmes and 
was anxious to co-operate with the Agency to the 
fullest extent. 
58. The Conference was meeting for the first 
time since the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute had come into force. The amendment 
would enable a greater number of Member States, 
especially developing countries, to take part in the 
Board's deliberations. The Board itself designated 
the nine Members of the Agency most advanced in 
atomic energy technology, including the production 
of source materials, but the Statute did not indicate 
what criteria were to be applied in assessing the 
degree of advancement. Some criteria, however, 
were obvious: the number and capacity of nuclear 
power reactors in operation or under construction, 
the extent to which those reactors had been or were 
being built by the country's own industries rather 
than by foreign concerns, the extent to which the 
technology used was national rather than imported, 
and the country's position as an exporter of nuclear 
power stations and components or of nuclear fuel 
and services. The general efforts of a country 
to promote Agency activities, as by the provision 

-7 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

of technical assistance, was clearly also of relevance. 


59. Although the criteria for designation were not 
mentioned in the Statute, it was quite clear that the 
Statute gave no support to the presumption that some 
seats on the Board were permanently reserved for 
certain countries. It was explicitly specified that, 
every year, the outgoing Board of Governors had to 
designate the Members which at that particular 
time were the most advanced in the technology of 
atomic energy, including the production of source 
materials. He did not wish to press the issue at 
the current session, since his country hoped to 
gain, through normal consultative procedures, 
access to the Board as a Member from the Western 
Europe area, but according to most of the objective 
criteria which he had just mentioned there was 
every reason to count Sweden among the nations 
most advanced in the technology of atomic energy. 
He assumed that the Board would take that into due 
account in future elections. 
60. Budgetary problems had been greater than 
usual during the current year as a result of world 
monetary instability, and the Board had had to 
recommend two consecutive increases in the 1973 
and 1974 budgets. His country was ready to share 
in the increased financial burden on an interim 
basis, but more stable solutions would have to be 
found, possibly by keeping Agency resources in 
more than one key currency. It was wrong that 
some countries, like his own, having paid their 
annual contributions early in 1973 when dollar 
values were higher, were being called upon to share 
in deficits which resulted from the decreased value 
of their contributions. If the Agency diversified 
its monetary assets such consequences could be 
mitigated. 
61. Budgetary squeezes were particularly regrettable 
in the field of technical assistance. The 
Agency had performed excellent services as the 
executing agency for UNDP projects and in its 
training and fellowship programmes. The recent 
Agency market survey of the potential demand for 
nuclear power in 14 developing countries showed 
that nuclear power was becoming an important 
factor in the developing world, and the Agency 
would have an important role to play in that field. 
The Director General's report on Agency technical 
assistance activities showed that the Agency was 
well aware of the planning- and problem-oriented 
policy which central United Nations bodies had 
instituted in the technical assistance field. No real 
problems seemed to exist in relation to UNDP, and 
it was most desirable that the value of technical 
assistance should increase steadily. It was to be 
hoped that the trend in the opposite direction would 
be stopped. 
62. In order to preserve the purchasing power of 
its 1974 contribution to the General Fund, Sweden 
had decided to contribute 185 000 Swedish crowns 
as in 1973. That was equivalent to $44 000 at the 
current exchange rate, an increase of about $8000, 
or 22%, over the amount of $36 000 corresponding 
to its base rate of assessment. In the same context 
he wished to mention the special agreement 
between the Agency and the Swedish International 
Development Authority, under which Sweden helped 
to finance the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste and provided fellowships and 
training. For 1973 the value of such assistance 
was approximately $200 000, and the 1974 figure 
would probably be even higher. Sweden was also 
the second-largest contributor to UNDP, providing 
some 10% of its budget. The overall value of 
Sweden's support of Agency activities was thus of 
the order of $500 000 in one year. 

63. The view had been expressed that the Agency 
was concentrating too much on safeguards to the 
detriment of technical assistance. He did not 
think that the two activities were in fact interrelated; 
they should be allowed to develop independently. 
The Agency was on the verge of concluding 
and implementing safeguards agreements 
with a number of important industrial countries 
within the framework of NPT. It was important 
that the Agency's safeguards system should make 
maximum use of existing nuclear material control 
systems, in order to keep expenditures within 
economically acceptable limits and to facilitate 
operations for the individual nuclear installations 
subject to safeguards. It was evident that some 
of the problems involved in the safeguards system 
were so complicated that continued studies and 
development work would be necessary. 
64. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency was devoting attention to the problem 
of waste management and radiological protection. 
The Agency had an important normative role to 
play with regard to the safe handling and disposal 
of radioactive wastes and the conclusion of general 
agreements in that field. Swedish Government 
experts were at present studying the report of a 
special panel on the dumping of wastes into the 
ocean, held during the summer, to help the Agency 
in connection with its responsibilities under the 
Convention on Marine Pollution by Dumping of 
Wastes and Other Matter. 
65. It was clear that in the near future the Agency 
would not only have to pay continued attention to 
the promotional aspects of nuclear technology, but 
also have to devote considerable effort to its 
regulatory and control functions. Much remained 
to be done in both fields. His country would give 
every assistance. 
66. Mr. YVON (France) said that the past year 
had been marked by an energy crisis and a growing 
awareness of environmental problems. In connection 
with both phenomena, however, the Agency 
was facing up to its new tasks, as could be seen 
from the market survey of the potential demand 
for nuclear power in developing countries and its 
expanded programme relating to the environment; 
hence the meetings organized by the Agency on the 
effects of radiation and the management of waste 
from nuclear facilities were highly relevant. At 
the same time, however, the tendency to hold many 
meetings on the same topic was not to be encouraged, 
since it could easily give rise to undue 
apprehension. 
8 



67. In 1973 there had been an increase in the rate 
at which orders for nuclear power stations were 
being placed in the more developed countries, 
although it was known that natural and enriched 
uranium were likely to be in short supply by the 
1980s. There was accordingly a need to intensify 
prospecting activities and to construct enrichment 
plants on an international basis. Although that 
trend concerned mainly the industrialized countries, 
the time was not far off when the developing 
countries would also have medium and small 
power reactors; in the meantime, those countries 
were already enjoying the benefits of nuclear 
energy through the application of isotopes in 
biology, agriculture and industry, and the specialists 
trained in those fields would play a significant 
part in the development of the nuclear industry. 
68. It was regrettable that the year 1973 had also 
been marked by a monetary crisis, for which a 
solution would still have to be found if the Agency's 
activities, especially those relating to technical 
assistance and the organization of scientific 
meetings, were not to be curtailed. 
69. With regard to the problem of safeguards, it 
was essential to establish clearly what the responsibilities 
of the Agency should be. In effect, 
the Agency should act as a kind of international 
centre for Member States making available nuclear 
technology and materials, with the task of ensuring 
that such assistance was used solely for peaceful 
purposes. It was up to the countries concerned to 
decide for themselves which facilities should be 
placed under safeguards. Within that context the 
Agency had a particular role to play in connection 
with the implementation of NPT. It should be 
stressed, however, that any discrimination within 
the Agency between signatory and non-signatory 
States should be avoided, and his delegation 
believed that it would be most undesirable if any 
such discrimination were to come about through 
the effect of majority votes. 
70. In 1972, the Agency had been the first 
organization to be informed by the French Government 
of the discovery of evidence of a chain 
reaction that had occurred in Gabon some two 
thousand million years before. Work in collaboration 
with the Gabon authorities had confirmed the 
presence of two separate fossil deposits, representing 
more than 200 tons of uranium depleted in 
uranium-235 to a varying degree. 
71. As far as France's nuclear programme was 
concerned, it had been decided to speed up 
nuclear power production by increasing the capacity 
planned for the years 1978-82 to 13 000 MW(e). 
Furthermore, the French prototype breeder 
reactor Phenix had gone critical in August 1973 
and was due for integration into the grid before 
the end of the year. Construction of the first 
large commercial power station with a breeder 
reactor, of 1200 MW(e) capacity, was scheduled 
to begin shortly within the framework of a joint 
German-Italian-French project. 
72. France had taken steps to deal with the 
predicted shortage of uranium by embarking on 
GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

prospection on a world-wide scale and by stepping 
up activity relating to fuel enrichment, especially 
within Europe. A study of the technical and 
economic factors involved in the construction of 
a multinational gaseous diffusion plant had been 
completed and it should be possible to reach a 
final decision in the near future. 

73. Since technical assistance was one of the 
Agency's major activities, his country aimed at 
contributing to the different forms of aid provided 
for the developing countries. In response to the 
Director General's appeal, it had been decided 
to take over one of the technical assistance projects 
which could not be included in the 1973 
programme. That project, the cost of which was 
estimated at $30 000, would thus represent a 
further addition to the French voluntary contribution 
for 1973. 
74. Furthermore, the offer to provide equipment 
worth 150 000 francs for one or more Agency 
laboratories in 1974 had been renewed, and 
France1 s voluntary contribution would be increased 
again in 1974 - to $120 000; in addition, fellowships 
would continue to be made available in 
France for further training. 
75. In conclusion, he wished to state that almost 
a third of a century had passed since the beginning 
of the atomic age and that 1973 had, as far as 
nuclear energy was concerned, been a year of 
great achievement. In the present eventful times, 
continuity was something to be valued highly; it 
was therefore gratifying to note that the Director 
General had been reappointed for a new term of 
office. The unanimous decision was an indication 
of the high confidence placed in him. 
76. Mr. FREIR (Israel), after congratulating 
Mr. Eklund on his reappointment as Director 
General, said in connection with the Agency's 
market survey for nuclear power in developing 
countries that the methods used and the conclusions 
arrived at, together with those which could be obtained 
by extrapolation, were invaluable. The 
considerable demand for reactors in the 600 MW 
range was noteworthy, and would certainly give an 
indication to the suppliers. However, the clients 
for those reactors might, he feared, come up 
against two difficulties. The reactors ordered by 
the American and European utilities were designed 
mostly for an output of 1000 MW and above. Moreover, 
the programmes of those utilities were being 
accelerated in view of the attitude which the oilproducing 
countries had begun to adopt. The result 
was a dual pressure on the supplying industries to 
use their present and foreseeable capacity for an 
accelerated supply of bigger reactors, and such 
pressure might work to the disadvantage of consumers 
whose grids could not accommodate such 
reactors. He suggested that the Agency examine 
whether such apprehensions were valid and, if so, 
consider what it could do to satisfy the needs of the 
small-grid consumer. In that connection, serious 
attention should also be paid to the development of 
air-cooled reactors in order to avoid sea and river 
pollution and the discharge of heat into waterbodies. 
-9 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

77. As regards the proposal to amend the Rules 
of Procedure, his delegation was in favour of 
expediting the proceedings by fusing the functions 
of the two existing committees within a single 
"Committee of the Whole". He suggested a further 
amendment to the effect that one week-day during 
each regular session should be free of formal 
meetings, since the General Conference was an 
occasion when the heads of all atomic energy 
commissions congregated at one place at the same 
time and could informally discuss matters of bilateral, 
multilateral and general interest. 
78. While endorsing the Agency's budget in the 
form in which it had been submitted, he noted with 
concern the grouping of the more powerful countries 
on one side and the less powerful ones on the other, 
the former laying stress on safeguards and the 
latter on technical assistance. Since both functions 
of the Agency were necessary, its promotional and 
regulatory functions should be placed on an equal 
footing. While Israel would like to see a statutory 
and quantitative change in the allocation of funds 
for the two main functions, it had decided under the 
prevailing circumstances to increase its voluntary 
contribution to an amount 10% above that corresponding 
to its base rate of assessment as a token 
of its earnest in the matter. In addition, it would 
put 45 man-months of fellowships at the disposal 
of the Agency in 1974. 

79. Lastly, his country had increased the scope 
of co-operation with other countries, largely during 
the past year, and was most willing to establish 
further links, in keeping with the spirit of the 
Agency. 
80. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam), after congratulating 
the Director General on his re-election, 
remarked that the current relaxation of world 
tension was particularly favourable to the strengthening 
of international co-operation, which had always 
flourished in the Agency. 
81. Despite the international monetary crisis, 
the Agency had been able to continue its activities 
almost normally, thanks to economies effected by 
the Secretariat. Objectives for the remaining 
part of the year were endangered, however, and it 
was for that reason that Viet-Nam supported the 
proposal of a supplementary assessment for 1973. 
82. The budget forecasts for 1974 were, inevitably, 
higher than those for previous years, but his 
country recommended their acceptance as they 
faithfully reflected the programme of activities for 
the coming six months approved by the previous 
session of the General Conference. 
83. The programme as a whole was well conceived. 
Despite its safeguards and environmental 
responsibilities, the Agency had continued to 
devote particular attention to technical assistance. 
Every effort should be made to satisfy to a maximum 
extent requests for assistance by countries 
really needing it and to increase the effectiveness 
of aid by continuous development of the technical 
assistance programme. 
84. In that connection Viet-Nam welcomed the 
Agency's efforts to encourage regional co-operation 
by initiating joint research projects for implementation 
under its aegis. 
85. In Asia, and South East Asia in particular, 
the Agency's efforts had resulted in the conclusion 
of an agreement on co-operation in research, development 
and training in the field of nuclear science and 
technology. His country had been pleased to learn 
that the radiation preservation of fish and fish 
products would be the first area of co-operation. 
86. His delegation looked forward to the launching 
of other applied research projects capable of 
yielding concrete results within a reasonable period 
of time. Such projects would encourage Governments 
to collaborate with a view to integrating 
national research projects into a regional effort. 
87. One of the main difficulties in developing 
countries continued to be a shortage of trained 
technical staff. His delegation had noted with 
interest that the Agency was continuing to organize 
periods of training, study tours and seminars. It 
held the view, however, that such training should 
preferably be provided on a regional basis by making 
use of existing nuclear plants and research 
establishments. In that way the costs of training 
could be reduced, conditions would be comparable 
to those in the trainees' countries of origin and 
links for subsequent collaboration would be forged. 
88. Mr. MEDINA (Philippines), after welcoming 
the German Democratic Republic and the People's 
Republic of Mongolia as new Members of the Agency 
and congratulating Mr. Eklund on his reappointment 
as Director General, said that the Agency had 
in the past few years expanded its role in international 
affairs by assuming additional responsibilities 
for the preservation of world peace and for 
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
including certain obligations related to the protection 
of the environment, especially the safe 
management of nuclear waste. In response to the 
growing demand for nuclear power, the Agency had 
intensified its efforts in that field through various 
activities, including the search for new reserves 
of low-cost uranium and a detailed survey of the 
market for nuclear power in developing countries. 

89. The Philippine delegation encouraged the 
increasing involvement of the Agency in matters 
within its competence and hoped it would continue 
to intensify its efforts in activities directly 
affecting the developing Member States. 
90. His delegation shared the Director General's 
views concerning the importance of the Agency's 
role in providing technical assistance. 
91. Examination of the budget proposals for 1974, 
however, showed that, while they would result in a 
25% increase over the adjusted Regular Budget for 
1973, the target for the General Fund was to remain 
at $3 million. The Director General had repeatedly 
stressed the need for an increase in the 
General Fund, since the annual cost of providing 
experts' services had risen by 55% between 1962 
- 10 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 


and 1973 and a further increase was foreseen in 
1974, the cost of equipment was rising at a rate of 
about 12% a year, and the average annual cost of 
training had increased by 80% in the eleven years 
since 1962. 

92. The Conference had been informed that the 
number of fellowship nominations not resulting in 
awards owing to lack of funds had been far greater 
in 1972 than in 1971. Such a decline in the number 
of fellowship awards was extremely harmful to the 
developing countries - particularly to the least 
developed ones, which had a greater need for 
training opportunities. The lack of sufficient 
resources for fellowships would also eventually 
have an adverse effect on the Philippines and 
other developing countries in the early stages of 
introducing nuclear power as an alternative source 
of energy. 
93. The General Fund had suffered not only from 
the eroding effects of inflation and currency 
fluctuations but also from a reduction in the value 
of gifts in kind and changes in UNDP's policies 
with regard to the financing of projects and 
training courses. 
94. The Conference should consider means of 
ensuring that Agency functions of similar importance 
were subject to similar financing systems 
and benefited equally from budgetary increases. 
95. The Philippine delegation considered that 
serious efforts should have been made to raise the 
target for the General Fund for 1974 before proposing 
a supplementary assessment of $1. 25 million 
for 1973 and a contingency fund of $4. 6 million 
for the 1974 Regular Budget. 
96. He supported the proposal to study the possibilities 
and implications of financing the provision of 
technical assistance from the Regular Budget and 
to request the Director General to report on that 
matter to the Conference at its next session. 
97. As evidence of its interest in the Agency's 
technical assistance programme his Government 
would contribute to the General Fund an amount 
corresponding to its base rate of assessment for 
1974. It would also continue to make available 
two Type II fellowships. 
98. The Philippines wished once more to urge 
Member States with large balance-of-payments 
surpluses, and also those which had contributed 
nothing or only small amounts to the General Fund, 
to make appropriate contributions. 
99. The great importance which his Government 
attached to nuclear power as a means of meeting 
the increasing need for energy in connection with 
the country1 s development was illustrated by the 
fact that it had decided to build the country's first 
nuclear power plant - in Luzon. For that purpose 
it had received assistance from the Agency and 
UNDP, which had carried out a pre-investment 
feasibility study in Luzon in 1964-1965. In 1972, 
the Agency had played an important role in updating 
that study, and its final report formed the 
basis for the decision to construct the nuclear 
power plant in Luzon. 

100. The decision to construct a nuclear power 
plant did not signify the end of Agency technical 
assistance but the beginning of a period of intensified 
assistance and advice, particularly with 
respect to tenders, the evaluation of bids, and 
construction and commissioning work. More 
people would also have to be trained in the regulation 
and surveillance of nuclear plants. The 
project would demonstrate how technical assistance 
could make an impact on the economic and social 
development of the recipient State. 
101. Regional co-operation was recognized by the 
developing countries in South East Asia as an 
effective means of overcoming many of their 
common problems, and the regional co-operation 
agreement on research, development and training 
in nuclear science and technology had been acceded 
to by India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, 
Thailand and South Viet-Nam. His delegation 
hoped that, during the current session of the 
General Conference, the countries concerned 
would be able to implement some of the recommendations 
made at the Delhi meeting of March 1973 
and agree to embark on projects relating to the 
radiation preservation of fish and to nuclear power 
plant engineering, especially nuclear instrumentation. 
The experience of regional co-operative 
efforts had shown that a strong link was required 
between those who needed and those who could 
provide assistance, and the Agency could serve as 
such a link. 
102. Although the introduction of high-yield 
varieties of crops in some Asian countries had led 
to increased food production, the gross inadequacy 
of the available storage and preservation facilities 
had greatly reduced the gains made. Moreover, 
in many developing countries sea fish, which could 
provide high-grade proteins for protein-starved 
populations, was not reaching inland areas for lack 
of efficient preservation methods. 
103. In connection with the report that a Member 
State was to start pilot-plant experiments using 
cobalt-60 and linear accelerators to study the 
technological and economic feasibility of the radiation 
preservation of fish and fishery products, he 
suggested that the Agency make arrangements with 
that country and with other countries which might 
have such projects in mind so that interested 
developing States could benefit from them. The 
Philippines would be interested in sending samples 
for analysis and having scientists trained at the 
pilot plant. 
104. Reiterating his country's strong objection to 
atmospheric tests of nuclear devices and generally 
to man-induced environmental and ecological 
changes, he expressed the hope that within the 
framework of the Agency some kind of collective 
agreement or understanding could be reached with 
regard to nuclear tests. 
105. The Philippines, which had concluded a 
safeguards agreement in connection with NPT with 
11 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 

the Agency in February 1973 and completed negotiations 
concerning the subsidiary arrangements, 
wished to urge all Member States party to NPT to 
help in ensuring that the objectives of NPT were 
achieved as soon as possible. 

106. Lastly, as an expression of the Philippines' 
continuing interest in the Agency's activities and 
of the importance it attached to the work of the 
Board, his Government was going to establish a 
permanent mission to the Agency in Vienna by the 
end of the current year. 
107. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) said he 
would first like to congratulate the Director General 
on his re-election. 
108. In approaching the work of the current 
session, his delegation was by no means free from 
concern, and on a number of counts. The Agency's 
policy, as it emerged from the documentation submitted 
to the Conference, appeared to be less and 
less in accord with the organization's main objective 
- the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy in all Member States. Indeed, the present 
programmes and the policy underlying the Agency's 
activities were, in his delegation's view, departing 
more and more from the basic democratic 
principle that the well-being of the majority should 
not be subordinated to the narrow interests of a 
minority, however powerful its members might be. 
109. An impartial observer would certainly be 
surprised to find that, according to the proposed 
budget increases to finance expanded activities, 
the main attention was being focused on such topics 
as protection of the environment, safeguards 
against the use of nuclear energy for military purposes 
and personnel administration, leaving the 
provision of technical assistance to Member States 
in furtherance of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy at the bottom of the ladder. That order of 
priority in itself might not at first glance seem 
irrational, at least as far as the first two topics 
were concerned; before starting to build, it was 
essential to stop indiscriminate killing and to 
provide a safe environment in which to live. But 
decent living was also a must; and undoubtedly, 
despite the Agency's belief and the widespread 
claim that nuclear energy made a not insignificant 
contribution to decent living, the under-equipped 
countries were far from deriving the benefit which 
they had expected from the Agency's activities. 
110. Protection of the environment and the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons might be commendable 
objectives in themselves, but the primary 
responsibility for their achievement lay with other 
organizations within the United Nations system. 
That, of course, was no reason why the Agency 
should not play its part in the building of a better 
world; in undertaking to concern itself with 
problems of pollution and disarmament, however, 
the Agency ought to adopt a serious approach, 
bearing in mind at all times the claims of its 
primary objective. But that, alas, was not being 
done. 
111. Getting down to the figures and to an analysis 
of what the three supposedly top-priority programmes 
really amounted to, he pointed out that 
the objective of the safeguards programme was 
fully defensible: to prevent the use of nuclear 
energy for military purposes - under NPT, which, 
incidentally, his country had signed and ratified. 
For a programme of that kind to have any sense, 
however, it was essential that all the Members 
possessing nuclear weapons or the capacity to 
manufacture them should sign and ratify NPT and 
should conclude safeguards agreements with the 
Agency. In actual fact, some of the more important 
countries in the nuclear field were not parties 
to NPT, a situation which was no fault of the Agency 
but which substantially reduced the effectiveness 
of NPT. And what was even more serious, none 
of the major nuclear Powers that had signed NPT 
had placed nuclear installations with a weaponsproducing 
capacity under Agency safeguards. At 
present, the Agency was in an absurd situation: it 
was administering some 41 safeguards agreements 
concluded with countries of which two-thirds 
belonged to the third world and 17 had no nuclear 
programme worthy of the name. 

112. Those figures sufficed to show that the 
programme in question merely represented an 
attempt to pull the wool over everyone's eyes. 
That in itself would not be so disconcerting were 
it not for the fact that the programme was costing 
the tidy sum of $2 918 000 in the current budgetary 
year, an amount which it was proposed should be 
increased to $3 260 000 in 1974 - an increase of 
17. 9%. At present, the safeguards programme 
absorbed 12. 9% of the Agency's total budget, 
whereas five years ago it had not even been heard 
of. And the main use to which those funds were 
being put was to pay the salaries of officials whose 
total number would go up in 1974 to an extent unequalled 
by any other Agency programme. 
Apparently, their function, at a total cost of 
$2 260 500, would be to define safeguards policy, 
improve the safeguards system and implement 
safeguards agreements at 395 nuclear installations 
consisting mainly of research reactors. No 
uranium-enrichment plant was included in that 
total, but 17 countries with no nuclear programme 
whatsoever were parties to safeguards agreements. 

113. Protection of the environment was the second 
bandwagon on which the Agency had recently 
climbed. Zaire was keen to protect the environment 
within its own territory, and would therefore 
have welcomed an Agency environmental programme 
had it not been for the fact that, once 
again, the Agency's activities were being tailored 
to suit the ideas of certain Powers. The management 
and control of radioactive wastes originating 
in military installations were expressly excluded. 
It seemed that pollution was "peaceful" by definition. 
Again, it was the gesture that mattered most. The 
bothersome thing was that the gesture cost money 
and would grow more expensive year by year, for 
the Agency had to live and certain countries had to 
salve their consciences about the armaments race. 

114. Lastly, there was the technical assistance 
programme to meet what was the primary objective 
- 12 



GC(XVII)/OR. 162 


and responsibility of the Agency. The amount 
provided for that programme in the Regular Budget 
was $984 000, out of a total of $20 million. As a 
piece of face-saving and conscience-salving, 
Operating Fund II had been established, to provide 
additional funds through voluntary contributions. 
If all of the budget depended on voluntary contributions, 
there would be room for speculation as to 
the Agency's possible situation today. How would 
it secure staff if all knew that the monthly salary 

cheque depended on some good soul's charity or on 
the success of the collection organized by the 
Secretariat each year during the General Conference? 
The degree of trust placed by the Secretariat 
in the voluntary system was well illustrated 
by the fact that care had been taken to ensure that 
the salaries of the staff concerned with technical 
assistance were paid from the Regular Budget and 
not from a voluntary fund - which accounted for 
the inclusion of the aforementioned amount of 
$984 000 in the draft Regular Budget for 1974. 

115. The Agency's technical assistance programme 
was thus in a state of perpetual crisis. 
The Director General found himself forced once 
again to make an urgent appeal for charity from 
individual Members in order to save the programme, 
which was menaced by monetary erosion, 
inflation and the indifference of the richer Members. 
As his delegation had repeatedly stressed, the only 
sensible remedy for that state of affairs was to 
include technical assistance under the Regular 
Budget, on the same footing as the other Agency 
programmes. 
116. The above brief analysis of its policy showed 
that the Agency had been, was, and would probably 
continue to be a minority concern. The underequipped 
countries were mere pawns, found to be 
of use during the cold war period but passed over 
now that the share-out had been accomplished. 
Earlier, his country had sought to persuade fellow 
countries in Africa to join the Agency. Today, 
its illusions had gone, in the face of the policy now 
being pursued. It would be well for those African 
countries not to waste their time with the Agency. 
They would merely lose money, for even programmes 
that might be of some interest for them, 
such as research in radio-agronomy, were still 
being directed chiefly to the solution of problems 
which had no relevance for Africa. 
117. For all those reasons, his delegation, regrettably, 
found the proposed budget for 1974 wholly 
unacceptable. 
118. Mr. RATNAVALE (Sri Lanka) expressed his 
country's appreciation of the assistance it had 
received from the Agency in a wide range of 
activities. Sri Lanka was a small developing 
country with modest resources and was only at a 
preliminary stage in the application of nuclear 
technology, but promising beginnings had been 
made in medicine, agriculture and prospecting 
for nuclear raw materials. Further studies were 
being planned in hydrology and industry and in 

connection with research and power reactors. The 
latter activities were particularly necessary due 
to shortages of electric power caused by drought. 
Sri Lanka therefore looked forward to receiving 
Agency assistance in those fields. 

119. As a mainly agricultural country, Sri Lanka 
felt optimistic about the future, due in no small 
measure to its success in applying nuclear technology 
to plant breeding and the use of fertilizers, 
in particular coconut-tree fertilizers. The 
advantages of such research had been extended to 
other countries in South and South East Asia. The 
programme of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division was 
most encouraging and should be expanded, possibly 
with a larger financial contribution by FAO. 
120. Population growth demanded a concentration 
of effort on all technologies aimed at improving 
food production, conservation and storage. The 
solution of those fundamental problems called for 
the widest possible application of modern technology, 
including the nuclear sciences. 
121. Technical assistance to the developing world 
would ultimately become the Agency's most 
enduring achievement and should be accorded the 
highest priority. Sri Lanka looked forward to 
regular visits by Agency experts and to a much 
closer dialogue between its Atomic Energy Authority 
and the Agency's scientific advisers. 
122. He invited the Conference to consider holding 
a future session in Sri Lanka, which had recently 
completed construction of the Bandaranaike 
Memorial International Conference Hall at Colombo 
and could provide all the necessary facilities. 
It was fitting that Asia, the most highly populated 
continent, should again be the venue of an 
important gathering like the Agency's General 
Conference. 
123. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director 
General on his reappointment and wished him and 
his staff continued success in carrying out their 
difficult and delicate, yet rewarding, tasks. 
• The meeting rose at 6. 5 p. m. 
- 13 



GC(XVII)/OR.163 
8 April 1974* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 20 September 1973, at 10.40 a.m. 

President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

10 
General debate and report for 1972-73 1-8 1 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Netherlands 1 - 12 
Canada 13 - 23 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 24 - 33 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic 34 - 41 
Republic of Korea 42 - 50 
Arab Republic of Egypt 51 - 58 
India 59 - 70 
Bulgaria 71 - 81 

11 
Closing date of the session 82 - 84 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 1 October 1973. 
** GC(XVII)/512. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC (XVII)/OR. 163 


THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1972-73 
(GC(XVII)/500, 500/Corr.1, 510) (continued) 

1. Mr. BOT (Netherlands), commending the 
Secretariat for its studies on the uses and supply of 
nuclear energy, said it was none the less desirable 
that co-operation in that field should be intensified 
with the United Nations agencies and other organizations 
such as the Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development and the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) which were 
studying the world energy situation. As regards 
the possible energy shortage, for example, he 
stressed that the Agency should be enabled to play 
its due role within the United Nations family in 
collaboration with the other agencies concerned. 
2. As for the need to provide more uranium 
enrichment facilities[1], to which the Director 
General had referred, the trilateral co-operation 
between the Federal Republic of Germany, the 
United Kingdom and the Netherlands on centrifuge 
enrichment offered very encouraging prospects. 
3. In the field of the human environment, the 
Netherlands delegation felt that the budget estimates 
relating to nuclear safety and environmental protection 
bore witness to the importance the Agency 
attached to those problems, and fully approved 
them. It was happy to note that the Board had 
authorized the Director General to conclude 
arrangements with the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) for the execution of work 
relating to the impact of nuclear energy on the 
environment or to the use of nuclear techniques in 
environmental studies, and hoped that the Secretariat 
would be able to act with greater dynamism 
than the wording of paragraph 11 of the annual 
report (GC(XVII)/500) seemed to suggest. 
4. The Agency's technical assistance programme 
was assuming increasing importance, and he had 
pleasure in announcing that his Government had 
decided, subject to parliamentary approval, to 
make a voluntary contribution of $40 000 to the 
General Fund. 
5. Although the Netherlands delegation had noted 
with the greatest interest the market survey for 
nuclear power[2], he wondered whether its conclusions 
were fully justified, since experience showed 
that, contrary to what was stated in the survey, 
reactors with a capacity below 200 MW were very 
useful. 
6. The Netherlands Government had learned 
with satisfaction that since January 1973 the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS) had 
been providing full coverage of nuclear documentation. 
It attached great importance to that system 
and was supplying every year an increasing quantity 
of inputs; the number of items supplied would 
[1] GC(XVII)/OR. 160, para. 25. 
[2] For details, see document GC(XVII)/506. 
reach 4000 at the end of 1973 and probably 6000 in 
the following few years. 

7. In his statement, the Director General had 
referred to the need for increased safeguards 
efforts and expressed his intention of seeking the 
advice of outside experts on the organizational setup 
of the Agency. [3] The Netherlands delegation 
wished strongly to suggest that some of those 
experts should be recruited from non-nuclearweapon 
States which had concluded with the Agency 
agreements for the application of safeguards on 
their territory. 
8. One of the most important safeguards agreements 
had been signed in 1973 between the Agency 
and EURATOM, and he was pleased to announce 
that the agreement had been submitted to the 
Netherlands Parliament for ratification. 
9. His delegation had noted with pleasure that 
the Agency intended to continue its activities on the 
irradiation of food-stuffs, which was of great 
importance to developing countries. The 
Netherlands already possessed substantial experience 
in the application of nuclear techniques to 
agriculture, and if the Agency envisaged co-ordinating 
a project in food irradiation on a technological 
scale, it would in principle be prepared to 
act as host country. 
10. In his statement, the Director General had 
mentioned that the Agency should continue to avoid 
any breakdown into groups, regardless of whether 
they were inspired by region, ideology or stage of 
development. [4] In the opinion of the Netherlands 
delegation, however, groups of States could jointly 
solve problems relating to nuclear energy without 
damaging the legitimate interests of the Agency or 
other organizations. 
11. The Netherlands Government was aware of 
the obligations which the Member States would 
have to assume owing to the financial difficulties 
arising from currency fluctuations. It was therefore 
willing to accept some increase in the 
Agency's budget. It felt, however, that decisions v 
should be taken by common consent within the 
United Nations system in order to face a situation 
which had world-wide implications. 
12. On behalf of the Netherlands Government, he 
wished to congratulate the Director General on his 
reappointment. 
13. Mr. BEESLEY (Canada) shared the Director 
General's view that from time to time the organizations 
should submit themselves to self-scrutiny 
and consider whether certain changes were 
necessary[5]. In the case of the Agency he believed 
that such self-examination yielded a satisfactory 
picture. Taking account of world developments and 
the fact that it was becoming more and more 
[3] GC(XVII)/OR. 160, para. 54. 
[4] Ibid., para. 67. 
[5] Ibid. , para. 14 et seq. 
-2 



GC (XVII)/OR. 163 


apparent that the use of atomic energy presented 
the best solution to the problem of the world's 
increasing demand for electric power, the Canadian 
delegation believed that, as in the past, the 
Agency's main objectives should be to enable the 
entire world, and in particular the developing countries, 
to benefit from the potentialities of nuclear 
power, and to apply safeguards so as to ensure that 
atomic energy was used only for peaceful purposes. 
The Agency had been able to establish a satisfactory 
balance between those two aspects of its programme 
and should continue to do so. 

14. Increased safeguards responsibilities were 
incumbent upon the Agency as a result of the entry 
into force of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[6] and of the increase in 
the number of nuclear power stations in service. 
Canada welcomed the increased importance which 
the Agency attached to environmental protection 
and it hoped that co-operation could be established 
in that area between the Agency and UNEP. The 
Agency had also maintained its technical assistance 
activities and its programme for the promotion of 
nuclear science and technology. 
15. In many regions of the world, the question 
arose whether conventional fuel resources were 
adequate to meet the ever-growing demand for 
power, and the pollution caused by the use of those 
fuels was causing grave concern. The utilization 
of nuclear energy offered a solution to a great 
many problems arising in that area. That was why 
Canada, which already had a natural uranium/ 
deuterium heavy-water moderated reactor of the 
CANDU type and also had, in the Pickering 
Generating Station, the largest operational nuclear 
power station in the world, intended to develop its 
nuclear capacity considerably during the next 
decade, and at an appropriate time to construct 
installations for producing the heavy water needed 
to supply the reactors, so that each of them could 
be put into operation as soon as it was completed. 
The Pickering Station (2160 MW) was to be duplicated, 
as would the Bruce Station (3000 MW). That 
expansion, together with the construction of another 
3000-MW station, would account for a total new 
construction of over 8000 MW in the next decade. 
Canada was gratified that the CANDU power stations 
which had been constructed abroad - in India and 
Pakistan - were operating successfully. Atomic 
Energy of Canada, with its Italian associate 
Italimpianti, was to conclude a contract for the 
construction of a 600-MW CANDU nuclear power 
station in Argentina, and a number of other countries 
were interested in the nuclear power stations 
which Canada could furnish. The Canadian nuclear 
industry had therefore examined with great interest 
the nuclear power market survey which the Agency 
had carried out in developing countries. That 
survey gave an interesting example of the type of 
assistance the Agency could provide to developing 
countries, which were having to cater for the 
increasing energy demands of their populations 
and industries, and it was to be hoped that the 

[6] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
Agency would undertake other studies of a similar 
nature. 

16. In order to cope with the expected increase 
in nuclear power production, a further 1. 5 million 
tons of low-priced uranium would have to become 
available during the next 15 years. For its part, 
Canada had sufficient resources to be able to 
increase its production above the present level of 
about 5000 tons per year, but it was to be feared 
that the present price of uranium on the world 
market was not high enough to encourage mining 
companies to carry out the necessary prospecting 
and exploitation. The Canadian Government was 
encouraging industry to subject raw materials to 
as much processing as possible before exporting 
them. The firm Eldorado Nuclear Limited, which 
was expanding its processing plants, would have to 
increase the capacity of its uranium hexafluoride 
production facility, and various Canadian companies 
had recently considered the possibility of 
constructing uranium enrichment plants. 
17. Canada was continuing to give active support 
to the Agency's efforts in the traditional areas of 
nuclear science and technology, and in technical 
assistance. Canadian experts from various 
universities and Government bodies had participated 
in symposia and panels organized by the Agency 
during the past year, and Canada had provided the 
services of experts and facilities for training in 
connection with technical assistance projects. 
18. In regard to technical assistance, the 
Canadian Government particularly welcomed the 
co-operation between the Agency and the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP). At the 
multilateral level, UNDP was giving efficient aid to 
developing countries, but the Agency - thanks to the 
General Fund - was providing technical assistance 
of a kind which could not be obtained elsewhere. 
For that reason, the Canadian Government had 
made a contribution of $88 800 to the General Fund, 
corresponding to its assessed rate for 1973, and it 
proposed to do the same again in 1974, 
19. Canada was extremely interested in the 
Agency's work relating to nuclear safety and environmental 
protection and had made available to the 
Agency the results of research which it had performed 
on the environmental effects of nuclear 
power production. The Agency had an important 
part to play in the formulation of international 
standards and regulations in that field, and the 
Canadian Government was glad that, under the 
London Convention on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 
the Agency had been entrusted with the task of 
determining what radioactive wastes should not be 
dumped into the sea, and it approved the Agency's 
activities in the fight against marine pollution. 
20. In addition, Canada attached great importance 
to the Agency's safeguards role both in 
connection with NPT and within the framework of 
the safeguards system. The signing of a safeguards 
agreement with the non-nuclear-weapon 
States Members of EURATOM represented a great 
step forward and Canada hoped that it would be 
-3 



GC (XVII)/OR. 163 

quickly followed by ratification of the agreement 
and of NPT by those States and also by other 
States not parties to the Treaty. However, he 
shared the Director General's misgivings in view 
of the low proportion of States that had implemented 
NPT. 

21. The Canadian Government was happy to see 
the entry into force of the amended version of 
Article VI of the Statute, which would make it 
possible for the Conference to elect 18 Members to 
the Board at its current session. When the 
Conference came to consider the matter of amending 
its Rules of Procedure, the Canadian 
Government would support immediate introduction 
of the revised set of rules annexed to document 
GC(XVII)/503. 
22. With regard to the financial difficulties 
created by monetary fluctuations coupled with the 
general rise in prices, the Canadian Government 
well understood that there must be a request for 
further contributions in 1973 and supplementary 
appropriations for 1974, if certain essential projects 
were not to be abandoned. It considered the 
programme for 1974 and the succeeding years to be 
well conceived, and was willing to support a 
reasonable increase in the budget for 1974. 
23. On behalf of the Canadian delegation and the 
Canadian Government, he warmly congratulated 
Mr. Eklund on his reappointment. 
24. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said that he wished first of all to congratulate 
the Director General on his reappointment. 
Mr. Eklund's knowledge, energy and vast 
experience would continue favourably to influence 
the work of the Agency. 
25. The improvement in the political situation, 
which had gathered momentum during the past year, 
opened up new possibilities for solving the main 
international problems and strengthening collaboration 
between countries in all areas of science, 
technology and culture. There was no doubt that 
such collaboration had been greatly favoured by 
specific applications of the principle of peaceful 
co-existence, which had found expression in the 
agreements and treaties concluded by the Soviet 
Union, the United States of America, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, France and other States. 
26. The scientific and technical collaboration 
which continued to grow on an international level 
enhanced the role and responsibilities of international 
organizations, including the Agency. His 
delegation viewed with satisfaction the strengthening 
of the international authority of the Agency and 
the results of its efforts to put atomic energy at the 
service of mankind. It supported the Agency's 
overall programme, which had been drawn up with 
care and covered all the main aspects of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. It noted with 
satisfaction the very important task which the 
Agency had carried out in pursuance of Article III 
of NPT. Finally, the enlarged programme of the 
Division of Nuclear Safety and Environmental 
Protection, which now included a systematic study 
of the effects of nuclear industry on the environment 
and deeper investigations into questions 
affecting the radiological protection of populations, 

also deserved mention because of the need to find 

solutions in a world-wide context. 

27. His delegation was also very satisfied with 
the work done by INIS. It supported the programme 
concerned with nuclear power and reactors. 
However, in view of the proposal to eliminate that 
part of the scientific programme relating to heat 
and mass transfer in nuclear power engineering, it 
would be very desirable, in view of the importance 
of the subject, to expand the corresponding sector 
of UNESCO's programme. Byelorussia was in 
favour of the Agency's efforts to promote international 
collaboration and the exchange of theoretical 
and practical information on the radiosterilization 
of biomedical products. There should be 
no reduction in that activity in 1975, 
28. The Byelorussian delegation was happy to 
welcome the German Democratic Republic and the 
People's Republic of Mongolia to the Agency. It did 
not doubt that the new Members would make a useful 
contribution towards the fulfilment of the Agency's 
tasks and the enhancement of its international 
authority. 
29. The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
had an enormous industry, a diversified agriculture 
and a large number of scientific institutions and 
establishments of higher education in almost all 
branches of modern science. It had achieved 
valuable results in studies aimed at the creation of 
power stations using a new type of coolant, as well 
as in radiochemistry, solid-state physics and semiconductor 
research, nuclear spectroscopy and the 
use of radiation in biology and medicine. For 
details of that work, reference could be made to the 
brochure entitled "Atoms for Peace in Byelorussia" 
(1973), which had been distributed to all delegates. 
30. Byelorussia was continuing to carry out work 
under contracts concluded with the Agency to exchange 
information with other countries on nuclear 
power engineering, radiochemistry and the various 
applications of gamma radiation. The Institute of 
Nuclear Power Engineering of the Academy of 
Sciences of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic had concluded a contract with the Agency 
for research into the safeguarding of fissionable 
materials destined for critical assemblies. The 
Institute was also carrying out research, with the 
Agency's support, in biology and medicine; a 
contract to study the immune reactions of the body 
to the introduction of uranium had been concluded. 
Work on the evaluation of nuclear constants was 
also progressing, and the results obtained would 
be transmitted to the Agency's Nuclear Data 
Section to be made available to all Member States. 
Byelorussia had always been in favour of a free 
exchange of all data between all countries, without 
restriction. He wished to take the opportunity to 
thank the Agency for having published so quickly 
and with such care the records of the study group 
meeting on fast reactors, held in Minsk in 1972. 
-4 



GC (XVII)/OR. 163 


31. There was now every reason to believe that 
nuclear power, with the help of fast reactors, 
would be able to meet all future heat and power 
needs of most countries. Studies carried out in 
some countries on gas-cooled breeder reactors 
had shown that reactors of that type would make a 
substantial contribution towards improved and 
rationalized power production. In that connection, 
he supported the Director General's proposal that 
a meeting be held to discuss the development of 
power production in a world-wide context and, 
more particularly, in certain regions. Studies 
conducted over several years at the Institute of 
Nuclear Power Engineering of the Academy of 
Sciences of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic had shown that with dissociating nitrogen 
tetroxide as coolant it was possible to design a 
single-circuit power reactor with a liquefied gas 
cycle. Thanks to a particular combination of 
physical properties and to the chemical reactions 
taking place in the coolant, it was in fact possible 
substantially to reduce the cost and size of the 
heat-exchangers in the turbines and hence the cost 
of producing electricity and thermal energy. 
32. The construction of a nuclear power station 
using a new coolant required extensive programmes 
of study and experimentation. However, 
the interesting prospects and real possibilities 
offered seemed to justify the continuation and even 
the intensification of such work. Several States 
Members of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA) were at present studying the 
possibility of a joint programme for the construction 
of a demonstration gas-cooled breeder power 
station using a dissociating coolant, with a view to 
the subsequent construction of a plant of that type 
having a capacity of 1200 to 2000 MW(e). In that 
connection Byelorussia welcomed the efforts of 
CMEA to co-ordinate the activities of the socialist 
countries in the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy. 
33. In conclusion, the Byelorussian delegation 
was firmly convinced that the favourable development 
of the international situation, the growing 
authority and wide experience of the United Nations, 
the Agency, CMEA, and other organizations, and 
the interest of all nations and of scientists, would 
help to accelerate international co-operation and to 
unite the endeavours of all countries in solving the 
main problems of modern science and applying the 
results obtained for the good of mankind. 
34. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) joined with 
other delegations in congratulating the Director 
General on his appointment for another four-year 
term of office. He was also glad that two socialist 
States, the German Democratic Republic and the 
People's Republic of Mongolia, had been admitted 
to membership of the Agency. He was convinced 
that those States would make a valuable contribution 
to the Agency's activities, and it was to be 
noted that they had already signed safeguards 
agreements. 
35. Safeguards undoubtedly constituted one of the 
Agency's most important tasks, for through safeguards 
it could help to reduce international tension 
and strengthen peace. For that reason 
Czechoslovakia had always supported that activity 
and was collaborating with the Agency with a view 
to improving methods of control and making safeguards 
more effective. The manner in which the 
Agency applied safeguards in Czechoslovakia 
itself was, happily, most satisfactory. There was 
no doubt, however, that the efficiency of safeguards 
could be further improved, and the best way of 
doing that was to perfect national systems of 
nuclear materials accounting and control. With 
that aim in view the Czechoslovak authorities had 
themselves undertaken to control nuclear materials 
and carry out the necessary inspections, and the 
results of that work would be entirely at the 
disposal of the Agency's inspectors. It was to be 
hoped that as a result safeguards could be made 
more effective without the need for additional 
inspections; the latter would necessarily remain 
restricted in number owing to the Agency's limited 
financial and staff resources. Czechoslovakia was 
trying to improve its national system of accounting 
and control without asking the Agency to reduce the 
number of inspections. 

36. Specialized institutions in Czechoslovakia 
were already co-operating closely with the 
Secretariat's Division of Operations in studying 
and developing methods of control. The Institute 
of Nuclear Studies had arranged for samples of 
nuclear materials to be sent for analysis and was 
developing semi-conductor detectors for that 
purpose. The Institute, together with the Agency, 
was at present examining the possibility of 
getting the Institute of Nuclear Fuel and the A-1 
nuclear power station to participate in that work. 
He felt sure that by 1975, the year in which a 
world conference would be held to review NPT, 
most States Members of the United Nations would 
have signed the Treaty and concluded appropriate 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. 
37. In its collaboration with the Agency, 
Czechoslovakia was particularly interested in 
nuclear power. The Czechoslovak authorities were 
preparing to construct many nuclear power stations, 
for producing not only electric power but also 
industrial heat, and for that reason they valued the 
Agency's programme in that field and in environmental 
protection. The Agency should give careful 
attention to the multipurpose utilization of nuclear 
energy. Nuclear safety and environmental protection 
were matters of ever-increasing importance, 
Czechoslovakia welcomed the work the Agency was 
doing to study the effects of radiation sources in 
densely populated regions where the environment 
was already badly polluted by conventional 
industry. 
38. The various uses of radionuclides were also 
of great interest. In that area there were many 
ways in which the Agency could give technical 
assistance to the developing countries. 
39. With regard to international collaboration in 
the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, special 
mention should be made of the co-operation 
between States Members of CMEA. The twentyfourth 
session of CMEA's Standing Commission, 
- 5 



GC(XVII)/OR. 163 

devoted to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, had 
been held during the current year in Czechoslovakia 

and had again illustrated the sound achievements 
that could be made in different sectors. Regular 
meetings of the Committee for Scientific and 
Technical Co-ordination were very useful for 
dealing with problems that arose in the various 
branches of nuclear science and technology. Great 
progress had also been made with the socialist 
countries' integration programme, especially in 
the founding of a nuclear equipment company called 

"Interatominstrument", with headquarters in 
Warsaw. On the occasion of the seventeenth 
regular session of the General Conference, the 
Secretariat of CMEA had published an information 
pamphlet describing the collaboration which had 
been achieved since the last session. 

40. Finally, the Czechoslovak delegation wanted 
to revert to the important problem of the Agency's 
budget for 1974. It could not approve that budget 
in its entirety and could support only the appropriations 
for safeguards, INIS, and, in part, for 
environmental protection, namely for the Agency's 
most useful activities. The budget should not be 
affected by the inflation that was raging in some 
capitalist countries and by the instability of the 
dollar. 
41. He took pleasure in announcing that in 1974 
the Czechoslovak Government would make a 
contribution of 200 000 crowns to the General Fund 
and that it would act as host to a study tour and a 
training group; it also extended a provisional invitation 
to the Agency to hold a symposium in 
Czechoslovakia in 1975. Finally his country would 
be offering to developing States Members of the 
Agency five long-term fellowships in higher 
educational establishments and four one-year 
fellowships in research institutes of the 
Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences or other research 
institutes in Czechoslovakia. 
42. Mr. HAN (Republic of Korea) said that over 
the past 14 years the Republic of Korea, with the 
Office of Atomic Energy playing a major role, had 
striven very hard to bring advanced nuclear 
technology to Korea. In carrying out that task, 
Korea had received valuable assistance from the 
Agency and active co-operation from its Member 
States. As a result, significant advances had been 
made in basic and applied research. Several 
hundred scientists had been trained and many of 
them had become involved in the establishment 
and operation of the Korean Institute of Science 
and Technology. A nuclear power plant with a 
capacity of 600 MW was currently under construction; 
it would be completed by the end of 1975 and 
would go into commercial operation in October 1976 
following performance tests. A programme to 
develop nuclear fuel manufacturing technology 
would be commenced in 1974 to coincide with the 
beginning of construction on the second and third 
nuclear power plants. 
43. In nuclear medicine, the Cancer Hospital of 
the Korean Atomic Energy Institute was providing 
diagnostic and therapeutic services as well as 
carrying out research on malignant tumours. The 
number of patients treated to date was 800 000. 

44. To cope with the world-wide energy crisis 
and to establish a long-range energy supply programme, 
Korea had decided to build a second and 
third nuclear power plant. In addition, it planned 
to carry out research programmes on new energy 
resources such as geothermal, solar and tidal 
energy and would be taking active steps to protect 
the environment from the pollution caused by heavy 
industries. 
45. Korea was undertaking a project with UNDP 
and Agency assistance to erect a large radiation 
processing demonstration plant which would be 
completed by 1976. It would contribute to the production 
of products such as wood-plastic composites, 
plywood, textiles, plastics and medical 
supplies, all of which were important export products 
for Korea. 
46. In February 1973 Korea had reorganized its 
atomic energy activities and replaced the Office of 
Atomic Energy by the Atomic Energy Bureau, a 
separate entity within the Ministry of Science and 
Technology. The three research institutes formerly 
under the Office of Atomic Energy had been 
reorganized into the Korea Atomic Energy 
Research Institute, a Government-chartered 
private institution. 
47. The Atomic Energy Bureau was responsible 
for all atomic energy policies, planning, international 
co-operation, radiation safety and the 
setting up and application of safety standards for 
nuclear reactors and nuclear materials. 
48. The Korea Atomic Energy Research 
Institute would carry out all research and development 
activities related to overall energy requirements 
and environmental control, nuclear power 
generation, fuel technology, medicine and life sciences. 
49. The Government of the Republic of Korea 
hoped that the Agency's technical assistance programmes 
for Korea would be directed towards the 
areas he had highlighted. 
50. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director 
General on his reappointment and wished continuing 
success to the Agency and all delegations. 
51. Mr. GOHAR (Egypt) said that the coming 
decade would see great developments in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy; the Agency 
should therefore consider carefully into which 
fields it would direct its efforts and resources. ' 
The Egyptian delegation shared the concern of 
those who felt that the Agency's regulatory activities 
were being expanded too much at the expense 
of its promotional activities and who had stressed 
the importance of work on the use of nuclear 
explosives for peaceful purposes, the generation 
of electricity, the production of fresh water and 
large-scale prospecting for nuclear raw materials. 
52. Economic advantages were expected to be 
derived from the use of nuclear explosives in the 
-6 



GC (XVII)/OR. 163 


mining and petroleum industries and in civil 
engineering. The Soviet Union and the United 
States had already obtained useful results in those 
fields. The right of non-nuclear-weapon States to 
obtain benefits from such applications was emphasized 
in Article V of NPT and that promise had 
induced many developing countries to ratify the 
Treaty. In that connection the Egyptian delegation 
regretted that an instrument as important for 
peace as NPT had not attracted more accessions; 
that it had not was due to the tensions which existed 
in certain areas of the world, and efforts should be 
made to eliminate those tensions. The Agency 
should not limit itself to implementing the provisions 
of NPT relating to safeguards but should also 
concern itself with the tasks envisaged under 
Article V. 

53. Egypt was extremely interested in the prospects 
offered by peaceful nuclear explosions in 
view of the important part they could play in exploiting 
energy resources. His Government was studying 
the possibility of using nuclear explosions to 
cut a 70-km canal through the desert from the 
Mediterranean to the Quattara depression - a project 
linked with the construction of a 4000-MW 
hydroelectric power station. Preliminary estimates 
indicated that it would be much more economic 
to use nuclear explosives than conventional 
excavating techniques. The Agency's work in that 
field in recent years had been confined to holding 
meetings and the time had now come to undertake 
feasibility studies in various regions of the world. 
54. Turning to the question of nuclear power, the 
Egyptian delegation noted with satisfaction the 
completion of the market survey carried out in 14 
developing countries. The survey showed that 
nuclear power stations were becoming economically 
competitive with conventional thermal plants 
and that during the period 1980-1990 nuclear 
plants with a capacity of about 62 000 MW would be 
required to meet energy requirements. The total 
capital investment needed for the construction of 
those plants was estimated at $20 000 million. 
The financing of those projects presented a serious 
problem, to which the Agency and international 
financing organizations should endeavour to find a 
satisfactory solution. In that connection it was 
appropriate to recall that the General Assembly of 
the United Nations had adopted a resolution inviting 
the Agency, the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD) and UNDP to continue 
the study of the problem of financing nuclear activities 
in developing countries. [7] Egypt proposed 
that consideration be given to establishing a special 
international fund for peaceful nuclear projects. 
Finance would be made available for projects on 
the basis of economic and technical feasibility 
studies. 
55. The desalting of sea-water could well become 
an important application of nuclear energy. Since 
that might make it possible to cultivate large semiarid 
and arid areas, efforts should be directed 
towards research on the use of desalted water in 
[7] Resolution A/2456 (XXIII). 
agriculture and schemes should be considered for 
linking the production of water and electricity in 
large dual-purpose nuclear plants. To that end, 
serious consideration should be given to establishing 
one or more international pilot plants, in which 
the necessary research and development work 
could be carried out. Egypt would also like to see 
the market survey extended to cover the nuclear 
power requirements for producing water in optimized 
nuclear dual-purpose plants. 

56. Large amounts of uranium and other nuclear 
raw materials would be required for the operation 
of those nuclear plants, not to mention those which 
were under construction or planned in countries 
not covered by the market survey. The demand 
for uranium would increase rapidly during the 
next decade, so an extensive programme would 
have to be organized to find and exploit nuclear 
raw materials. The development of nuclear energy 
depended on such action and the Agency should 
address itself to that problem because many countries 
lacked the necessary experience and finance 
to undertake large-scale prospecting work. In that 
connection, the special international fund already 
referred to would enable the Agency to develop a 
suitable programme, 
57. The Egyptian delegation had noted with 
satisfaction the Director General's statement that 
the Agency would be placing emphasis on new 
fields of activity and dropping those which had 
become mere routine or were now outdated. [8] 
His Government felt that technical assistance was 
an important element of the programme but was 
not receiving the attention it deserved. Safeguards 
and INIS continued to absorb more and more of the 
budget while other activities were expanding at a 
very slow rate. It was surprising that no contingency 
appropriation had been requested to cover 
the deficit in technical assistance funds caused by 
currency fluctuations. The target for voluntary 
contributions should be raised and steps should be 
taken to finance technical assistance from the 
Regular Budget. Egypt, for its part, had decided 
to make the same contribution to the General Fund 
as in the previous year - a fraction of the target 
much larger than its share of the assessed budget. 
58. He congratulated Mr. Eklund on his 
reappointment to the post of Director General of 
the Agency. The Agency's achievements since 
Mr. Eklund had taken the helm stood as a good 
augury for the future. He likewise welcomed the 
admission of the German Democratic Republic and 
the Mongolian People's Republic to the Agency. 
59. Mr. JAIPAL (India) congratulated the 
Director General on his reappointment and said 
that India welcomed the admission to the Agency 
of the German Democratic Republic and the 
Mongolian People's Republic. 
60. The experience of the preceding two years 
and especially the natural catastrophes which had 
befallen India showed that non-nuclear sources 
[8] GC(XVII)/OR. 160, para. 19. 
-7 



GC (XVII)/OR. 163 

were totally inadequate for the power requirements 
of a developing economy. The reactors already in 
service at Tarapur and in Rajasthan, and also 
those which were under construction in Madras or 
being planned for the Delhi area, underlined India's 
increasing reliance on nuclear energy to satisfy 
its needs. India had recently been reviewing its 
nuclear programme for the next ten years in the 
context of its available fuel resources and the 
capacity of its industry. It was most likely to 
continue to build 220-MW(e) reactors, since it was 
familiar with them, but it also intended to acquire 
the necessary experience for constructing 500-MW 
facilities. It also wished to keep in touch with the 
more advanced reactors, especially breeders 
fuelled with thorium. In collaboration with France, 
India was building a fast breeder test reactor near 
Madras and establishing a reactor research centre, 
the programme of which included studies relating 
to fast reactors. 

61. The use of isotopes in industry and medicine 
had made considerable progress, and in that connection 
special mention should be made of a project 
known as the ISOMED project involving radiation 
sterilization of medical products, a UNDP 
project which was to move into the industrial phase 
by the end of the year and had been enthusiastically 
welcomed by the pharmaceutical industry. India 
intended to locate several such sterilization units 
in the country, and would be most happy to share 
its experience with other countries of the region. 
62. Work on radiation preservation of food-stuffs 
had been in progress for several years, and it 
appeared that irradiated wheat, potatoes and onions 
could be safely released for human consumption. 
The results obtained in the preservation of fish 
were very promising, but further experiments 
were needed to show whether irradiated products 
had any adverse effect on the health of people 
suffering from malnutrition. 
63. India had been closely associated with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in its region. 
Several countries in South and South East Asia had 
agreed to share their experience and facilities so 
that the benefits of their activities could be brought 
home to the people of the region as quickly as 
possible. The Indian delegation wished to urge the 
Agency to lend its support to those activities and 
give liberal assistance to joint projects under which 
the best possible use could be made of the experts' 
services available in the region. It would perhaps 
be useful to establish within the Agency a separate 
unit which could handle regional projects and see 
to it that the resources of a region were pooled in 
the most effective manner. 

64. In that connection, he mentioned that the 
variable energy cyclotron under construction in 
Calcutta based on the 88-inch Berkeley cyclotron' 
would be used for the benefit of the universities 
and other Indian institutions; India would, however, 
be happy to make it available to the countries of the 
region, especially for the production and use of 
neutron-deficient isotopes, for the study of 
radiation damage, radiobiological processes and so 
on. 
65. Referring to the main problems faced by the 
Agency, he recalled that the financial situation of 
the Agency was bad, that arrears of contributions 
amounted to some $ 3 million and that there seemed 
to be no way of collecting them. A matter of even 
greater concern was that the 1973 and 1974 budgets 
had had to be revised to allow for currency fluctuations, 
the total shortfall for those two years being 
of the order of $ 5. 85 million. It had been proposed 
that the deficit should be covered by a supplementary 
assessment on all Member States. However, 
India, like other developing countries, considered 
itself in no way responsible for the present financial 
crisis, of which it was but a helpless victim. 
It would be too much to ask the developing countries 
to pay a part of the costs resulting from the 
currency crisis. A question of principle, namely 
that there should be "no taxation without representation", 
was at issue. 

66. Since certain advanced countries had actually 
benefited from the crisis and had united their 
efforts to strengthen their currencies, one might 
hope that the same spirit would induce them to protect 
the Agency from fluctuations of their currencies, 
either by voluntarily increasing their contributions, 
or by establishing a special stabilization 
fund to tide over the present crisis. The Indian 
delegation would support the budget and that amounted 
to a vote of confidence in the Agency. However, 
its support should not be interpreted as willingness 
to accept responsibility for the deficit or liability 
for meeting it. 
67. Another matter of intense concern to developing 
countries was that the technical assistance programme 
financed from voluntary contributions had 
remained frozen since 1971. Inflation and currency 
realignments had sharply reduced the value of the 
frozen figure in real terms, and it was the developing 
countries that suffered. According to the 
annual report, only 53 countries had received 
technical assistance and 34 requests had been 
turned down for lack of funds. Not only did no 
action seem to have been taken to implement the 
recommendation which the General Conference had 
made at its tenth session about finding ways and 
means of increasing the assistance to developing 
countries[9], but the resources available to the 
Agency for technical assistance were actually 
declining and the Director General had felt 
obliged to make an appeal for more contributions. 
In response to that appeal the Indian Government 
had decided to increase its contribution by 10% to 
$50 000 in 1974. 
68. While the immediate aim was to set the 
target for 1974 at a level higher than $3 million, 
in the longer term it would be wise to consider the 
desirability of placing the technical assistance programme 
under the Agency's Regular Budget, which 
would in fact amount to converting a voluntary act 
into a legal obligation. Obviously that would not be 
necessary if adequate voluntary contributions were 
made every year; but, if the Agency had to rely on 
dwindling voluntary contributions, its technical 
[9] See document GC(X)/RES/217, para. 1. 
-8 



GC(XVII)/OR. 163 


assistance programme would go on declining, and 
there was every danger that the developing countries 
might lose interest in the Agency's other 
activities. 

69. Lastly, the Agency's safeguards activities, 
which had originally been envisaged as a corollary 
to the provision of technical assistance, had lately 
grown out of proportion to that assistance. Considering 
that 90% of future additional capacity 
would be installed in the advanced countries and 
that safeguards expenditure would reach unprecedented 
levels, the developing countries would be 
bound to re-examine the extent of their liability 
to meet such expenditure on an ever-increasing 
scale. 

70. Twenty years after the famous "atoms for 
peace" speech of President Eisenhower, and 17 
years after the adoption of the Agency's Statute, 
thought ought to be given to the future evolution of 
the Agency, its priorities and, in particular, its 
relevance to the vast majority of its Members. 
The annual report referred to the need to find new 
reserves of nuclear fuel to meet the increasing 
demands; it was to be hoped that nuclear disarmament 
would release nuclear fuel which could be 
used for peaceful purposes and that the Agency 
would then function as a bank for the fuel thus 
released, as had originally been envisaged by its 
founders. 
71. Mr. VASSILEV (Bulgaria) welcomed the 
delegates of the German Democratic Republic and 
the Mongolian People's Republic, who, he said, 
were at last occupying their rightful place in the 
Agency. He was convinced that the new Members 
would greatly assist the Agency in carrying out its 
tasks. 
72. The current session was proceeding in an 
atmosphere of general detente, thanks to the 
peaceful policy of the Soviet Union, which favoured 
mutual understanding between all countries, whatever 
their political system. In that connection, 
particular importance was to be attributed to the 
signing by the Soviet Union and the United States 
of an agreement on the prevention of nuclear war, 
and to the organization of a conference on 
European security and co-operation. All those 
events would not fail to have a favourable influence 
on the Agency's development, for they would contribute 
much towards eliminating the risk of 
nuclear war and creating a system of international 
security, 
73. With respect to the Board's report for the 
past year, the Bulgarian delegation noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency had tried first and 
foremost to provide developing countries with the 
best means of using nuclear energy for the realization 
of their peaceful objectives and to promote 
the use of the atom for the benefit of mankind. In 
order to fulfil its obligations under NPT, the 
Agency had signed not only bilateral agreements 
with various countries but also an agreement with 
the non-nuclear-weapon States Members of 
EURATOM. However, the Bulgarian delegation 
shared the opinion expressed by other delegations: 
it was not enough to sign agreements, it was also 
necessary to implement them. The Agency should 
therefore extend its activities in that context, and 
Bulgaria had no objection to an increase in the 
appropriations needed to finance them. 

74. Nevertheless, Bulgaria could not conceal its 
disquiet at the large increase in the budget for 
1974. True, the increase was largely due to 
external factors, but the Agency would do well to 
consider how it might reduce administrative 
expenditure. The Bulgarian delegation saw no 
objection to denominating the budget in Austrian 
schillings. 
75. One of the main tasks of the Agency was to 
grant technical assistance to developing countries 
so that they could make broader use of nuclear 
energy, particularly for the generation of electricity. 
As everyone knew, technical assistance was 
provided under a uniform procedure laid down by 
the United Nations, one of the main elements of 
which was the principle of voluntary contributions. 
Bulgaria was unable to accept the suggestion made 
by certain delegations that technical assistance 
should be financed from the Regular Budget. Like 
other countries, it regularly made contributions 
in national currency, whereas the contributions to 
the Regular Budget were expressed in United 
States dollars. An increase in payments required 
in international currency could not but give rise to 
difficulties for those countries. In that connection, 
a study should be made to determine how the funds 
in national currencies that were accumulating in 
certain countries were being used; the Agency 
should try to make full use of them. 
76. The data published on technical assistance 
indicated that in the past few years it had been 
directed mainly towards the application of isotopes 
and radiation in agriculture. Indeed, almost a 
third of the available funds had been used for that 
purpose, a fact which could be explained by the 
natural desire of many countries to improve their 
food crops. Thanks to the Agency, many countries 
were now applying new methods in agriculture and 
animal husbandry. It should be noted that 
Bulgaria was also receiving considerable benefit 
from collaboration within the framework of CMEA 
in all sectors of the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
Thus, for example, as a part of its general programme, 
CMEA had set up the previous year a 
joint enterprise called "interatominstrument", an 
international team for reactor studies and several 
committees for technical and scientific co-ordination 
which would contribute towards the solution of 
certain problems posed by the future development 
of nuclear science and technology. 
77. In Bulgaria, radioisotopes and radiation were 
continuing to find increased application in the various 
sectors of science and the national economy. 
Whereas formerly they had been employed primarily 
in research, for the last seven or eight years 
they had been used to an increasing extent in medicine, 
geophysics and geochemistry, for defect 
detection and for the automation and control of 
production in various branches of industry and agriculture. 
The IRT-2000 research reactor was used 
- 9 



GC (XVII)/OR. 163 

to produce various short-lived radioisotopes, 
which were mainly used for medical diagnosis and 
treatment, but also fulfilled certain needs in industry 
and agriculture. 

78. In geophysics and geochemistry, nuclear 
methods were being used to solve geological problems 
related to prospecting for deposits of coal, 
ferrous and non-ferrous metals, oil and natural 
gas, and for determining the absolute age of geographical 
formations. In large factories and 
assembly plants, gamma radiography allowed the 
detection of defects at very low cost. A specialized 
enterprise known as "Nuclear Technique" had 
been created, which was not only engaged in 
developing prototype nuclear equipment, but was 
also capable of constructing instruments already 
approved and of installing and maintaining them. 
In agriculture, varieties of peas and beans with an 
increased protein content had been developed. 
During the past three years experiments had been 
carried out on the irradiation of seeds and had 
yielded results which seemed promising for certain 
crops. 
79. Mention should also be made of the use of 
nuclear energy for power production. The construction 
of Bulgaria's first nuclear power station 
at Koglodui was proceeding according to plan. At 
the same time, plans were being studied for installing 
other power stations of the same type so that 
Bulgaria could have a total installed capacity of 
more than 2000 MW by 1980. Such activities 
clearly required the training of staff capable of 
exploiting the new sources of energy in safe conditions. 
Apart from the specialized courses organized 
for technicians currently employed at the construction 
sites, who would later have the task of 
running the power stations, new disciplines had 
been introduced in the curricula of higher and 
secondary education. In that connection, the 
Bulgarian delegation wished to thank the Agency 
for its efforts in training experts for nuclear power 
station operation. 

80. Parallel to the construction programme, 
studies were being carried out under the radiological 
protection programme on the intensity of 
natural radiation, and the evolution of radioactivity 
levels in the health protection zone was being 
monitored. The radioactivity of the Danube near 
Koglodui, Vidin and Ruse was also being monitored, 
as were the levels in the main food-stuffs, forage 
crops and soil of the same region. 
81. The Bulgarian delegation wished to express 
its deep satisfaction at the reappointment of the 
Director General for a new term of four years. It 
highly appreciated his vast experience as an 
administrator and a man of science, qualities from 
which the Agency could not but benefit. It wished 
to assure him that Bulgaria would not cease to 
support the efforts that the Agency was making to 
promote the use of atomic energy for the benefit of 
mankind. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

82. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to 
fix the closing date of the session, on the recommendation 
of the General Committee. 
83. The General Committee had considered the 
matter and had authorized him to recommend on its 
behalf that 24 September 1973 be fixed as the closing 
date. 
• 84. The Committee's recommendation was 
accepted, 
• The meeting rose at 12. 50 p. m. 
- 10 



GC(XVII)/OR.164 

International Atomic Energy Agency 10 April 1974* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 21 September 1973, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject aphs 

Pagrag 


10 General debate and report for 1972-73 1 -• 105 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Holy See 1 -• 11 

Romania 12 -• 22 

Bangladesh 23 -• 34 

Australia 35 -46 

Ireland 47 -• 56 

Thailand 57 -• 61 

Spain 62 -• 71 

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 72 -83 

Ghana 84 -93 

Turkey 94 - 105 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 September 1973. 
** GC(XVII)/512. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC (XVII)/OR. 164 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1972-73 
(GC(XVII)/500, 500/Corr.1, 510) (continued) 

1. Mr. ABS (Holy See) said that the Holy See, as 
a founding Member, had from the beginning followed 
the affairs of the Agency with interest and offered 
encouragement, for it believed that the Agency's 
principal objective, that of seeking "to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world", 
could profoundly influence the development of 
nations and the quality of life of future generations. 
"Development" had come to mean peace, as had 
been affirmed by His Holiness Pope Paul VI in his 
Encyclical Letter Populorum Progressio, and the 
Church regarded it as a duty always to support 
those who strove to improve the lot of all peoples, 
and particularly of those less fortunate and less 
well endowed economically. 
2. However, to ensure ordered development it 
was necessary not only to give economic and 
technical aid but also to imbue the conscience of 
men with the principles of social justice - justice 
in the relationships between individuals and in 
those between nations - so that it would be felt on 
the international plane, too, as an irresistible 
force. To that active search for justice the Church 
could contribute through its doctrinal teachings and 
through the educational work of Catholic institutions. 
And it was above all to promote that highest goal 
that the Holy Sea was present and active in the 
Agency and the other international organizations. 
3. The Permanent Mission of the Holy See had 
been particularly happy to join in celebrating the 
World Day of Peace, on 18 January 1973, in the 
Agency's Board Room, thus signifying palpably 
the common accord of the Church and of the 
international organizations with regard to the two 
great concerns of the times: development and peace. 
The World Day of Peace was, according to the 
message uttered by its founder, Pope Paul VI, on 
8 December 1367, designed "to educate new generations 
to reciprocal respect between nations, to 
brotherhood between peoples and to collaboration 
between races, with a view also to their progress 
and development". 
4. On 14 February 1973 the Holy See had deposited 
an instrument of acceptance of the amendment 
to Article VI of the Agency's Statute with the 
Government of the United States of America in 
Washington. Given its religious and spiritual 
nature, which shunned questions of a political 
character, the Holy See had decided to take that 
action solely because it believed that the entry into 
force of that amendment would allow the wider 
participation in the Board which many developing 
countries had long sought. 
5. His delegation wished to express its satisfaction 
at the ample technical assistance provided by 
the Agency in 1972, as outlined in document 
GC(XVII)/INF/142, in most important areas of 
development. It was to be hoped that the Agency, 
in responding to requests for technical assistance, 

would continue to give priority to those coming 

from countries which were listed by the United 

Nations as being most in need of assistance. The 

more favoured peoples had a special duty to pro


vide those countries with the means of achieving 

their own advancement; indeed, that was an impor


tant factor for the peace of the whole world. To 

support that noble goal, were it only symbolically, 

the Holy See was offering again, for 1974, a 

voluntary contribution to the fund which the Agency 

used for financing the provision of technical assistance. 

6. The Agency's environment programme, 
expanded pursuant to a decision of the Board in 
March 1972 and the recommendations of the 
United Nations Conference on the Human 
Environment (the Stockholm Conference) merited 
whole-hearted support; that much was evident from 
the annual report for 1972-73 now before the 
Conference. But, though the progress of international 
co-operation in that vital sector gave 
reason for satisfaction, legitimate fear was being 
created by the fact that new nuclear arms tests 
were being carried out also in the atmosphere. 
7. "The production of arms", Pope John XXIII 
had written in his Encyclical Letter Pacem in 
Terris, "is allegedly justified on the grounds that 
in present-day conditions peace cannot be preserved 
without an equal balance of armaments. And so, if 
one country increases its armaments, others feel 
the need to do the same; and if one country is equipped 
with nuclear weapons, other countries must 
produce their own, equally destructive. 
8. "Consequently, people live in constant fear 
lest the storm that every moment threatens should 
break upon them with dreadful violence. And with 
good reason, for the arms of war are ready at hand. 
Even though it is difficult to believe that anyone 
would deliberately take the responsibility for the 
appalling destruction and sorrow that war would 
bring in its train, it cannot be denied that the conflagration 
may be set off by some uncontrollable 
and unexpected chance. And one must bear in mind 
that, even though the monstrous power of modern 
weapons acts as a deterrent, it is to be feared that 
the mere continuance of nuclear tests, undertaken 
with war in mind, will have fatal consequences for 
life on earth. 
9. "Justice, then, right reason and humanity 
urgently demand that the arms race should cease; 
that the stockpiles which exist in various countries 
should be reduced equally and simultaneously by 
the parties concerned; that nuclear weapons should 
be banned . . .. " 
10. It was a pleasant duty to extend congratulations 
to Mr. Eklund on his reappointment as 
Director General of the Agency. On the eve of his 
fourth consecutive mandate, the delegation of the 
Holy See wished to convey to him its cordial wishes 
for a successful and happy outcome of his important 
mission. 
11. Social progress, if it was to be achieved in 
justice and harmony, demanded a special dedica-
2 



GC (XVII)/OR. 164 


tion on the part of all men of goodwill, for "the 
increasingly close relations between peoples impose 
the obligation of uniting the efforts of all in order to 
ensure the peace and stability of the world community", 
as His Holiness Pope Paul VI had stated 
not long ago. To strengthen the bonds of universal 
brotherhood and to ensure peace and the benefits of 
closer collaboration in science, technology and culture 
for all peoples was the Holy See's most 

earnest wish; nor would it limit itself to words in 
pursuing those aims. The Holy See offered the 

international organizations taking part in the 

common task its most willing collaboration and 
hoped that the General Conference, at its seventeenth 
session, would also make a valuable contribution 
towards the realization of those noble goals. 

12. Mr. URSU (Romania), after congratulating 
Mr. Eklund on his appointment for a fourth term as 
Director General, said that during the period that 
had elapsed since the last session of the Conference 
the international situation had been characterized by 
an amplification of contacts, exchanges of opinion 
and negotiations among States, by a normalization 
of relations among States and by the conclusion of 
important agreements for collaboration in various 
fields. A political event of historic importance was 
the Conference on Security and Co-operation in 
Europe, the second phase of which had opened in 
Geneva, by a happy coincidence, on the same day 
as the current session of the Agency's General 
Conference. 
13. Romania had always strongly supported the 
principle of universality in the Agency, and he 
therefore wished to express his delegation's satisfaction 
at the admission of the German Democratic 
Republic and the Mongolian People's Republic. 
That development would give new impetus to the 
efforts of Member States to bring about the participation 
of the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and 
all other interested States in the Agency's activities. 
14. One of the most important problems for the 
future was to free humanity from the fear of armaments, 
and particularly from the nightmare of a 
nuclear war. The Romanian delegation considered 
that the Agency, as an institution specialized in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, could and should 
make a contribution to international efforts to halt 
the arms race with a view to reaching the final 
goal of general disarmament. 
15. For Romania, as a socialist developing 
country, nuclear energy was a means of making 
rapid progress in acquiring and applying advanced 
techniques to raise its economic potential and 
living standards. The basic directions for developing 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy in the 
Romanian economy and in the social sector were 
laid down in the national nuclear programme, the 
provisions of which were being successfully implemented. 
An important part of the programme was 
scientific research directly applicable to industry, 
agriculture, medicine and other fields. In order to 
extend activities in connection with physics and 
nuclear physics, the development of basic and 
applied research had also been taken into account. 
The provision of Romanian institutes with new 
equipment and installations, such as a Van de 
Graaff accelerator and a medium-sized computer, 
had made it possible to raise the level of research 
in such fields as nuclear structure, nuclear reactions 
and theoretical physics. Plasma physics, 
semiconductor and laser research and the study of 
materials by different methods (nuclear magnetic 
resonance, electron paramagnetic resonance etc. ) 
were being pursued with good results; many of the 
results had been presented at international scientific 
conferences, including those organized by the 
Agency. Special measures had been taken to relate 
the results to design and production problems; for 
example, the structure of some laboratories and 
centres had been modified with a view to solving 
certain problems connected with the needs of the 
national economy, 

16. One of the main aims of the national nuclear 
programme was the development of technological 
research relating to nuclear fuel, nuclear reactor 
components and other aspects of nuclear energy. 
Other activities which had been planned were the 
manufacture of nuclear instruments, the construction 
of nuclear facilities and the production of 
stable and radioactive isotopes. It was hoped in 
that way to cover, as far as possible, the requirements 
of domestic users and to create possibilities 
for export. The application of nuclear techniques 
in industry had experienced a rapid and extensive 
development, particularly in such branches as oil 
production, mining, metallurgy, chemistry and 
machine building. In agriculture the results of 
research based on nuclear techniques had been put 
to use, special attention being paid to soil fertilizers, 
plant physiology, plant and animal protection 
and breeding, and the prevention of water 
pollution. 
17. Romania was promoting and developing extensive 
and mutually advantageous international cooperation 
in relation to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, both on a bilateral basis and through the 
international organizations. Its co-operation in 
nuclear matters with socialist and other countries 
had been continuously enlarged and intensified in 
the past year, and new agreements and other instruments 
had been concluded. Annual co-operation 
programmes on specific problems of mutual 
interest were being carried out jointly with 
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, the 
Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. Common research 
activities in different fields and exchanges of specialists, 
materials and information had taken place 
with those countries on the basis of agreements 
concluded directly between research institutes and 
laboratories. Co-operation agreements had also 
been concluded with the national commissions of 
Argentina, the Federal Republic of Germany, India, 
the Netherlands, Pakistan and Sweden; together 
with existing agreements, they had made it possible 
to solve jointly certain research and development 
problems of common interest. 
18. Romania paid special attention to the development 
of the Agency's activities and to the extension 
of its own co-operation with the Agency. It believed 
-3 



GC (XVII)/OR. 164 

that the increased emphasis on nuclear technologyin the Agency's work was a significant and indispensable 
factor in the efforts of the developingcountries to introduce commercial nuclear power.

19. The contribution made by the Agency to the 
process of development was necessarily a multilateral 
one and should be as substantial as 
possible. He was thinking of the support it could 
give in introducing nuclear power, elaborating 
health and safety regulations (including those for 
protection of the environment), extending the 
applications of radiation and radioisotopes (especially 
in agriculture, industry, medicine, biology 
and hydrology) and providing nuclear information 
through the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS). He wished to express his delegation's 
satisfaction with the positive results obtained 
by the Agency in those vital fields. 
20. The serious financial difficulties confronting 
the Agency were a reason for justified concern on 
the part of Member States. Regardless of the 
causes of that situation, Members were being 
presented with an unprecedented budgetary increase 
and a reduction of some major activities of benefit 
to the developing countries. The Romanian delegation 
was unable to support the proposed figures for 
the 1974 budget. At the same time, it shared the 
concern expressed by other delegations from the 
developing countries regarding the decline of 
technical assistance. It was essential to maintain 
an adequate balance between the basic functions of 
the Agency. Recognizing the particular role and 
importance of technical co-operation and assistance, 
Romania took an active part in that aspect of the 
Agency's work and would therefore, as in the past, 
contribute in 1974 to the General Fund and also 
grant ten fellowships of ten months each for training 
at its nuclear centres. 
21. Romania believed that the Agency should be 
active in promoting and implementing international 
co-operation aimed at ensuring that more States, 
particularly the developing ones, benefited from 
the achievements of nuclear science and technology. 
It had therefore been advocating the elaboration and 
adoption of an international legal instrument laying 
down principles which would govern international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Such an instrument should be based on the premise 
that all States could freely participate in the development 
of peaceful applications of nuclear energy 
and benefit from its advantages, under conditions 
of equality, national independence and sovereignty, 
non-interference in internal affairs and mutual 
advantage. 
22. In conclusion, he wished to thank the 
Director General and his staff for their work in 
carrying out the technical assistance project on 
"Development of nuclear technologies in Romania", 
which was being financed by the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP). 
23. Mr. ALI (Bangladesh) expressed the great 
satisfaction of his country at the admission of the 
German Democratic Republic and the Mongolian 
People's Republic to the Agency, as Bangladesh 
was committed to the principle of universality of 
the international organizations. His Government 
was also very happy at the appointment of 
Mr. Eklund as Director General for a further 
four-year term. 

24. Since its independence less than two years 
before, Bangladesh had embarked upon the enormous 
task of rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
Although constrained by economic limitations and 
national priorities, the Government of Bangladesh 
attached great importance to the development of 
science and technology and, after creating separate 
ministries for science and technological research, 
atomic energy and natural resources, had established 
a National Atomic Energy Commission 
charged with promoting the peaceful applications 
of atomic energy in Bangladesh. 

25. At present the atomic energy programme 
was modest but oriented towards achieving selfreliance 
in that field, with major emphasis on 
applied research in agriculture, food and medicine. 
The scientists of the Commission had already 
evolved high-yielding rice varieties known as 
IRA TOM and,disease-resistant, high-yielding varieties 
of jute known as ATOMPAT. Desirable varieties 
of other crops such as pulses and sugar-cane 
had also been developed by mutation techniques and 
were awaiting field trials for ultimate use by farmers. 
Significant results had also been achieved in 
studies of soil-plant relationships and the control 
of diseases and pests using radioisotope techniques, 
and he wished to acknowledge the assistance received 
from the Agency in that connection. 
26. The Commission hoped that construction of 
the Institute of Nuclear Agriculture at Mymensingh 
would be completed in 1974, enabling the Commision 
to pursue extensive programmes in nuclear agriculture. 
An Irradiation and Pest Control Research 
Institute was also under construction, near Dacca, 
and was expected to be completed during the current 
five-year plan (1973-1978). Research into aspects 
of the radiopreservation of food which were of 
special interest to Bangladesh would be the 
Institute's main activity, and some co-ordinated 
research programmes had already been undertaken 
in collaboration with the Joint FAO/IAEA Division. 
27. There were three nuclear-medicine centres 
in the country and six more were planned. The 
three existing centres, which were attached to 
general hospitals, had been employing radioisotopes 
and radiation successfully in the diagnosis and treatment 
of many diseases and the Agency had helped 
provide valuable equipment for those centres. 
28. The Atomic Energy Research Centre at 
Dacca was now well established, with several major 
research facilities such as a Van de Graaff machine, 
an IBM-1620 computer and a 5000-curie, cobalt-60 
irradiation source. The Centre was engaged in 
research relating to low-energy nuclear physics, 
solid-state physics, electronic instrumentation and 
control, nuclear chemistry, radiobiology and 
health physics. 
-4 



GC(XVII)/OR. 164 


29. In the coming decades many developing 
countries would be employing nuclear power to 
meet their energy requirements. Because of the 
small grid systems involved, those countries would 
have their choice restricted to small and mediumsize 
reactors, whose unit capital cost still remained 
high compared to those of conventional power 
plants. 
30. In that connection the Agency's market survey 
for nuclear power, carried out in 14 developing 
countries including Bangladesh, was an excellent 
piece of work, but he felt that it should be updated 
and expanded in the light of new information becoming 
available. That applied particularly to 
Bangladesh, as the survey had been conducted when 
the country had just been recovering from war 
devastation. 
31. He hoped to see small- and medium-size 
reactors become competitive and suggested that the 
Agency collaborate with the manufacturers to find 
ways of reducing the unit capital costs. 
32. Nuclear power feasibility studies had been 
undertaken in Bangladesh. As the known reserves 
of fossil and hydro-energy resources were limited, 
the introduction of nuclear power might become 
essential in the early 1980s; a site suitable for a 
nuclear power station had already been selected in 
the western part of the country. In order to create 
the technological infrastructure for nuclear power 
and to undertake research and development in that 
field, an Institute of Nuclear Technology would be 
built adjacent to the proposed site and would be 
completed in two phases covering the first and 
second five-year plans, 
33. Bangladesh was very interested in international 
collaboration in the field of science and technology 
in general and atomic energy in particular. 
He was very pleased to announce that India and 
Bangladesh had signed an agreement for co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and that 
an agreement had also been signed between 
Australia and Bangladesh for co-operation in pilotplant 
studies for the exploitation of beach sand 
minerals. 
34. Bangladesh supported the Agency's technical 
assistance programme but noticed that the amount 
allocated under the Regular Budget for technical 
assistance was rather small and that most of the 
funds came from voluntary contributions. In the 
interests of the developing countries, he therefore 
wished to suggest that more funds be allocated to 
technical assistance from the Regular Budget. 
35. Sir Lenox HEWITT (Australia) said his 
delegation wished to join in the expressions of welcome 
to the German Democratic Republic and the 
Mongolian People's Republic and in congratulating 
Mr. Eklund on his reappointment as Director 
General. 
36. Australia had always attached importance to 
the objectives and work of the Agency. Since the 
organization had a specialist role, its significance 
to individual Members would vary according to their 
particular circumstances and needs, and it was 
natural therefore that views about the balance which 
it should maintain in its activities would not always 
coincide, the more so as there were limits to what 
could be achieved with the resources at its disposal. 
In considering the Agency's priorities, he 
wished to mention first the major new roles 
accepted by it under the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[1] and 
pursuant to the recommendations of the Stockholm 
Conference. That did not mean, however, that his 
delegation did not also recognize the importance of 
the specific needs of the developing countries. It 
understood completely their desire to share fully in 
the benefits of nuclear technology and for ways to 
be found of enabling the Agency to undertake a 
larger programme of technical co-operation. 

37. Delegations would be aware that Australia 
had ratified NPT on 23 January 1973 - one of the 
first acts of the Australian Government elected in 
December 1972, reflecting the great importance 
which the country ascribed to NPT. Australia was 
at present negotiating a safeguards agreement with 
the Agency to provide for the application of safeguards 
to nuclear materials in its territory. 
38. The rapidly expanding, insatiable demand for 
scarce energy resources was inevitably drawing 
attention to the importance of the world's uranium 
deposits. It was necessary to contend with problems 
of values and currencies when trading in 
uranium and other materials as well as with the 
physical tasks of exploration and the proving of 
reserves. Since Australia had the potential to 
become a major exporter of certain nuclear 
materials, it was very conscious of the need for the 
application of appropriate Agency safeguards to 
such exports in the interests of upholding the 
principles and spirit of NPT. Australia would continue 
to concert with other like-minded countries 
in order to develop a reasonable and practicable 
international policy for safeguards on nuclear exports. 


39. His delegation was convinced that, to be 
effective, NPT required the widest possible participation 
and support. If nations were to give such 
support, they had to have confidence in NPT and in 
the existence of an efficient system of verification. 
Australia therefore attached great importance to 
the Agency's role in connection with NPT. It 
believed that confidence in the verification system 
would be reinforced if it was clearly apparent that 
safeguards in connection with NPT would be applied 
with equal effectiveness and impact in all nonnuclear-
weapon States party to NPT. 
40. Australia believed that it was the desire of 
the international community that there should be no 
further testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, 
or indeed in any other environment, and 
that there should be no further proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. It was very concerned that certain 
countries were continuing to test such weapons 
in the atmosphere in and around the Pacific area 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
- 5 



GC(XVII)/OR. 164 


and it fervently hoped that they would respond to 
the clearly expressed wishes of the countries affected 
by their activities and cease their programmes 
for nuclear weapons testing. 

41. His delegation could sympathize with the 
attitudes of the developing countries, Members of 
the Agency, which had never contemplated acquiring 
nuclear weapons, had done nothing to create the 
problem with which all were now faced, but saw a 
substantial proportion of the Agency's Regular 
Budget being expended on the safeguards function, 
with less available for other Agency tasks. 
Because they too would suffer from the consequences 
of a breakdown in NPT, Australia believed that 
all Member States had a strong interest in its 
success. Nevertheless, it understood their point of 
view and believed that the Agency could do much to 
help them by facilitating the freer transfer of 
nuclear technology from the more advanced to the 
less developed countries. In that connection he 
wished to commend and endorse the remarks made 
at the present session by the distinguished delegate 
of Indonesia about the advantages and possibilities 
of the transfer of knowledge and technology through 
regional co-operation schemes. [2] 
42. The recommendations of the Stockholm 
Conference[3] had placed new obligations on the 
Agency; for example, the Conference had recommended 
that the Agency's co-operation be sought in 
connection with the tasks of elaborating recommended 
standards of safety covering the dispersion of 
radioactive waste and providing - in collaboration 
with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development and other appropriate international 
bodies - a basis for the most effective development 
of the world's energy resources, with due 
regard to the environmental effects of energy production 
and use. Since then the Agency had been 
given more specific responsibilities under the 
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution 
by the Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (the 
London Convention). All who had participated in 
the Stockholm Conference welcomed the Agency's 
co-operative response. 

43. As a maritime nation, Australia was very 
conscious of the need to protect the seas against 
pollution, and it welcomed the Agency's new role as 
adviser to the international community on the dumping 
of radioactive materials in the oceans. It had 
already given its support to the special fund established 
by the Agency for implementing the 1973 
programme and was ready to consider any further 
request for assistance. 
44. His delegation continued to see value for 
Members in INIS and in such activities as setting 
safety standards, developing regulations for the 
safe transport of radioactive materials and providing 
for the exchange of information in many fields. 
45. He reiterated that Australia supported the 
technical assistance activities of the Agency. 
[2] GC(XVII)/OR. 160, para. 125. 
[3] See United Nations document A/CONF. 48/14. 
Although it still believed that UNDP, having been 

set up for that specific purpose, should remain the 
principal channel for technical assistance rendered 
through the United Nations system, it did regard 
those activities as an important part of the Agency's 
work and would seek ways of offering increased 
assistance under its auspices. His country, which 
had already contributed to the General Fund an 
amount corresponding to its base rate of assessment, 
whole-heartedly supported the Director 
General's appeal to Members to increase their 
contributions to the Fund and had recently informed 
him of Australia's readiness to pay up to a further 
10%, provided that enough other countries did 
likewise to make a significant impact on the total. 
He wished to add that, regardless of what others 
might do, Australia would be paying a total of 

$44 300 for 1973. That sum included an additional 
sum equal to 5% of its assessed total, and Australia 
would be prepared to pay more if other countries 
joined it in doing so. It expected to make a similar 
additional payment and a similar additional offer 
for 1974. 

46. His country was also engaged in active discussion 
with the Agency about other forms of 
practical aid in kind and in training through the 
Agency as a part of regional co-operation schemes. 
That applied in particular to countries in the area 
of Australia, with which it had already established 
technical co-operation programmes. That was a 
form of assistance which his delegation thought 
could offer interesting and useful possibilities. 
47. Mr. WARNOCK (Ireland) congratulated the 
Director General on his excellent annual report, 
which was at once interesting, informative and 
attractively presented. 
48. His Government was heartened by the progress 
made by the Agency over the past year in the 
negotiation of safeguards agreements and their 
implementation. A particularly notable development 
had been the signing on 5 April 1973 of the 
safeguards agreement between the Agency, 
EURATOM, and the seven non-nuclear-weapon 
States of EURATOM, including Ireland. His 
Government was confident that that agreement 
would provide a more favourable safeguards regime 
for those non-nuclear-weapon States than the 
agreements previously concluded with the Agency by 
individual States. The new agreement, when 
ratified, would replace the agreement between 
Ireland and the Agency which had been signed on 
29 February 1972 and had entered into force on the 
same day. 

49. No less vital than the negotiation of safeguards 
agreements was their implementation. The continuous 
improvement of equipment and procedures was 
of paramount importance, and an example of such 
improvement cited in the Agency's annual report 
was the use of automatic camera equipment to take 
over part of the surveillance work carried out by 
inspectors. His Government was convinced that 
the research and development aspect of the Agency's 
safeguards activities was most beneficial and worth 
while. 
-6 



GC(XVII)/OR. 164 


50. His Government was also happy to note that 
the Agency had intensified its work in the field of 
environmental protection, with a substantial increase 
in the number of symposia, panels, publications 
and research contracts. As had been 
recognized in the London Convention, the Agency 
had a unique competence in the field of radioactive 
waste management. His Government was anxious 
that, when the detailed United Nations environment 
programme was drawn up and approved in March 
1974, the Agency's environment programme should 
be accorded its rightful importance. 
51. The number of demands made on the technical 
assistance funds of the Agency during the past 
year - and the fact that those demands originated 
in a wide number of countries - was in itself a 
healthy sign. It indicated that atomic power was no 
longer the prerogative of the few; moreover, its 
commercial potential was being increasingly exploited 
by the developing countries for their own benefit. 
The ability of the Agency to meet the increasing 
number of demands had been hampered by lack of 
funds. The annual report pointed out that, in 1973, 
34 requests for assistance had been adjudged 
technically sound but had had to be turned down 
simply due to lack of funds. His Government 
appreciated the problem of inflation that had beset 
the technical assistance programme and had decided 
to increase its voluntary contribution to the General 
Fund for 1974. The amount of that increase had yet 
to be decided, 
52. He stressed, however, that the spectre of 
inflation should not be allowed to overshadow the 
other very real problems that had to be tackled in 
administering a technical assistance programme of 
such magnitude - for example, the relative weighting 
of short-term and long-term projects, the need 
for project diversification, and the alternative 
benefits of expenditure on personnel and equipment. 
53. His Government was anxious that Ireland's 
relationship with the Agency should be characterized 
by vigorous two-way co-operation. Since 
joining the Agency in 1970, Ireland had followed its 
activities and achievements with great interest. In 
order that Ireland might better contribute to the 
work of the Agency, it had been decided to present 
its candidature for membership of the Board for the 
following year. He sincerely hoped that Ireland's 
candidature would be successful and that its tenure 
of office would be fruitful. 
54. The nuclear energy situation in Ireland had 
not changed substantially in the past year. The 
Nuclear Energy Board, provided for in the Nuclear 
Energy Act of 1971, had not yet been set up. 
Active consideration was being given to constructing 
a nuclear power station, the timing of which 
would depend on a'number of factors, including the 
results of oil and gas prospecting on the Irish 
continental shelf. The Agency's annual report 
pointed out that the whole process of the introduction 
of nuclear power required the State concerned 
to start planning at least eight to ten years before 
a nuclear plant was to go into operation. Ireland 
had started planning and would be seeking to draw 
more and more on Agency experience and expertise, 

as communicated through its symposia and publications. 
The scientific information made available 
through INIS was extremely valuable to Ireland, 
and he was confident that Irish academic and 
scientific bodies would become increasingly interested 
in contributing to, as well as benefiting from, 
INIS. 

55. His Government was keeping under continuous 
review the possibility of arranging for some of the 
symposia, seminars and other meetings sponsored 
by the Agency to take place in Ireland. 
56. The services performed by the Agency in 
connection with environmental protection especially 
those relating to radioactive waste management, 
were of particular interest to Ireland. Being an 
island, his country had always been most concerned 
about the protection of the marine environment and 
was greatly encouraged by the Agency's activities 
in the field of radioactive waste management particularly 
by its readiness to discharge its 
responsibilities under the London Convention. 
Although Ireland had not been represented at the 
panel convened in Vienna in June to discuss the 
question of the Agency's responsibilities under the 
London Convention, it had followed the proceedings 
very closely. The panel's recommendations were 
being studied with great interest by the competent 
Irish authorities. 
57. Mr. TALABHAT (Thailand) expressed his 
delegation's satisfaction at the reappointment of 
Mr. Eklund as Director General for a further term 
of four years. His long experience with the Agency, 
his breadth of vision and his devotion would be of 
benefit to all. Mr. Eklund's visit to Bangkok in 
August had been the occasion for the establishment 
of useful contacts between him and Thailand's 
Office of Atomic Energy for Peace. 
58. His delegation also welcomed the market 
survey for nuclear power, which had included 
Thailand and had been carried out under the sponsorship 
of the Agency with generous assistance 
from the advanced countries. It considered the 
results highly satisfactory, although the survey 
data had become somewhat outdated owing to the 
problems created by the present energy crisis, 
as a consequence of which a number of countries, 
Thailand among them, had found it necessary to 
provide for the construction of nuclear power stations 
at earlier dates. He was happy to learn that 
the Agency would continue rendering assistance 
and services to those countries. 
59. The delegation of Thailand looked with favour 
on the efforts of the Board and the Secretariat to 
amend the Rules of Procedure of the General 
Conference. It hoped the amendment would come 
into force at a relatively early date. 
60. The financial difficulties resulting from 
general inflation had affected many countries and 
had left their mark on the budget of the Agency. 
However, his delegation was glad to learn that the 
Secretariat would do everything possible to make 
judicious use of the funds available to it. 
-7 



GC (XVII)/OR. 164 


61. Thailand was among the developing countries 
of South East Asia which had often requested aid 
from the Agency under the heading of regional 
co-operation; in that connection, he wished to 
mention how much his country appreciated the 
efforts of India, which had done everything possible 
to promote such co-operation. However, the concept 
of regional co-operation, while presupposing 
increased mutual assistance, required as a primary 
condition that each country make a maximum 
effort of its own. That was the principle which 
Thailand intended to apply. 
62. Mr. OTERO NAVASCUES (Spain) said he 
would first like to congratulate the Director 
General on his reappointment for a further term of 
office. 
6 3. For several decades Spain had been undergoing 
extensive economic and industrial development, 
as was shown, for example, by the fact that 
over the ten years between 1960 and 1970 the total 
consumption of energy, in terms of millions of 
tons of equivalent coal, had been more than 
doubled. To ensure that future energy requirements 
were covered, a national energy plan - of 
which the national electricity plan was a part - was 
being prepared. Spain's installed electrical 
capacity at the present time was 32 500 MW, and 
was expected to reach 48 700 MW by 1983. 
64. Nuclear power was playing a steadily 
increasing part in the national electricity plan, and 
it had been calculated that by 1988 more than 45% 
of the total installed capacity would be accounted 
for by nuclear energy. Three nuclear power stations 
were in operation (Jose Cabrera, Santa 
Maria de Garona, and Vandellos), and other 
reactors were in the process of being licensed. 
6 5. The proposed investment in power station 
components amounted to 60 000 million pesetas for 
the stations to be established within the present 
decade, and would have risen to 300 000 million by 
1990. The expenditure on fuel was expected to 
have exceeded 25 000 million pesetas by the same 
year. The recently formed Empresa Nacional de 
Uranio (National Uranium Corporation) was developing 
uranium ore deposits and would shortly start 
constructing a fuel fabrication plant in Spain, with 
the collaboration of the Junta de Energia Nuclear. 
66. He then requested that the following part of 
his statement be reproduced verbatimf*]: 
(1) "Between the previous session of the 
General Conference and the present session 
an event of great importance has taken place 
in the life of the Agency, namely the entry 
into force of the amendment to Article VI of 
the Agency's Statute which was approved at the 
fourteenth session of the Conference in 1970. 
The Board of Governors is a key element in 
[*] This translation of a part of a statement made 
in Spanish is reproduced verbatim at the speaker's 
request under Rule 89(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 

the Agency's operation, and the organization's 
successes or failures will, to a large extent, 
depend on the efficiency with which the Board 
can function; and this efficiency, in turn, 
depends on the Board being of the right size 
and composition. My delegation therefore 
considers that the present session, at the end 
of which the first Board of Governors appointed 
under the new version of Article VI will 
take up its duties, is one of particularly 
great importance, 

(2) "In 1970 the Spanish delegation voted in 
favour of the amendment to Article VI. 
During the last few years there has been a 
marked increase in the number of States 
Members of the Agency and, what is still 
more important, in the number of countries 
pursuing activities connected with the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. These two factors 
necessitated a corresponding increase 
in the size of the Board, and my Government 
considered the proposal approved in 1970 to 
be reasonable in that respect. Similarly, my 
Government felt that the proportions in which 
the various geographical areas would be 
represented on the new Board were suitable. 
Consequently, we consider the new composition 
of the Board of Governors to be such as 
to enable it to function smoothly and efficiently. 
(3) "But, Mr. President, my Government 
would like to draw the attention of other 
Member States to the fact that it is not enough 
for the Statute to lay down an appropriate 
formula for selection of the Board of 
Governors; it is also essential that suitable 
standards of judgement should be applied when 
the time comes to designate or elect the 
Members of the Board, 
(4) "Firstly, my delegation considers that 
when the outgoing Board designates the Members 
which, under Article VI. A. 1, are to serve on 
the next Board, it should adhere strictly to 
the prescripts of the Statute - in other words, 
that it should designate those Member States 
which are most advanced in nuclear technology, 
whether in the world as a whole or in 
the individual geographical areas. 
(5) "When the outgoing Board of Governors 
was called upon to designate the five Members 
most advanced in the technology and utilization 
of atomic energy in the world as a whole, 
there was no doubt as to which countries 
qualified. Now that the number has been 
raised to nine, the Board has to select four 
more Members from among several whose 
attainments in these matters are very much 
the same. Hence, each year the outgoing 
Board of Governors must take into consideration 
the situation existing in each Member 
State with regard to the technology and utilization 
of nuclear energy. Since this situation 
is neither permanent nor immutable, the 
review will of necessity result in the annual 
replacement of some of the States designated 
-8 



GC (XVII)/OR. 164 


to serve on the Board of Governors. To 

agree to a procedure whereby the Members 

designated for the previous Board are 

systematically reappointed would be tanta


mount to transforming the 'designated 

Members' into 'permanent Members'. 

(6) "It is clear that this would run counter to 
the prescripts of the Statute and would give 
rise to a situation unfair in every respect. I 
think that my Government's position is 
sufficiently clear and comprehensible for me 
not to have to refer to the specific ways in 
which a country could unjustifiably benefit 
therefrom, 
(7) "As regards the Members elected under 
Article VI. A. 2, my delegation considers 
that the General Conference should not apply 
an indiscriminate and wholly egalitarian 
standard of judgement in selecting the representatives 
of each geographical region. We 
maintain that the state of advancement in the 
technology and utilization of nuclear energy 
in a country has an important effect on the 
efficiency with which that country's representative 
can function in the Board and thereby 
contribute to the smooth operation of the 
Agency. Hence the frequency with which 
Member States serve on the Board should not 
be governed by a simple rotation of seats; 
there should be a sensible relationship 
between the frequency with which they serve 
and their attainments in the technology and 
utilization of nuclear energy, as well as their 
experience and tradition in such matters. 
(8) "My delegation would like to make it 
clear that the principles which I have expounded 
are fundamental and must be observed if the 
composition of the Board of Governors is to 
be the most appropriate for the smooth functioning 
of the Agency. 
(9) "As I have already said, my Government 
voted in favour of amending Article VI, but 
has still not ratified the amendment for the 
very reason that it wished to emphasize, at 
this session of the General Conference, the 
deep concern it feels about the practical 
application of the new Article VI; for it is 
that application which could determine to a 
large extent the future success of the 
Board's work". 
6 7. In nuclear research, the Junta de Energia 
Nuclear had continued to promote the activities of 
the nuclear industry, giving priority to safety, fuel 
technology and reactor engineering. 
68. On the international plane, an agreement on 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
had recently been signed between the Junta de 
Energia Nuclear and the Gesellschaft fur 
Kernforschung in the Federal Republic of Germany, 
covering research in reactor physics and fuels and 
components for fast reactors. In addition, cooperation 
agreements had been concluded with 
other countries, particularly those of Latin America. 
69. International co-operation was essential in 
solving those problems of nuclear technology which 
were common to all countries. Among such problems 
was the availability of nuclear fuel, including 
fuel enrichment. Uranium isotope separation was 
an area in which the world's potential had to be 
considerably increased if a shortage of uranium 
was to be avoided in the years to come. Spain was 
anxious to collaborate with other countries in such 
work, particularly with those located in its own 
geographical area. 
70. Nuclear safety and environmental protection 
were also problems that required ever-increasing 
attention. The studies being carried out at present 
by the Agency were of great benefit to Member 
States; it was hoped that such activities would continue 
on a larger scale, with a view to establishing 
regulations which could be applied internationally. 
71. With regard to the Agency's budget, it was 
gratifying to see that the nuclear safety and environmental 
protection programme had been considerably 
enlarged as compared with the previous 
year. Conversely, there had continued to be an 
unfortunate decline in the volume of technical 
assistance, which had dropped from 17% of the 
budget to less than 15. 5%. Provision of technical 
assistance was one of the Agency's main objectives, 
which all Member States should further. His 
country had systematically provided experts' 
services and fellowships, in addition to its voluntary 
contribution, and would strive to maintain the 
same level in coming years. 
72. Mr. ZHMUDSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic), noting that each of the preceding regular 
sessions of the General Conference had been 
characterized by some special feature, said that 
in the opinion of his delegation the present session 
was being influenced as never before by the improvement 
in the world political climate, which resulting, 
among other things, from the recent 
visits of Mr. Brezhnev to the United States, the 
Federal Republic of Germany and France, the 
normalization of the situation in Central Europe, 
the end of the war in Viet-Nam and the successful 
start of the Conference on Security and 
Co-operation in Europe - opened up before all 
organizations within the United Nations family, 
including the Agency, new possibilities for contributing 
to the strengthening of peace throughout the 
world. It was the duty of all States and international 
organizations to ensure the irreversibility 
of the favourable changes which had taken place in 
the world situation. 
73. His delegation noted with pleasure that the 
Agency reacted sensitively to positive developments 
in all parts of the world, as demonstrated 
by the approval for Agency membership of the 
German Democratic Republic, a sovereign State 
which had for some time been co-operating with the 
Agency as a party to NPT, and welcomed the new 
Member State not only because, with its considerable 
economic potential and achievements in the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy, it would be 
able to make a valuable contribution to the Agency's 
work, but also because its acceptance into the 
-9 



GC (XVII)/OR. 164 


Agency was a triumph of realism in a changing 
world. 

74. It was also gratifying that the Conference had 
approved for membership of the Agency a further 
socialist State - the Mongolian People's Republic, 
which had been transformed within a short time 
from a feudal, backward country into one with 
highly developed industry and agriculture. 
75. However, the elimination of the basis for the 
"cold war" in no way meant that all the causes of 
distrust between States with different social systems 
had been removed; there were still forces 
trying to use the achievements of science and 
technology to intimidate. All depended on the use 
to which those achievements were put; as Einstein 
had foreseen, they would contribute to the further 
progress of human civilization only if man's moral 
and social foundations were strengthened. 
76. Science had become a productive force 
capable of satisfying man's material and spiritual 
needs. That was particularly so as regards atomic 
energy, and the role of the Agency in contributing 
to world peace and human welfare was correspondingly 
important. 
77. Turning to his country's recent activities in 
the nuclear field, he reported that questions of 
nuclear structure and the mechanisms of nuclear 
processes were being studied with the help of 
neutrons and charged particles at the Institute of 
Nuclear Research and the Physico-Technical 
Institute of the Academy of Sciences of the 
Ukrainian SSR. Important new data had been 
obtained on cross-sections for the scattering and 
capture of particles by various nuclei and on the 
quantum characteristics of the ground and excited 
states of nuclei. A number of new isomeric 
nuclear states had been discovered and their 
nature ascertained. Using a 2-GeV linear electron 
accelerator - one of the most powerful in the 
world - Ukrainian investigators were studying the 
mechanism of the interaction of high-energy photons 
with matter, the photo- and electroproduction 
of particles, the charge distribution in nuclei, 
nuclear disintegration and various other nuclear 
phenomena. Considerable work was also being 
done on high-temperature plasmas with a view to 
achieving controlled thermonuclear fusion, and 
plasmoids with high parameters had been obtained. 
78. At institutes of the Academy of Sciences of 
the Ukrainian SSR a wide range of questions relating 
to the use of nuclear radiation in solid-state 
physics, radiation physics and chemistry, the 
study of materials, geology, radiobiology and other 
fields was being investigated. The results of 
research into the use of radioisotopes were finding 
wide practical application, with important economic 
consequences; for example, the savings achieved 
through the use of radioisotope instruments in the 
Ukrainian coal industry during 1972 had been estimated 
at 1. 5 million roubles. 
79. Many problems relating to the functioning of 
human organs and systems in both normal and 
pathological situations were being studied with 
success, while radioisotope methods of investigation 
were being improved and used in both clinical 
and ambulatory cases. Modern equipment, labelled 
compounds and radioisotopes were being produced 
on a scale sufficient to permit widespread scanning 
of the internal organs of patients. The research 
leading to the advances which he had enumerated 
was being carried out at clinics as well as at 
scientific institutes. 

80. At Kiev University, it had been demonstrated 
for the first time that the characteristic X-ray 
spectra associated with the atoms produced in 
radioactive electron-capture decay could be used 
as a standard for all other roentgenography methods, 
for the excitation process was not connected 
with the external action of excitation agents on the 
atom. 
81. The Ukrainian delegation appreciated the 
excellent work being done by the Agency in connection 
with NPT and was pleased to note that the 
number of safeguards agreements and of nuclear 
facilities subject to international safeguards was 
increasing from year to year. 
82. The Agency's activities in the field of 
environmental protection had expanded considerably, 
to some extent as a result of the Stockholm 
Conference, and new responsibilities had been 
entrusted to the Agency under the London 
Convention. Agency experts had formulated 
interesting recommendations concerning radioactive 
waste and the Agency would undoubtedly contribute 
a great deal to the prevention of marine 
pollution. In that connection, the Ukrainian delegation 
felt that the Monaco Laboratory should 
expand its activities and start using nuclear methods 
in the study of non-radioactive marine pollutants. 
In the Ukrainian SSR there was considerable 
interest in such activities and work had been in 
progress for some time on radioactive marine 
pollution, the migration of radioisotopes in the 
hydrosphere and their concentration in marine 
organisms. 
83. In conclusion, the Ukrainian delegation was 
very happy about the re-election of Mr. Eklund, 
who had done so much to increase the Agency's 
efficiency, especially as regards INIS and safeguards 
in connection with NPT. 
84. Mr. OSEI TUTU (Ghana) extended his 
delegation's congratulations to Mr. Eklund on his 
reappointment as Director General and warmly 
welcomed the German Democratic Republic and the 
Mongolian People's Republic to the Agency. The 
more the membership of the Agency increased, the 
further away, he fervently hoped, the world would 
move from the spectre of nuclear destruction, 
85. Ghana believed in and fully supported the 
objectives stated in Article II of the Statute, and it 
was in furtherance of some of them that it had 
established a National Centre for Radioisotope 
Applications in 1969 and, since then, directed its 
efforts to the solution of some of the practical 
problems facing Ghana in agriculture, pharmacology 
and medicine. 
- 10 



GC(XVII)/OR. 164 


86. In agriculture, techniques for the protection 
of dry cocoa beans against attack by insects and 
fungi and against economic waste during storage 
were being developed. In collaboration with the 
Cocoa Research Institute at Tafo, the Centre had 
also started investigating radiation techniques for 
the development of hardier, more diseaseresistant 
strains of cocoa. Similarly, projects 
relating to certain other crops, such as tomatoes, 
were being planned with the Faculty of Agriculture 
of the University of Ghana. 
87. With regard to pharmacology, the possible 
harmful effects of antimalarial drugs were being 
studied. Work was nearing completion on a walkin 
growth chamber which would be used for studying, 
among other things, the medicinal properties 
of some'of the country's local herbs. In that 
connection, he was happy to mention that scientists 
in a European country had shown interest in the 
project and wished to collaborate in it. 
88. As far as medical applications of radioisotopes 
were concerned, the limited radioisotope 
diagnostic services being provided in collaboration 
with the Ghana Medical School were in the process 
of being expanded, and a shadow shield whole-body 
counter for clinical investigations and research 
would shortly be commissioned. Training of the 
staff that would be required to maintain those 
clinical services was also under way. 
89. He was happy to mention that the Agency had 
been helping Ghana under its technical assistance 
programme; its help was greatly appreciated. His 
country was also most grateful to the United 
Kingdom for substantial financial assistance. 
Ghana looked to those two sources and to other 
friendly Member States, such as the Federal 
Republic of Germany, for further collaboration and 
help in its efforts. 
90. Besides the activities which he had briefly 
summarized, the National Centre for Radioisotope 
Applications was also providing important services 
to various bodies engaged in general scientific 
work, particularly in projects involving the use of 
radioisotopes or large radiation sources. For 
example, the Centre offered various training 
facilities and, in 1971, under the auspices of the 
Agency and with funds provided by UNDP, it had 
successfully organized a four-month training 
course in general scientific and radioisotope 
laboratory techniques for technicians from a 
number of the English-speaking Member States of 
Africa. At the moment, it was considering a 
request recently made by UNDP for the organization 
in 1974 of a further, similar training course 
in Africa. 
91. The activities of the Centre were a demonstration 
of Ghana's belief in the use of nuclear 
energy solely for peaceful purposes. A further 
demonstration of that belief was its signing of 
NPT and the recent conclusion of a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency. 
92. It was to be regretted that one highly respected 
Member State of the Agency had recently 
carried out nuclear bomb tests in complete disregard 
of the Agency's objectives and of world opinion. 
His delegation fervently hoped that that would 
be the end of such tests. It hoped also that those 
Member States of the Agency which already possessed 
nuclear weapons would clearly demonstrate 
their awareness of their moral obligation never to 
give mankind genuine grounds for fear, as such 
fears understandably tended to lead other States to 
want to develop their own independent nuclear 
force. 

93. In conclusion, he wished to comment on a 
matter which was very important to Ghana and to 
many other Member States - namely, the method of 
financing the technical assistance programme of 
the Agency - and to reiterate the serious concern 
of his delegation, which had been expressed the 
year before, at the fact that, whereas there had 
been an increase in the budget of the Agency, the 
allocation for the regular programme of technical 
assistance had shown a decrease, albeit a small 
one, in 1973. Various weighty and convincing 
reasons had been given for that decrease. However, 
in the view of the Ghanaian delegation, the 
most disturbing feature of the whole problem was 
the very unsatisfactory way in which the provision 
of technical assistance was financed - that is to 
say, from voluntary contributions instead of from 
the Regular Budget. In that regard, he fully 
supported the views expressed on the subject by 
the distinguished delegate of Indonesia both when 
the Administrative and Budgetary Committee had 
met in May and during the present session of the 
Conference. Ghana would work in concert with 
Indonesia and all other interested Member States 
in urging that a speedy solution be found to that 
problem and therefore reserved the right to speak 
on the issue again. 

94. Mr. ALPAN (Turkey) wished to join other 
delegations in warmly congratulating Mr. Eklund 
on his reappointment as Director General. 
95. Turkey had been observing with growing 
concern the ominous effects of the international 
monetary crisis on the Agency's budget, especially 
on the provision of technical assistance, which was 
one of the Agency's major tasks . The Agency 
needed the financial support of its Members to a 
more substantial extent than ever before. Besides, 
many countries were counting on the allocation of 
increased funds to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. In that connection, his 
Government had pleasure in informing the 
Conference of its decision to increase its voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund in the years to 
come. 
96. Although the total cash contributions pledged 
to the General Fund for 1973 had exceeded 90% of 
the target, it was regrettable that during the same 
year 34 technically sound requests could not be met 
for lack of funds. The outstanding amounts of contributions 
to the Regular Budget represented 
another disquieting point, and it was imperative 
that an appropriate remedy should be found to that 
persistent problem. 
- 11 



GC (XVII)/OR. 164 


97. Turkey was closely following the recent 
developments connected with nuclear energy and 
carrying out extensive studies in several fields, 
including uranium ore prospecting in western 
Turkey with the assistance of the Agency and 
UNDP. 
98. Radioisotopes were being used in agriculture, 
medicine, industry and basic research, and in view 
of the increasing demand for different radioisotopes 
it had been decided to step up the power of the 
Turkish research reactor to 6 MW. 
99. The symposium on nuclear medicine held 
under the joint auspices of the Agency and the 
Turkish Atomic Energy Commission in Istanbul 
between 10 and 14 September had been very 
successful. His Government wished to assure the 
Agency of its continued support for such activities. 
100. The feasibility study and the selection of a 
site for Turkey's first nuclear power reactor, 
which was to go into commercial operation by 
1981-1982 and would have a capacity of 600 MW, 
had been completed; tenders would be invited in the 
spring of 1974. It was estimated that his country 
would be generating approximately 6000 MW of 
nuclear power annually by the year 2000, 
101. The market survey of the potential demand 
for nuclear power in developing countries, which 
had covered 14 countries including Turkey, had 
been a very useful exercise. The report on Turkey 
was now being studied by the various governmental 
bodies concerned. 
102. However, the accuracy of the results of the 
survey depended largely on the energy forecasts 
and other data provided by the national authorities 
concerned. Considering that the 14 countries 
covered by the survey were developing States, it 
would be a useful practice to revise the survey 
results periodically, as the conditions in those 
countries changed, so that they could be evaluated 
more realistically. He suggested that the Agency 
hold a panel meeting where the representatives of 
the developing countries which had participated in 
the market survey might have an opportunity to 
discuss the assumptions and results of the survey. 

103. Furthermore, the Agency should devote more 
attention to exchanges of experience, inventions 
and data in the field of nuclear power production. 
Agency assistance in the four stages mentioned in 
paragraph 107 of document GC(XVII)/INP/142 
would be an important step towards the introduction 
of nuclear power in developing countries. 
104. Referring to the widely held view that nuclear 
energy was one of the causes of environmental 
pollution, he considered that the Agency should 
take urgent measures to enlighten public opinion 
and dispel public concern. The Agency had an 
important role to play in identifying the present and 
future problems associated with the environmental 
aspects of nuclear power plants and in the development 
of international standards and regulations. 
105. In conclusion, he wished to assure the Agency 
that his Government would continue to lend its full 
support to the Agency's activities in promoting 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
• The meeting rose at 12. 50 p. m. 
- 12 



GC(XVII)/OR.165 
16 April 1974* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 21 September 1973, at 3. 30 p.m. 

President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

10 General debate and report for 1972-73 1-7 3 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

German Democratic Republic 1-8 
Peru 9-20 
Lebanon 21 - 24 
Austria 25 - 35 
Poland 36-42 
Morocco 43 - 49 
Switzerland 50-5 5 
Costa Rica 56-59 
Nigeria 60-65 
Mongolia 66-73 

Statement by the delegate of France 74 

3 Credentials of delegates to the seventeenth (1973) 
regular session 


(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 75 - 88 
* A provisional version of this document was issued on 3 October 1973. 
** GC(XVII)/512. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INP/145/Rev. 2. 


GC(XVII)/OR. 165 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1972-73 
(GC(XVII)/500, 500/Corr.1, 510)(continued) 

1. Mr. HILBERT (German Democratic Republic) 
thanked the General Conference on behalf of his 
country for approving its application for admission 
to membership of the Agency. It was a matter for 
satisfaction that the application of the Mongolian 
People's Republic had also been approved and that 
a representative of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea was taking part as an observer. 
He welcomed Mr. Eklund's re-election as Director 
General of the Agency. In his opinion, recent 
developments towards peaceful coexistence had 
given a strong impetus to the Agency's activities 
in applying the results of nuclear research for the 
benefit of mankind as a whole. In that regard, the 
agreement on the prevention of nuclear war recently 
concluded between the Soviet Union and the United 
States and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[1] were helping to create 
favourable conditions. The German Democratic 
Republic had been among the first of the States 
party to NPT to conclude a safeguards agreement 
with the Agency; it would welcome similar action 
by other non-nuclear-weapon States, in order 
further to accelerate the process of detente and of 
increasing security in Europe and the world in 
general. 

2. The German Democratic Republic was ready, 
within the limits of its possibilities, to help in 
implementing the programme set out in the 
statement by the Director General. Thanks to the 
substantial measure of support given by the Soviet 
Union, it had been working in nuclear research 
and technology for the past 18 years. In particular, 
it had taken an active part in joint projects and 
activities undertaken by the member countries of 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(CMEA) and some of its scientists, working at the 
Joint Institute of Nuclear Research at Dubna, had 
contributed to such major international advances 
as the recent discovery of "antitritium". 

3. His country was very well equipped for the 
production of isotopes and nuclear instruments, 
and a comprehensive programme for the application 
of isotope and radiation technology was accordingly 
being carried out, particularly in agriculture, 
health and environmental protection. As one of 
Europe's largest producers of isotopes, it might 
be able to undertake work within the framework of 
Agency technical assistance, applying nitrogen-15 
in plant and animal nutrition studies. Its joining 
the international economic organization 
"Interatominstrument" would lead to an increase 
in the production of nuclear instruments, which 
would have a favourable effect on the entire range 
of applications of isotope and radiation technology. 
4. The development of nuclear engineering, 
particularly for electrical power production, was 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
another area in which his country was working in 

close co-operation with the other socialist 
countries; it already represented an important 
component of his country's long-term economic 
programme. The first nuclear power station in 
the German Democratic Republic, a facility 
equipped with a 70 MW(e) pressurized-water 
reactor, had been commissioned in 1966 and had 
since served to train nuclear power station personnel 
and furnish valuable experience for further 
work in nuclear power generation. A large nuclear 
power station with 440 MW(e) pressurized-water 
reactors was under construction and would shortly 
be going into service. In addition, the country had 
in 1957 been supplied by the Soviet Union with a 
research reactor, which was being used both for 
isotope production and for research in reactor 
and nuclear physics; critical facilities had been 
added subsequently. 

5. Basic research in nuclear physics was being 
conducted at research institutions of the country's 
Academy of Sciences and at universities and higher 
institutes. Such research had been expressly 
directed towards basic problems in nuclear physics 
and towards multiple applications in other special 
fields. Outstanding results had been achieved in 
close co-operation with the institutes of other 
socialist States, especially within the framework 
of the Joint Institute of Nuclear Research at Dubna, 
so that the German Democratic Republic now 
possessed a wealth of experience and a reserve of 
highly qualified staff in high-energy and low-energy 
nuclear physics. 
6. His country had gained wide experience in 
radiation protection and nuclear safety, matters 
regarded by it as of overriding importance. At 
present, some 6000 institutions and around 30 000 
individuals occupationally exposed to radiation 
were under constant observation. High safety 
standards with regard to nuclear facilities and the 
collection, treatment, disposal and transport of 
radioactive wastes had been ensured by having 
highly qualified staff available. The high quality 
was due to the great attention paid from the outset 
to training, and qualified specialists would be 
available also in the future to ensure broad-based 
development in nuclear research and technology 
and their application in the country's economy. 
7. It was considered important that the German 
Democratic Republic should take part in the implementation 
of safeguards, and especially in 
expanding the Agency's inspection system and 
studying control methods. It was in a position to 
help draw up safety standards and to assist in 
international safety measures and such other tasks 
as the treatment and disposal of radioactive wastes, 
8. The German Democratic Republic was 
desirous of complementing its highly advanced 
science and technology information system by 
taking an active part in the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS). It was also ready to 
help in the training of specialists in such fields as 
isotope technology, nuclear physics, reactor technology, 
radiation protection and information by 
providing university places and field experts. It 
-2 



GC (XVII)/OR. 165 


was, moreover, in a position to supply nuclear 
instruments and isotope products under technical 
assistance programmes. In conclusion, he stated 
that his country would be making an adequate voluntary 
contribution in national currency in support of 
the Agency's activities. 

9. Mr. FERNANDEZ BACA (Peru) congratulated 
the Director General on his re-election, which 
demonstrated the confidence which Member States 
had in him. 
10. Peru's Atomic Energy Control Board had 
just launched an intensive programme of scientific 
and technical development in all areas connected 
with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Peru's 
situation was different from that of countries whose 
hydroelectric potential was limited or fully utilized; 
his country still had hydraulic resources available 
which would enable it to meet requirements for a 
good many years to come. Moreover, intensive 
oil prospecting had produced results which indicated 
that the country could be self-sufficient within 
a few years. Nevertheless, Peru was not ruling 
out the possibility of starting to use nuclear 
reactors in' about ten years. 
11. As regards drinking water and irrigation, 
the supply problem seemed to be solved for the 
time being, but Peru was nevertheless considering 
the use of nuclear energy for desalting sea water. 
There were areas, however, in which there was 
an urgent need for the application of nuclear techniques 
- for example, entomology, fertilizer 
studies, biological and medical research, medicine, 
agriculture, hydrology and various branches of 
industry. Radiological protection in hospitals and 
for the users of ionizing sources was also an 
important problem. 
12. Activities relating to nuclear energy were 
encouraged and regulated by the new law governing 
nuclear energy and its peaceful applications; in 
addition, there were plans for establishing a 
Peruvian "Nuclear Energy Institute" to replace the 
present Control Board and to assume new tasks. 
13. Thanks to the Agency's co-operation, it had 
been possible to formulate protection regulations 
for the control of ionizing substances; the regulations 
would be applied by the Ministry of Public 
Health and the Nuclear Energy Institute, 
14. A few months earlier, construction work had 
been completed on the first buildings for Peru's 
"Nuclear Centre", the plans for which had been 
prepared with the assistance of experts from 
nuclear energy institutes in friendly Agency 
Member States. Construction of the Nuclear 
Centre would continue with the installation of a 
research reactor, a particle accelerator and the 
equipment needed for staff training and research, 
a programme in which Peru's scientific and 
university institutes would participate. The cost 
of the Nuclear Centre would be about 1600 million 
sols. 
15. As regards academic training, the Advanced 
Institute of Nuclear Energy, which came under the 
Atomic Energy Control Board, had resumed 
activities in nuclear physics and its applications 
and would be participating in the university 
programme for training technicians and specialists 
to take part in the development of nuclear energy 
in Peru. 

16. With regard to research, mention should be 
made of the work being performed by the La Molina 
Agricultural Institute, including the programme 
for the eradication of the Mediterranean fruit fly 
by the sterile-male technique being carried out 
in collaboration with the Agency. 
17. Also worthy of mention was the research 
work being performed by the Institute for Neoplasmic 
Diseases, one of the most important 
bodies using radiation in cancer diagnosis and 
therapy. 
18. Peru, as a country rich in mineral resources, 
had considerable reserves of uraniferous ores. 
19. In conclusion, he wished to state that his 
country supported the policy of non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and was participating actively 
in the effort to attain the objectives of the international 
agreements to which it had acceded. 
20. The Peruvian delegation congratulated the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
and its non-nuclear-weapon Member States on 
having signed a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency and expressed its confidence that nuclear 
energy could be used to promote the well-being 
and progress of mankind. 
21. Mr. SHADID (Lebanon) expressed his 
congratulations to Mr. Eklund on his re-election 
to the important post of Director General, which 
was a tribute to his personality and outstanding 
experience. 
22. It was difficult for him, as a representative 
of one of the smallest Member States, to report 
any great national achievements in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, but he could assure the 
Conference that Lebanon was doing its utmost in 
that field - for the benefit of its own people and of 
the world. A national committee set up for the 
purpose had been given the task of implementing 
international regulations on radiological protection, 
particularly those of the Agency and the 
World Health Organization (WHO). With the help 
of the Agency, Lebanon had framed legislation 
on atomic energy and drawn up radiation safety 
regulations. 

23. During the previous year, in the district of 
Finar, thanks to aid received under the Agency's 
technical assistance programme, radiationattenuated 
vaccines had been used against lungworm 
in sheep, A programme for the use of 
radiation-attenuated vaccines against other 
important animal parasites was now under consideration. 
Lebanon was also benefiting from the 
Agency's research into the use of radioisotopes in 
medicine, agriculture, nuclear physics, animal 
science and hospital physics. 
-3 



GC(XVII)/OR. 165 

24. Lebanon had already signed and ratified asafeguards agreement with the Agency inconnection with the peaceful use of atomic energy 
and would associate its efforts with those of all 
peace-loving nations in seeking to make the world 
a better place to live in. 

25. Mr, MANZ (Austria) expressed his pleasure 
at the re-election of Mr. Eklund to the post of 
Director General; his Government had always held 
Mr, Eklund in high esteem as he combined the 
qualities of a scientist, an administrator and a 
humanist. 
26. As in previous years, the Agency was continuing 
its efforts to establish a world-wide 
safeguards system. The Board's report showed 
that 95 non-nuclear-weapon States had signed NPT 
and that 78 of them had already ratified it. 
Unfortunately, only 37 of those countries had so 
far concluded a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency in connection with NPT. Austria, as was 
known, had been one of the first States to sign and 
ratify a safeguards agreement with the Agency, and 
it had just passed a law introducing a system of 
national control to facilitate the application of 
safeguards by the Agency in Austrian installations 
in accordance with the provisions of NPT. He 
welcomed the Agency's intention of organizing a 
panel on systems of accountancy for and control 
of nuclear material, to be held in Tokyo in the 
near future, 

27. In order to apply safeguards with maximum 
efficiency the Agency needed adequate laboratory 
space. It was for that reason that on 3 July 1973 
Austria had concluded an agreement with the 
Agency on the construction of a safeguards laboratory 
at Seibersdorf. 
28. Article VIII. 3 of NPT provided for the 
holding of a conference of the parties thereto in 
Geneva in order to review its operation. It might 
be useful if information on the arrangements for 
the conference, which was to take place in 1975, 
were distributed to Member States before the next 
regular session of the General Conference in order 
to give delegations an opportunity to prepare for 
the discussions. 
29. Although the importance which the Agency 
attached to protection of the human environment 
and to safety measures was due in part to the 
growing public interest in such problems, the 
Agency appreciated both how essential it was to 
secure the future energy resources needed by the 
world and that mistakes in the application of 
nuclear energy could have the gravest consequences. 
He noted with satisfaction that in implementing 
the resolutions of the United Nations 
Conference on the Human Environment the Agency 
had almost doubled the number of symposia and 
panels dealing with environmental problems. 
30. Mention should also be made of the excellent 
results achieved by INIS. 
31. The first Austrian nuclear power plant, which 
would have a capacity of more than 700 MW, was 
being constructed at Zwentendorf and was to go 

 critical in 1976. 

. 32. With regard to the Agency's budget, Austria 
fully understood the difficulties being faced, which 
were attributable in the main to price increases 
and to the effects of exchange-rate instability on 
most of the important currencies. Austria was 
prepared to make its full contribution to the 
Regular Budget for 1974 and to the supplementary 
assessment for 1973. The main thing was that the 
Agency should not be restricted in the execution of 
its tasks by the need to make savings or by the 
growing share of staff and administrative costs in 
the budget total as a result of wage and price 
rises. 

33. As the representative of the Agency's host 
country, he wished to review briefly for the 
Conference the progress made in constructing the 
Agency's permanent headquarters. The planning, 
carried out in close contact with the international 
organizations located in Vienna, had been completed 
and work on the foundations had commenced 
in the spring. Thanks to the use of the most 
modern techniques, the buildings would be completed 
rapidly; as regards quality, they would 
meet accepted international standards. The 
Federal Government, with the assistance of the 
City of Vienna, would see to it that the office 
space and other facilities required by the Agency 
were put at its disposal at an early date. 
34. If, once the buildings were completed, it was 
found that the Agency did not need all the office 
space and other facilities planned, Austria would 
be able to place them at the disposal of other 
organizations in the United Nations family. 
3 5. Finally, he wished to express his warm 
thanks to the Director General and to all members 
of the Agency's staff for the excellent organization 
of the Conference and for their collaboration with 
Austrian institutions during the past year. 
36. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) congratulated 
Mr. Eklund on his reappointment as Director 
General and said he was happy that the German 
Democratic Republic and the Mongolian People's 
Republic had been admitted to the Agency. In 
taking that decision, the General Conference had 
demonstrated its common sense and political 
realism. 
37. Referring to the outstanding events during 
the period under review, which had brought about 
a change in the political climate, he emphasized 
that the Agency should contribute to the relaxation 
in tension by consolidating the results it had 
achieved in its own sphere of activity. It should 
in particular devote itself to speeding up the 
effective implementation of the agreements concluded 
in connection with NPT. 
38. He was pleased with the operation of INIS, 
which enabled appreciable savings to be effected 
by eliminating overlapping of research and was of 
special importance to small countries. 
-4 



GC(XVII)/OR. 165 


39. The Polish delegation fully endorsed the 
increase in the Agency's activities relating to 
protection of the environment against pollution especially 
radioactive pollution. 
40. It was fully aware of the financial difficulties 
faced by the Agency in connection with currency 
fluctuations. However, it had full confidence in 
the ability of the Director General and the Secretariat 
to find solutions to those difficulties without 
detriment to programme activities. The financial 
difficulties also affected technical assistance, 
which was an essential activity of the Agency, and 
Poland intended to raise its voluntary contribution 
substantially. 
41. Equally important was the question of 
formulating international standards and regulations 
concerning radiation protection, radioactive waste 
management, the transport of nuclear fuel and 
other radioactive materials and the operational 
safety of nuclear power plants. In view of the 
importance of such standards and regulations, the 
Agency should step up its efforts to encourage 
greater co-operation, not only between countries 
but also between international and regional 
organizations, including CMEA. 
42. Although the Polish delegation was very 
satisfied with the Agency's activities during the 
preceding year, it was concerned about the 
excessive increase in its budget and wished to 
emphasize once more that the rate of increase of 
the Agency's budget should not exceed that of the 
national income of its Member States. 
43. Mr. AL-ARBI KHATTABI (Morocco) 
welcomed the admission to the Agency of the 
German Democratic Republic and the Mongolian 
People's Republic. 
44. His delegation warmly approved the Agency's 
work during the period under review. The particular 
attention paid to the negotiation of 
safeguards agreements in connection with NPT, 
assistance to developing countries and the protection 
of the environment reflected the international 
community's wish for nuclear power to 
become a true source of progress used rationally 
for peaceful purposes and in the interests of all 
countries. Unfortunately, the scope for realizing 
that wish was severely limited because vast human, 
technical and financial resources which could be 
devoted to technical assistance programmes were 
still being used to develop nuclear power for military 
purposes. In those circumstances, it might 
well be asked whether NPT was not about to lose 
much of its importance and effectiveness. 
45. At a time when there was talk of a possible 
world energy crisis, nuclear power offered great 
possibilities to the countries able to produce it, 
but the political and economic aspects of the 
problem should not be forgotten. Before consideration 
of the use of nuclear power as an alternative 
solution, the principle of the sovereignty of States 
over their natural resources would have to be 
courageously recognized and the whole energy 
problem examined in the context of sound, equitable 
and untrammelled international co-operation. 
Otherwise, how could such an alternative solution 
be adopted by all countries, and in particular by 
the developing countries, within the foreseeable 
future? 

46. The Director General had pointed out to the 
Conference that the future development of nuclear 
power depended on the extent to which rational use 
could be made of fissionable material. [2] That 
question was closely connected with the future of 
technical co-operation and the need to stop the 
production of fissionable material for military 
purposes. 
47. Nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes also 
presented serious problems and called for the 
establishment by the Agency of a system of international 
surveillance, in accordance with the provisions 
of NPT; such action was dependent to a 
large extent on the result of the negotiations concerning 
the banning of nuclear weapons tests. 
Some delegates had spoken of the nuclear facilities 
in their respective countries, while others had 
little to say on the subject; that difference showed 
the importance of technical co-operation, which 
was one of the Agency's most urgent tasks. It was, 
however, obvious that the increase in voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund for 1973 would 
not be enough to solve that problem. The important 
question was to what extent the developed countries, 
in particular those possessing nuclear weapons, 
were ready to direct their efforts towards progress 
and technical co-operation between nations. 
48. He shared the fears expressed by some 
delegations concerning the possible effects of the 
continuing monetary crisis on the Agency's activities, 
especially the technical assistance 
programmes. He also wished to express his delegation's 
reservations about the increase in the 
proposed budget for 1974 due to currency fluctuations. 
49. In conclusion, he wished to reiterate his 
delegation's confidence in Mr. Eklund and to congratulate 
him on his re-election, which was just 
recognition of his competence and integrity. 
50. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland), speaking on 
behalf of the delegations of Liechtenstein and 
Switzerland, congratulated the Director General 
on his reappointment. He also congratulated the 
German Democratic Republic and the Mongolian 
People's Republic on their admission to the Agency. 
51. The Agency would be called upon to play an 
increasingly important part in man's efforts to 
increase his security. With man's concern about 
the protection of his environment growing 
constantly, nuclear power would make it possible 
not only to meet electricity demands but also to 
provide urban heating and to permit the widespread 
electrification of public transport - not to mention 
that of private vehicles, for which a solution would 
undoubtedly be found at some time in the future. 
[2] GC(XVII)/OR. 160, para. 23. 
-5 



GC(XVII)/OR. 165 

52. Since the economic development of 
Switzerland and the rest of the world would have 
to be stabilized from the beginning of the next 
century at a level which would preserve man's 
harmony with his environment, provision would 
have to be made for the constant recycling of raw 
materials and consequently for the extra power 
needed for such operations; co-operation between 
the Agency and the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) at Nairobi should enable a 
world-wide energy strategy to be drawn up. His 
delegation hoped that the Agency would increase 
its activities as a clearing-house for all the data 
that Member States could supply on the possibilities 
of nuclear power. 
53. In the field of research and development, 
Switzerland was to launch a high-temperature 
reactor programme, because facilities of that 
type seemed most likely to meet the requirements 
relating to protection of the environment. In the 
field of controlled thermonuclear fusion, too, 
Switzerland hoped to contribute towards reconciling 
power supply and environmental protection. The 
Swiss Nuclear Research Institute at Villigen had 
acquired a 600 MeV particle accelerator which 
would be used mainly to produce high-intensity 
pions. His country attached particular importance 
to the question of food preservation through irradiation, 
which was of interest to both industrialized 
and developing countries. 
54. With regard to nuclear security, the Agency 
had an important role to play in applying safeguards 
designed to ensure the use of nuclear power 
exclusively for peaceful purposes, both under its 
own safeguards system and in connection with NPT, 
It needed to be emphasized that the preamble to the 
latter instrument made provision for the indispensable 
corollary - nuclear disarmament. The 
Swiss authorities were therefore closely following 
the negotiations relating to such questions as 
strategic arms limitation and the reduction of 
armed forces in Europe. 
55. The authorities of his country, realizing that 
the practical and economic consequences of the 
safeguards provided for in Article III of NPT were 
acceptable to the Swiss economy and conscious of 
the progress made towards the world-wide implementation 
of NPT, were carefully following 
developments with regard to ratification procedures 
and would start such a procedure themselves at a 
suitable time. 
56. Mr. ORTIZ-LOPEZ (Costa Rica) said that 
he was fully aware of the very useful work done by 
the Director General over the past twelve years 
and warmly congratulated him on his re-election. 
57. He would restrict his statement to comments 
on certain aspects of the Agency's activities, 
especially those connected with technical assistance. 
In that context, his delegation welcomed the relations 
established between his country and the 
various technical assistance services. Costa Rica 
had benefited from the Agency's aid in many ways especially 
the provision of experts' services and 
the granting of fellowships - and he was grateful to 
it for its useful contribution to the development of 
his country; Costa Rica had also benefited from 
the studies carried out by the Agency in executing 
a regional project for Central America. In particular 
he drew the Conference's attention to the 
assistance provided by Argentina and Brazil in the 
form of Type II fellowships, from which Costa 
Rica had profited on many occasions; the 
importance of such disinterested action by two 
developing countries, for which his Government 
was deeply thankful, should not be overlooked. 

58. Technical assistance to developing countries, 
which was an instrument of unity and mutual understanding 
conducive to the establishment of peace 
and social justice, should be maintained in the 
interests of peaceful coexistence. Budgetary 
resources would obviously have to be increased, 
either through voluntary contributions or by other 
means, and the deficit caused by currency fluctuations 
made up, in order not only to finance 
technical assistance, but also, for example, to 
permit the adjustment of staff salaries. However, 
it would be unfair to ask the developing countries 
to participate in such an operation in proportion to 
their regular contributions, because they were 
victims of rather than those responsible for the 
monetary situation created by the industrially 
developed countries. It was for the latter countries 
to solve the problem, and his delegation hoped that 
the goodwill they always showed at international 
conferences would be translated into action. 
59. He welcomed the admission to the Agency of 
the German Democratic Republic and the Mongolian 
People's Republic because his country considered 
that, in the common interest, all nations, whatever 
their economic and military power, their political 
regime and ideology, should be on an equal footing, 
that their ideas and convictions should be respected, 
and that they should be allowed to pursue their 
activities without having to suffer the political and 
economic pressure which the developed countries 
too often tried to exercise. The Director General 
and the Secretariat had always managed to avoid 
such pressure and carry out their work objectively. 
60. Mr. OGUNLANA (Nigeria) congratulated 
Mr. Eklund on his re-election to the post of 
Director General for another four years. 
61. He had two hopes: that the active participation 
of poorer countries in developing nuclear 
science should take the form of a cultural activity 
rather than an aid programme and that the richer 
countries should realize that the spread of nuclear 
capability was beneficial to all mankind. He 
regretted that the poorer countries had to limit 
themselves to measurement activities because, 
while they were becoming acquainted with measurement 
techniques, the richer countries were forging 
ahead and their knowledge was reaching levels 
which were increasingly difficult to attain. Nuclear 
data were proliferating, a development which was 
due precisely to the scientific and technological 
difficulties encountered. 
62. The complexity of the forces involved gravitational, 
nuclear and electromagnetic - was 
-6 



GC(XVII)/OR. 165 


such that many questions were left unanswered byspecialists 
who often deliberately ignored them, 
since they were unable to answer them. The 
poorer countries, therefore, remained in ignorance. 
If they made systematic efforts to ask 
pertinent questions, the Agency would be obliged 
to recognize the importance of developing 
programmes leading to their nuclear emancipation. 
Until such programmes were developed, it was 
highly unlikely that the developing countries would 
"take off" in the nuclear field and benefit from the 
applications of nuclear science. 

63. The two cornerstones of the Agency's activities 
were to make the benefits of nuclear energy 
available throughout the world, bearing in mind 
the special needs of the developing countries, and 
to apply safeguards against possible military uses. 
Efforts to achieve the objectives associated with 
the first of them were hampered by far-reaching 
anomalies. For example, the Agency had limited 
its technical assistance programme to the application 
of isotopes and radiation, and many 
developing Member States had based their 
programmes on that. It was not surprising 
therefore that many atomic energy commissions 
in Member States were being reorganized, disbanded 
or given "non-nuclear" tasks. Furthermore, 
the amount contributed by some developing 
countries might be more than the assistance 
received, which gave rise to the question of who 
was truly giving the assistance. 
64. As regards the objectives associated with 
the other cornerstone, there was the question of 
who was being "safeguarded". The proponents of 
NPT were themselves carrying out nuclear tests, 
which showed clearly how much attention they paid 
to it; moreover, the collaboration between the 
proponents of NPT and South Africa showed their 
lack of sincerity. 
65. Since those two sets of objectives were the 
primary responsibilities of the Agency and it was 
desirable to seek constructive suggestions, the 
question of the atmosphere conducive to the 
establishment of nuclear competence in poor 
countries should be investigated and the Agency 
called on to use its staff to help them in that 
respect. The developing countries' problem was 
to create an atmosphere that would enable pacesetters 
in scientific thought to survive and triumph. 
Many developing countries suffered from a lack of 
professional staff, which had nothing to do with 
problem-solving capability. Agency staff should 
be relieved of the need to participate in too many 
meetings and conferences and used as assistants 
to innovating scientists in developing countries. 
Such collaboration would enhance the possibility 
of holding Agency meetings in those countries, 
with the advantage of bringing the fruits of scientific 
development to a larger group of people. The 
richer countries liked to discuss pollution. His 
delegation wished to point out that the adverse 
effect of physical pollution was infinitesimal 
compared with that of the lack of sincerity to 
which he had already referred. 

66. Mr. DASH (Mongolia) expressed his deep 
satisfaction at Mr. Eklund's appointment as 
Director General of the Agency for the fourth time 
and wished him every success in the performance 
of his varied and responsible tasks. He took the 
opportunity of thanking the delegations which had 
congratulated his country on its admission to 
membership of the Agency. 
67. First of all, the Mongolian delegation was 
glad to note that important changes were at present 
taking place in the world situation. The resulting 
decrease in international tension would certainly 
have a favourable effect on the relations between 
the different countries and on their collaboration 
within the Agency. That welcome trend in the 
direction of peace, democracy and social progress 
was essentially due to the policy of the Soviet 
Union, Mongolia and other socialist countries, and 
to the efforts of all the progressive forces in the 
world. It had also been made possible by the 
realistic attitude of the leaders of western countries 
vis-a-vis the world situation. The best illustration 
of the new state of affairs was the end of the war 
in Viet-Nam. 
68. Among the most important recent events had 
been the summit meetings between the Soviet Union 
and the United States. The agreement between 
those two countries on the prevention of nuclear 
war was of exceptional importance for the cause 
of general security. The present session of the 
General Conference, too, could make a valuable 
contribution to the improvement of the political 
climate. Examination of the Agency's activities 
showed that its efforts to promote the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy were an important contribution 
to the consolidation of peace and security 
throughout the world. 
69. The Mongolian delegation was glad to note 
that one of the main tasks with which the Agency 
was at present concerned was the conclusion of 
safeguards agreements in connection with NPT. 
His Government was carefully following the 
Agency's efforts and thought it should even speed 
up the negotiation and implementation of such 
agreements. He hoped that countries which had 
not yet concluded agreements would do so in the 
near future. Mongolia had ratified NPT in 1968 
and had concluded a safeguards agreement with 
the Agency in 1972. 
70. The more important functions of the Agency 
included international collaboration for the practical 
application of the latest achievements in nuclear 
physics, the improvement of environmental protection, 
the expansion of technical assistance, and 
the diffusion of information on the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. The Agency had already done much 
work in those areas and would certainly do still 
more in the future. With qualified staff and wide 
experience, it was fully capable of co-operating 
with WHO and other international organizations in 
co-ordinating the work being carried out in 
different countries to make the benefits of nuclear 
science available to mankind. 
-7 



GC(XVII)/OR. 165 

71. In Mongolia, the Council of Ministers had a 
Nuclear Energy Committee which was responsible 
for studying the possible uses of nuclear energy in 
the country, promoting the training of qualified 
staff and co-ordinating collaboration with foreign 
countries and international organizations. To that 
end, the Committee co-operated with the corresponding 
bodies in the Soviet Union and other 
socialist countries and with the Joint Institute of 
Nuclear Research at Dubna. 
72. Mongolia had several laboratories for nuclear 
studies, in particular those associated with 
Mongolia University, the Academy of Sciences, the 
Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Public 
Health. In collaboration with other socialist 
countries and with the Joint Institute at Dubna it 
was carrying out both fundamental and applied 
research. Special attention was being paid to the 
utilization of the latest achievements of nuclear 
physics in medicine, agriculture, biology and 
geology. The Mongolian Government was keenly 
interested in those branches of nuclear science 
which could play a leading part in the economic, 
scientific and cultural development of the country. 
73. In conclusion, the Mongolian delegation 
wished to express the conviction that its country's 
collaboration with other Member States, whatever 
their social structure, would contribute greatly to 
the development of nuclear physics in Mongolia and 
to the utilization of the latest achievements in that 
field for the well-being of the Mongolian people. 
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF FRANCE 


74. Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT (France) said he wished 
to present a brief clarification by way of reply to 
delegates who had referred in the general debate 
to nuclear tests. Some of those references had 
been in general terms and others had been directed 
at particular countries. He considered it essential 
to point out that nothing in the Statute gave the 
Agency power to deal with questions of that nature; 
it would therefore seem better not to refer to them 
at sessions of the General Conference but to deal 
only with matters relating to the Agency's statutory 
functions. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE 
SEVENTEENTH (1973) REGULAR SESSION 

(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE (GC(XVII)/514) 
75. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the draft 
resolution contained in the last paragraph of the 
report of the Credentials Committee 
(GC(XVII)/514), the adoption of which was recommended 
by the Committee. 
76. Mr. MOISIU (Albania) said that he did not 
recognize the validity of the credentials of the 
representatives of the Saigon clique, which held 
power only with the economic and military support 
of the United States. Nor could he accept the 
validity of the credentials issued by the puppet 
regime of Phnom Penh or of those issued by the 
Seoul Government, which had no right to represent 
the Khmer Republic and South Korea respectively. 
He was therefore unable to approve the part of the 
report relating to the credentials of the representatives 
of those three States. 

77. Mr. ARKADIEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics), speaking on behalf of his own Government 
and of the Governments of the Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic, the People's Republic of 
Bulgaria, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the 
German Democratic Republic, the Hungarian 
People's Republic, the Mongolian People's 
Republic, the Polish People's Republic and the 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, said that one 
could not pass over in silence the absence at the 
current regular session of the General Conference 
of a delegation of the legitimate and democratically 
elected Government of Chile, especially as it 
appeared that a number of countries were considering 
Chile for membership on the Board of Governors. 
78. Using peaceful means and acting within a 
framework of strict legality, Chile's Government 
of National Unity had striven to transform Chilean 
society in the interests of the overwhelming majority 
of the people. However, reactionary forces and 
a reactionary military clique in Chile, encouraged 
and supported by imperialist circles abroad, had 
done everything to upset the normal life of the 
country and openly taken the road of violence, 
military dictatorship and terror. The forces of 
reaction had not stopped at the violent overthrow of 
the legitimate Government; they had also killed 
the popularly elected President and were taking 
savage reprisals against those faithful to the cause 
of the people. 

79. His delegation and those other delegations 
on whose behalf he was speaking profoundly 
regretted the tragic death of the President of 
Chile, Salvador Allende, who had courageously 
championed the interests of the Chilean people, 
democracy and peace and had been an outstanding 
member of the national liberation movement, and 
were deeply indignant at the crimes committed by 
the Chilean forces of reaction, 
80. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania) wished to raise 
three objections to the draft resolution before the 
General Conference. First, he regarded as 
unacceptable the credentials issued by the Saigon 
Government which was not alone competent to 
represent South Viet-Nam, since in that country 
there was a provisional revolutionary government 
which had been recognized by a large number of 
countries and in international legal instruments. 
Second he endorsed the remarks of the delegates 
of the Soviet Union and Poland, mentioned in 
paragraphs 2 and 3 respectively of the Committee's 
report, concerning the non-validity of the credentials 
issued by the Seoul Government, which 
had no right to represent the Korean people as a 
whole. Lastly, he was also unable to recognize 
the validity of the credentials from which the 
representatives of Phnom Penh claimed to derive 
their powers. 
-8 



GC(XVII)/OR,166 

International Atomic Energy Agency 16 April 1974* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Monday, 24 September 1973, at 10. 50 a. m. 

President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
17 The Agency's accounts for 1972 1 -2 
18 Amendment of the Rules of Procedure 3-6 
19 Election of Members to the Board of 7-1 0 
Governors 
20 Appointment of the External Auditor 11 - 14 
12 Opening date of the eighteenth (1974) 15 - 16 
regular session 
13 The Agency's budget for 1973 17 - 18 
16 Market survey for nuclear power 19-2 0 
22 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 21 - 23 
for 1974 
21 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension 24 
Committee 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 27 September 1973. 
** GC(XVII)/512. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC(XVII)/OR. 166 

THE RECORD 

THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1972 
(GC(XVII)/515) 

1. Mr. MULLER (Finland), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, introduced 
the Committee's report on the Agency's accounts 
for 1972 (GC(XVII)/515). 
• 2. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XVII)/515 was adopted. 
AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE 
(GC(XVII)/517) 

3. Mr. MULLER (Finland), Rapporteur of the 
Administrative and Legal Committee, introducing 
the Committee's report in document GC(XVII)/517 
on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure, said 
the Committee recommended that the Conference 
take two actions under that agenda item. The 
first was to adopt the draft resolution annexed to 
its report, so that in electing Members to the 
Board of Governors the General Conference could 
give effect to the provisions of Article VI. A. 2 of 
the Statute which had come into force in June 
1973 [1]. The second was to take-the steps outlined 
in paragraph 4 of the report as the Committee 
had not had time to consider in detail the remainder 
of the draft amendments to the Rules of Procedure 
which were annexed to document GC(XVTI)/503, and 
had therefore concluded that a revised set of draft 
rules would have to be presented to the Conference 
at its next session. 
• 4. The draft resolution annexed to document 
GC(XVII)/517 was adopted. 
5. The PRESIDENT said that he assumed the 
Conference wished to take the steps outlined in 
paragraph 4 of the Committee's report. 
• 6. It was so decided. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 

GOVERNORS (GC(XVII)/502, 513) 

7. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the 
General Committee's memorandum in document 
GC(XVII)/513 on elections of Members to the Board, 
in paragraph 2 of which the Committee notified the 
Conference that 18 Members had to be elected to 
the Board, specifying the geographical areas in 
respect of which elections were required and the 
number of Members to be elected from each area. 
The elections would be conducted under the current 
Rules of Procedure (GC(VII)/INF/60) as amended 
by the resolution just adopted (GC(XVII)/517, 
Annex). 
• 8. At the invitation of the President, a 
member of the Netherlands delegation and a 
member of the Yugoslav delegation acted as tellers. 
[1] See document INFCIRC/159/Rev. 3. 
• 9. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 
18 Members to the Board. 
10. The PRESIDENT suggested that, while the 
tellers were counting the votes, the Conference 
pass on to other business. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

11. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference 
that the Agency's External Auditor, who was 
Auditor General of the Czechoslovak Socialist 
Republic, had been appointed by the Conference to 
audit the Agency's accounts for the years 1972 
and 1973. [2] It was accordingly necessary for the 
Conference to appoint an External Auditor to audit 
the Agency's accounts for subsequent years. 
12. He had been informed that the Auditor General 
of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic was willing 
to continue to serve as the Agency's External 
Auditor and that the Czechoslovak Government was 
willing to make him available for that task. He 
proposed, therefore, that the Auditor General of 
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic be appointed to 
audit the Agency's accounts for the years 1974 and 
1975. 
• 13. The President's proposal was accepted. 
14. The PRESIDENT said he was sure the Conference 
would wish him to convey its gratitude to 
the External Auditor for the sound and thorough 
work which he and his staff had done in the past 
and its appreciation of his willingness to continue 
to serve the Agency. Thanks were likewise due 
to the Czechoslovak Government for continuing to 
place its Auditor General at the Agency's disposal. 
OPENING DATE OF THE EIGHTEENTH (1974) 
REGULAR SESSION 

15. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee had asked him to put 
forward its recommendation that the opening date 
of the eighteenth regular session be Monday, 
16 September 1974. 
• 16. The recommendation of the General 
Committee was accepted. 
THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1973 (GC(XVII)/516) 

17. Mr. HAMMOND (Canada), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the Agency's 
budget for 1973 (GC(XVII)/516). 
• 18. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XVII)/516 was adopted. 
[2] See document GC(XV)/Resolutions (1971), 
Other Decisions, decision number GC(XV)/DEC/10. 
2 



MARKET SURVEY FOR NUCLEAR POWER 

(GC(XVII)/520) 

19. Mr. HAMMOND (Canada), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report in document 
GC(XVII)/520 on the market survey for nuclear 
power. 
• 20. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XVII)/520 was adopted. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL 
FUND FOR 1974 (GC(XVII)/511/Rev. 4) 


21. The PRESIDENT referred the Conference to 
document GC(XVII)/51l/Rev. 4, in which the 
Director General had stated that, by 6 p. m. on 
21 September, pledges by Members of voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund for 1974 had 
amounted to $ 1 774 947. One Member had in the 
meantime increased its pledge by nearly $5000, 
so that the total now stood at $1 779 747. 
22. Forty-nine Members were therefore pledged 
to contribute a little more than half the proposed 
target of $ 3 million [3]. Nevertheless, it emerged 
from the table in the document that several 
Members that had made generous contributions to 
the General Fund in previous years were not yet in 
a position to make known their contribution for 
next year, so there was good reason to believe that, 
for the first time in the Agency's history, the 
GC(XVII)/OR. 166 


target for voluntary contributions to the General 
Fund would be reached. 

23. It was also of some importance to note that 
26 Members had pledged sums representing percentages 
of the target that were considerably above 
the base rates of assessment expected to be set for 
their respective contributions to the Regular 
Budget for 1974; indeed, those percentages were 
on the average nearly 30% higher. That was a 
most heartening development, and he appealed to 
other delegations to do their utmost to convince 
their Governments to follow suit. The total in the 
General Fund would then in fact exceed the target 
and the Agency would be able to do considerably 
more for Members in the developing areas of the 
world in 1974 than had been thought possible. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 


24. The PRESIDENT explained that an item had 
been included in the agenda in case it had become 
necessary to replace one or more of the members 
of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee who were 
chosen by the Conference. Since, however, all 
the members in question expected to be able to 
serve throughout the following year, there was no 
business for the Conference to transact under that 
item. 
The meeting rose at 11. 40 a. m. 

[3] See document GC(XVII)/505, Annex V, 
draft resolution B, para. 1. 
-3 

GC(XVII}/OR.167 

International Atomic Energy Agency 16 April 1974* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

SEVENTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 18-24 SEPTEMBER 1973 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Monday, 24 September 1973, at 3.20 p.m. 

President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Par agraphs 
19 Election of Members to the Board 1 - 21 
of Governors 
14 The Agency's budget for 1974 22 - 23 
15 Scale of assessment of Members' 24 - 25 
contributions for 1974 
23 Closing of the session 26-4 1 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 3 October 1973. 
** GC(XVII)/512. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVII)/INF/145/Rev. 2. 


GC(XVII)/OR. 167 

THE RECORD 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the General 
Conference of the results of the voting at the 
preceding meeting to elect Members to the Board 
of Governors. [1] 
• 2„ The result of the election of three 
Members from the area of Latin America was as 
follows: 
Invalid votes: 3 
Abstentions: 21 
Valid votes: 207 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Costa Rica 71 
Peru 70 
Chile 52 
Cuba 13 
Bolivia 1 

• 3. Having obtained the required majority, 
Costa Rica, Peru and Chile were elected to the 
Board. 
• 4. The result of the election of four 
Members from the area of Western Europe was 
as follows: 
Invalid votes: 5 
Abstentions: 25 
Valid votes: 278 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Switzerland 71 
Denmark 70 
Ireland 68 
Sweden 68 
Iceland 1 

• 5. Having obtained the required majority, 
Switzerland, Denmark, Ireland and Sweden were 
elected to the Board. 
• 6. The result of the election of three 
Members from the area of Eastern Europe was as 
follows: 

Invalid votes: 

Abstentions: 

Valid votes: 

Required majority: 

Votes obtained: 

Hungary 
Bulgaria 
Czechoslovakia 
Poland 
Yugoslavia 

1 
40 
190 
32 

64 
62 
62 
1 
1 

• 7. Having obtained the required majority, 
Hungary, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia were 
elected to the Board. 
[1] See document GC(XVII)/OR. 166, paras 7-10. 
-

• 8. The result of the election of four 
Members from the area of Africa was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 29 
Valid votes: 278 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Gabon 69 
Sudan 69 
Algeria 68 
Ghana 67 
Cameroon 1 
Ethopia 1 
Madagascar 1 
Nigeria 1 
Senegal 1 

• 9. Having obtained the required majority, 
Gabon, Sudan, Algeria and Ghana were elected to 
the Board. 
• 10. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia 
was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 0 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 74 
Required majority: 38 
Votes obtained: 

Pakistan 70 
Lebanon 2 
Israel 2 
Jordan 1 

• 11. Having obtained the required majority, 
Pakistan was elected to the Board. 
• 12. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of the Far East was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 69 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Korea, Republic of 56 
Mongolia 11 
Khmer Republic 1 
Viet-Nam 1 

• 13. Having obtained the required majority, 
the Republic of Korea was elected to the Board. 
• 14. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia, 
South East Asia and the Pacific, or the Far East 
was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 70 
Required majority: 36 
Votes obtained: 

Philippines 69 
Pakistan 1 

• 15. Having obtained the required majority, 
the Philippines was elected to the Board. 
2 



GC(XVII)/OR. 167 

• 16. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of Africa, the Middle East and South 
Asia, or South East Asia and the Pacific was as 
follows: 
Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 7 
Valid votes: 68 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 
Lebanon 66 
New Zealand 1 
Zaire, Republic of 1 

• 17. Having obtained the required majority, 
Lebanon was elected to the Board. 
18. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 
18 Members just elected, recalled that under 
Article VI. D of the Statute they had been elected 
to hold office from the end of the current session 
until the end of the second regular annual session 
of the General Conference thereafter, in other 
words for a period of two years. He had, 
however, an important announcement to make in 
that connection. 
19. The Statute provided that there should always 
be 22 Members of the Board elected by the General 
Conference. [2] The General Conference had just 
elected 18 Members, so that it should elect four 
Members in 1974 and thereafter continue electing 
18 Members one year and four Members the next. 
During recent months, however, certain Members 
had expressed misgivings regarding the inherent 
imbalance in such a pattern of elections, and had 
tried to find some way of avoiding the difficulties 
which could arise if the composition of the Board 
were changed each year according to that pattern. 
In that context representatives of Algeria, Chile, 
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Denmark, 
Ghana, Ireland and Lebanon had authorized the 
President to inform the Conference, on behalf of 
their respective Governments, that those seven 
Members had decided to contribute to a solution 
of the problem by serving on the Board for one 
year only. Consequently, the Conference would 
be called upon to elect 11 Members to the Board 
at each regular session henceforth. 

20. He was confident that the Conference would 
deeply appreciate the high ideals and the unselfishness 
which had led to that decision, which would 
make it possible to achieve the desired balance in 
the annual election of Members to the Board and 
contribute towards an equitable and regular 
rotation on the Board of the Members in the 
various areas mentioned in Article VI of the 
Statute. 
21. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegations of 
the Netherlands and Yugoslavia, which had provided 
the two tellers, and also thanked the tellers 
themselves and their Secretariat assistants. 
[2] Article VI. A. 2. 
THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1974 (GC(XVII)/518) 

22. Mr. HAMMOND (Canada), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's report on the Agency's 
budget for 1974 (GC(XVII)/518). 
• 23. Draft resolution A (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1974) annexed to that report, 
draft resolution B (Operational Budget allocations 
for 1974), draft resolution C (The Working Capital 
Fund in 1974) and draft resolution D (The financing 
of technical assistance) were adopted in turn. 
SCALE OF ASSESSMENT OF MEMBERS' 
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1974 (GC(XVII)/519) 

24. Mr. HAMMOND (Canada), Rapporteur of the 
Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
presented the Committee's report on the scale of 
assessment of Members' contributions for 1974 
(GC(XVII)/519). 
• 25. The draft resolution in the document 
was adopted. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

26. Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) paid tribute, on 
behalf of the delegations from South East Asia and 
the Pacific, to the great experience of the 
President, under whose expert direction the 
deliberations of the seventeenth regular session of 
the Conference had been brought to a successful 
conclusion. He wished to express his gratitude to 
the members of the Secretariat for their spirit of 
co-operation, which had made it possible to 
discuss even the most delicate questions. Finally, 
he warmly thanked the delegates to the Conference 
for electing his country to the Board. 
27. Mr. TAPE (United States of America) 
expressed the gratitude of the Canadian delegation 
and of his own for the manner in which the 
President had guided the session's discussions. 
He desired also particularly to thank the seven 
Member States which, in a spirit of great 
generosity and understanding, had announced their 
intention to serve on the Board for one year only. 
28. Mr. ERRERA (Belgium), acting as spokesman 
for the delegations of Western Europe, 
thanked the President, and congratulated the 
members of the Secretariat on the excellent work 
they had carried out under the guidance of the 
Director General. 
29. Mr. MARULANDA (Colombia), speaking on 
behalf of the group of Latin American countries, 
thanked the Austrian authorities for their 
hospitality, and the President, Director General 
and entire Secretariat for the welcome they had 
accorded the delegates to the seventeenth regular 
session of the Agency's General Conference in 
Vienna. He was gratified at the results achieved 
by the Conference and hoped that the Agency would 
continue to support the interests of the less 
-3 



GC(XVII)/OR. 167 

favoured countries so as to bring about a better 
understanding between men, 

30. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan), on behalf of the 
Members in the area of the Middle East and South 
Asia, wished to associate himself with the 
expressions of gratitude addressed to the President 
for the courtesy and firmness with which he 
had directed the work of the session. He also 
thanked the delegates to the Conference for the 
honour they had bestowed upon his country by 
electing it to the Board, 
31. Mr. ANDRZEJEWSKI (Poland) congratulated 
the President on behalf of the Eastern European 
and socialist countries on the brilliant way in 
which he had discharged his task during the 
session. He also wished to thank all members of 
the Secretariat for their assistance during the 
session. 
32. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) said that, 
on behalf of the African Members, he also wished 
to thank the President. He hoped that the Director 
General, during his new term of office, would 
defend the interests of the developing Members as 
assiduously as he had in the past. 
33. Mr. DENES (Yugoslavia) expressed his 
delegation's appreciation of the tact with which 
the President had directed the work of the session 
and the spirit of co-operation and understanding 
shown by the delegates, which augured well for the 
future. 
34. Mr. KIT (Singapore) said that he was pleased 
to express his gratitude to the President, thanks 
to whom it had been possible to solve many 
difficulties during the session and to reach a 
harmonious understanding. 
35. The PRESIDENT warmly thanked the delegates 
who had spoken on behalf of their countries 
or their regions for the flattering words they had 
addressed to him. 
36. He was particularly pleased to welcome two 
new Members of the Agency, the German Democratic 
Republic and the Mongolian People's 
Republic. He wished to thank the Chairmen of the 
two Main Committees for the hard work they had 
accomplished in providing the Conference with the 
resolutions it had adopted that day. He also 
expressed his gratitude to the Vice-Presidents and 
the members of the General and Credentials 
Committees, as well as to the Director General 
and all his staff, whose efficiency, patience and 
understanding had made everyone's task so much 
easier. 

37. He also welcomed the many expressions of 
confidence in the Director General, which applied 
likewise to the Agency as a whole. 
38. In conclusion, he wished to comment briefly 
on problems of energy, as distinct from nuclear 
energy. It was becoming increasingly apparent in 
many countries that the provision of an adequate 
supply of energy was not only a matter of science 
and technological development, but that the 
technical decisions involved also had an important 
sociological and political impact. Although he 
was not one of those who was prepared to predict 
the evolution of demand and reach depressing 
conclusions, he was bound to admit that the 
world's known hydrocarbon fuel resources were 
limited and would need to be supplemented or 
replaced by other resources. He was sure that 
such resources would be found, but Governments 
must understand the need to seek advice from men 
or organizations which were truly interdisciplinary. 
Workers in nuclear energy had developed that 
interdisciplinary approach in greater depth than 
many of their colleagues working in the more 
conventional forms of energy, and some countries 
had already begun to exploit the talents of such 
people and organizations. The Agency had already 
moved to diversify its activities, particularly 
with regard to the impact of nuclear energy on the 
environment, but protection of the environment 
was only one of the many sociological questions 
that might be expected to be raised in world 
forums in the coming years. Of all the United 
Nations organs, the Agency was best placed to 
make a major contribution to the solution of those 
problems. 

39. He reiterated his thanks to the delegates for 
their spirit of comprehension and their sustained 
attention during the discussions. 
40. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he then invited delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. 
41. The PRESIDENT declared the seventeenth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
• The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m. 
-4 



