GC(XVIII)/OR.168 

International Atomic Energy Agency 3 February 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-EIGHTH PLENARY" MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Monday, 16 September 1974, at 3. 5 p.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) 
President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
1 Opening of the session 1-4 
2 Election of the President 5-1 1 
3(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee 12-1 3 
4 Election of the Vice-Presidents 14-1 8 
5 Appointment of the General Committee 19-2 2 
6 Applications for membership of the Agency 23-
4 4 
7 Statement by the Director General 45-7 9 
Statement by the Representative of the 80 85 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 24 September 1974. 
** GC(XVIII)/523. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 
74-9168 


GC(XVIII)/OR. 168 

THE RECORD 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the 
eighteenth regular session of the General Conference 
open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure he invited the delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for one 
minute. 
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
those present, particularly Mr. Veselsky, Secretary 
of State in the Federal Chancellery of the 
Republic of Austria, and Mr. Gratz, Mayor of 
Vienna, who were honouring the opening meeting 
of the session with their presence. 
4. Recalling the observations he had made at 
the end of the preceding session on the subject of 
energy resources, [1] he said that the events which 
had occurred since then had done nothing to weaken 
his impression that the Agency was the institution 
best fitted to make a substantial contribution to 
solving the numerous problems associated with 
energy. He hoped that the work of the present 
session would represent a step in that direction. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations 
for the office of President of the Conference. 
6. Mr. FUJIYAMA (Japan) nominated 
Mr. F. A, Medina, the delegate of the Philippines. 
He said that Mr. Medina was Chairman of the 
Philippines National Office for the Promotion of 
Sciences, and in that capacity was playing an 
important part in the nuclear energy field. 
Since 1958 he had been participating actively in the 
work of the Agency, and had held the important 
Secretariat post of Director of the Division of 
Technical Assistance. Since 1971 he had led the 
Philippine delegation to the annual session of the 
General Conference, and since the preceding 
September he had been representing his country on 
the Board of Governors. 
7. Miss RAY (United States of America) and 
Mr. ANAK AGUNG (Indonesia) supported the nomination. 
• 8. Mr. Medina (Philippines) was elected 
President of the General Conference for its 
eighteenth regular session by acclamation. 
• Mr. Medina (Philippines) took the Chair. 
[ 1] Summarized in document GC(XVII)/OR. 167, 
para. 38. 
9. The PRESIDENT thanked all delegations for 
their support for his candidature and was highly 
appreciative of the honour which his election 
signified for his country. 
10. After the moment of fear which the atom had 
brought about had passed, the Philippines had 
undertaken a programme for the utilization of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes which had 
enabled it to make considerable progress in that 
realm of technology. 
11. He intended to do his best to direct the work 
of the General Conference, and requested all delegations 
to lend him their support in striving for the 
success of the session which had just opened. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE 

12. The PRESIDENT proposed, in accordance 
with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, that a 
Credentials Committee should be appointed consisting 
of the following nine Members: Belgium, 
Costa Rica, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, Arab 
Republic of Egypt, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Thailand, 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the 
United States of America, 
• 13. The proposal was accepted. 
ELECTION OF THE VICE-PRESIDENTS 

14. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 34 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference was 
required to elect its Vice-Presidents after the 
election of the Chairmen of the two Main Committees. 
He therefore proposed to suspend the plenary 
meeting for a short time to enable the two Committees 
to elect their Chairmen. 
• The meeting was suspended at 3.35 p.m. 
and resumed at 3. 45 p. m. 
15. The PRESIDENT invited nominations for the 
eight posts of Vice-President of the Conference. 
16. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) nominated 
the delegates of Argentina, Canada, France, India, 
Indonesia, Japan, the Sudan and the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics. 
17. Mr. PETRI (Sweden) seconded those nominations. 
• 18. The delegates of the Members nominated 
were elected to the eight Vice-Presidencies. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

19. The PRESIDENT recalled that under Rule 40 
of the Rules of Procedure the Conference was 
required to elect four additional Members to the 
General Committee. He invited nominations. 
20. Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) nominated the 
delegates of the Federal Republic of Germany, 
-2 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 168 

Hungary, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland and the United States of America. 

21. Mr. ALLOTEY (Ghana) seconded those nominations. 
• 22. The delegates of the Members nominated 
were elected to the General Committee, which was 
thus duly appointed in compliance with Rule 40 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY (GC(XVIII)/521, 522) 

23. Mr. HAN (Republic of Korea), speaking to 
document GC(XVIII)/522 on the application by the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea for 
membership of the Agency, recalled that, as he 
had said at a meeting of the Board of Governors 
in June, his Government was not opposed to that 
application. His position was based on a foreign 
policy statement dated 23 June 1973 in which the 
following principles had been laid down: the 
Republic of Korea would endeavour, by initiating 
a dialogue between South Korea and North Korea, 
to consolidate peace in the area and achieve 
reunification of the country; North Korea and 
South Korea should not interfere in each other's 
internal affairs; the Republic of Korea would not 
oppose the entry, together with its own entry, of 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea into 
the United Nations and other international organizations 
if that would contribute to a relaxation of 
tension and an intensification of international 
co-operation. He expressed the hope that the 
admission of North Korea to the Agency would 
help bring about a dialogue and promote exchanges 
between South and North Korea, thereby hastening 
national reconciliation. 
24. Mr. ANAK AGUNG (Indonesia) said he 
supported without reservation the application by 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for 
membership of the Agency and hoped that country 
would also become a member of other international 
organizations. 
25. Mr. HELLAL (Algeria) said he was convinced 
that the admission to membership of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea would strengthen the 
principle of universality which should prevail in 
the Agency, the work of which would thereby gain 
in efficiency. 
26. Mr. IRAOLAGOITIA (Argentina), 
Mr. ORTIZ-LOPEZ (Costa Rica) and 
Mr. ORLANDO RODRIGUEZ (Cuba) supported the 
application for membership for the same reasons. 
27. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania) welcomed the application 
for membership of the Agency submitted by 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, a 
country attached to peace which, through its political 
initiative, had opened the way towards the 
normalization of relations between North Korea 
and South Korea and the realization of the legitimate 
aspiration of the Korean people to live in a 
unified State created through the efforts of the 
entire nation, by peaceful means, without any 
interference from outside. 

28. He called attention to the remarkable success 
of the Korean people in building up the country and 
the international prestige of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and considered that its 
admission to the Agency would be of great importance 
for the Agency itself and in strengthening the 
part the latter played in regard to the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
2 9. His delegation wished to emphasize that the 
admission of the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea to the Agency was in no way linked with the 
manoeuvres which aimed, by using the United 
Nations, at institutionalizing the division of Korea 
and preventing the dialogue which sought to achieve 
the peaceful reunification of North Korea and South 
Korea. 
30. Mr. TAPE (United States of America) said 
that his delegation would not oppose the Conference's 
approval by consensus of the admission of 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the 
Agency. It hoped that that country's association 
with the Agency would contribute to stable and 
peaceful relations between the Republic of Korea 
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
and to the admission of both countries to the United 
Nations. 
31. Mr. FUJIYAMA (Japan) said that his delegation, 
as it had already stated in June to the 
Board, welcomed the spirit of detente underlying 
the position of the Government of the Republic of 
Korea with respect to the application for admission 
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 
32. Mr. PLAKA (Albania) said he strongly supported 
the justified application for membership of 
the Agency by the Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea, a sovereign State which had achieved 
significant success in the economic sphere and in 
science and scientific applications. 
33. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) supported without reservation the applications 
for membership of the Agency by Mauritius 
(GC(XVIII)/521) and the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea (GC(XVIII)/522). The latter had 
made considerable progress in all areas of 
economic development, including the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. 
34. Mr. TALABHAT (Thailand) said that he, too, 
was in favour of admitting the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea to the Agency. He had no doubt 
that that country would faithfully discharge its 
obligations under the Statute. 
35. Mr. UNGERER (Federal Republic of 
Germany) said he was in favour of admitting the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the 
Agency. Its entry would help to increase the 
universality of the Agency, intensify international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and establish peaceful relations between North and 
South Korea. It was to be hoped that the 
-3 



GC (XVIII )/OR. 168 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea would 
become a full member of the United Nations, 

36. Mr. CHOWDHURY (Bangladesh) supported 
the two applications for membership of the Agency 
which were before the Conference. 
37. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference 
wished to adopt the draft resolution approving 
Mauritius for membership of the Agency contained 
in document GC(XVIII)/521. 
• 38. It was so decided,, 
39, The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference 
also wished to adopt the draft resolution approving 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for 
membership contained in document GC(XVIII)/522. 

• 40. It was so decided. 
41. Mr. PAK (Observer from the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea) expressed gratification 
at the admission of his country just approved by 
the General Conference. He recalled that his 
country was already a Member of specialized agencies 
of the United Nations and was participating in 
their work, moved by a desire to contribute to the 
cause of world peace and security. It would discharge 
its obligations under the Statute in the same 
spirit, 
42, The Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
had made great progress in technology and science, 
especially in research relating to the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. It now had a number of scientists 
who were actively engaged in developing 
applications of nuclear energy in the country. For 
example frequent use was made of radiation and 
radioisotopes in all fields, including industry and 
medicine. The Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea was determined to continue those activities 
in collaboration with the States Members of the 
Agency. 

43. In purely industrial terms, the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea was carrying out a sixyear 
plan, one of the main purposes of which was 
to achieve mechanization, semi-automation and 
automation in all branches of industry. The following 
plan would have as its purpose a considerable 
increase in the production of ferrous and nonferrous 
metals, coal, electricity, cement, fertilizers 
and grains. Thus, the country was developing 
an economy which would enable it to meet 
all requirements, 

44, In conclusion he wished to make it clear that 

there could be no question of linking the entry of 

the Democratic People's Republic of Korea into 

the Agency with the entry of the two Koreas into 

the United Nations. The Democratic People's 

Republic of Korea wanted to become a member of 

technical institutions for reasons of international 

co-operation, but it reaffirmed that it was impos


sible for the two Koreas to enter the United 

Nations, which was a political organization, since 

that would amount to official recognition of the 

existence of two Koreas. Only after a reunifica


tion, or at least a confederation, could Korea 
become a member of the United Nations. For its 
part, the Government of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, in order to achieve that goal, 
was endeavouring to institute co-operation and 
interchanges in numerous areas with the Republic 
of Korea. 

STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

45. The DIRECTOR GENERAL congratulated the 
President on his election and thanked the delegates 
for their continued confidence in him. 
46. Since the last session of the General Conference 
the world had seen what could happen when 
supply problems arose with man's principal energy 
resources. That had brought home to all concerned 
how much modern life depended on the availability 
of energy, and had shown how sensitive the world's 
economy was to fluctuations in the cost of energy. 
47. The objections raised against nuclear power 
were mainly concerned with the safety of nuclear 
power systems, the handling and storage of radioactive 
waste, the risk of unauthorized use of 
fissionable material and the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. It had to be emphasized from the outset, 
however, that nuclear power, for the time being, 
was the only available means of meeting the world's 
increasing energy demands. 
48. Even if there was some decline in oil prices, 
electricity from nuclear power would still be 
cheaper in nearly all cases than that derived from, 
coal, oil and other thermal sources. The threshold 
point at which electricity from nuclear power 
became cheaper than that from oil-fired plants now 
lay between 100 and 200 MW. It was not surprising, 
therefore, that the industrial countries were 
experiencing a spate of orders for nuclear power 
plants which made prices more competitive. The 
drop in the competitive threshold size obviously 
made nuclear power economically attractive to a 
much broader range of developing countries and, 
consequently, nuclear power was likely to account 
for more than half of the capacity additions in 
about 40 developing countries during the next 
decade, 1980 to 1990. 
49. Expansion of nuclear power would call for 
increased international efforts with regard to 
safety, and the plans submitted to the Board for 
the development of safety standards over the next 
three years would mark a major step forward. It 
was necessary to keep under continuing review the 
environmental impact of nuclear power production. 
The importance of the evaluations made by the 
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects 
of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), particularly in 
regard to long-term genetic effects of radiation, 
was due in part to the fact that UNSCEAR was a 
completely independent body - and one to which the 
Agency would continue to give its support. 
50. While public fears about plant safety were 
likely to diminish with time and experience, problems 
regarding the disposal and management of 
4 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 168 


radioactive wastes would require additional efforts 
for their solution. In March 1974 the Secretariat 
had established a standing international working 
group on high-level and alpha-bearing wastes to 
provide a full exchange of information on management 
practices and technological developments and 
to give guidance on the Agency's own programme. 
Advice on the main directions and priorities in the 
entire field of waste management and storage 
technology would be sought from a senior advisory 
group meeting at the end of the year. 

51. In fulfilment of the mandate assigned to the 
Agency in 1972 by the Convention on the Prevention 
of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and 
Other Matter (the London Convention)!2], the Board 
of Governors had approved a provisional definition 
of wastes unsuitable for ocean dumping and of 
procedures to be followed for the ocean disposal 
of low-level wastes. 
52. One of the problems encountered by the 
developing countries was to obtain comprehensive 
and impartial guidance, particularly at the early 
stages of a programme. To meet that need the 
Agency would expand its advisory services in 
power planning and project implementation. The 
problem of ensuring that developing countries could 
obtain sound and impartial advice on their energy 
programmes was part of the broader question of 
responsibility at the international level for energy 
matters. One could not fail to be concerned at the 
proliferation of energy studies, energy projects 
and even proposals for new international machinery. 
53. In approving the six-year programme before 
the Conference[3], the Board had recognized that 
the Agency must have certain competences, for 
instance in the areas of economic analysis and 
environmental studies, which would enable it to 
provide its Members with an overall view of the 
energy situation. He therefore asked Members to 
pass on to the Agency the experience acquired by 
their electric power authorities and utilities. 
54. Another problem in many developing countries 
was the lack of industrial experience and infrastructure 
to build, operate and maintain nuclear 
plants. The Agency would provide assistance to 
those countries with the co-operation of the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(IBRD), the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) and the industrialized Members. 
55. The problem of financing nuclear power had 
been aggravated sharply by the increase in oil 
prices. Under its Statute the Agency could not 
serve as a financing institution but it was using its 
good offices with other bodies. He had been encouraged 
by the much more positive attitude taken 
recently by IBRD towards the financing of nuclear 
power plants. 
56. Nuclear power plants with capacities below 
400 MW were not yet commercially available. One 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/205. 
[3] GC(XVIII)/526 and Mod. 1. 
of the purposes of the Market Survey for Nuclear 
Power in the. Developing Countries[4] had been to 
show manufacturers the scope of the demand that 
they were not yet catering for. In some industrial 
countries there was renewed interest in smaller 
nuclear power plants for merchant ship propulsion 
and it was conceivable that those two factors might 
in time converge. 

57. During the year the Agency had served for 
the first time as a channel for the supply of fuel for 
power reactors and fuel services to two Members. 
The demand for enrichment services was also 
rapidly increasing and in June a major supplier had 
had to temporarily suspend the conclusion of new 
contracts. The situation with regard to reprocessing 
capacity also indicated that much work would 
have to be done on the detailed planning of the 
entire fuel cycle before it could be claimed that 
nuclear power was successfully integrated into the 
world's energy supply. The establishment, as an 
international undertaking, of a reprocessing plant, 
preferably also combined with a nuclear fuel 
fabrication unit, might go a long way towards 
reaching that goal. The advantages of such an 
undertaking with regard to safeguards, physical 
protection and waste disposal were obvious. 
58. The Scientific Advisory Committee., which 
had met at the end of the previous week, had 
approved, in principle, a proposal to hold a major 
international conference in 1977 on the prospects 
for nuclear energy. The main object of the conference 
would be to provide government officials and 
utilities with the type of information they would 
need to cope with the massive expansion of nuclear 
capacity. 
59. Thirty-six of the 80 non-nuclear-weapon 
States which were party to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[5] had not 
yet completed the negotiation of the safeguards 
agreements it required and, in most cases, the 
time limit set for that by Article III. 4 had elapsed. 
The Secretariat was ready to help those States to 
fulfil their obligations without delay so that they 
might attend the Review Conference of the Parties 
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (the NPT Review Conference) in May 1975 
with their legal requirements fully discharged. 
60. The prospects for NPT had not improved 
during the year and, if the Review Conference was 
to mark the forward movement of NPT and not its 
stagnation, it was essential that the major industrial 
Powers, both nuclear- and non-nuclearweapon 
States, should reaffirm, by deed as well 
as by word, the importance they attached to NPT, 
However, there had also been some positive 
developments in the application of safeguards. It 
had to be remembered that the Agency's safeguards 
system represented the first application of international 
controls, and the experience acquired 
should be of immense value in establishing such 
controls in other fields in the future. 
[4] See document GC(XVII)/506. 
[5] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-'5 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 168 

61. In July, the Governments of the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United 
States of America had each announced that they 
would inform the Agency promptly and continuously 
of their anticipated exports and imports of nuclear 
material. [6] Further, a number of major exporting 
States had informed him of decisions they had 
taken to apply a minimum standard of conduct in 
the implementation of Article III. 2 of NPT, and to 
require the application of the Agency's safeguards 
in non-nuclear-weapon States in respect of items 
covered by that provision of NPT and supplied by 
them to such States. [7] 
62. The Agency's Safeguards Analytical Laboratory 
would begin operations the following year, 
performing analyses for safeguards purposes in 
parallel with laboratories under contract to the 
Agency in Member States. Clearly the national 
systems required under NPT would become more 
and more important as Governments felt the need 
for strict internal accounting and control of nuclear 
materials and appreciated the growing problem of 
protecting plant and materials against sabotage and 
theft. The Agency was already assisting Members 
to build up their system of accountancy and control 
and had issued appropriate guidelines. 
63. While arrangements for physical protection 
were primarily a national or, perhaps, regional 
responsibility, the Agency could provide guidance 
on protection during international transport of 
nuclear material, and the time might now be ripe 
to explore the prospects for international agreement 
on minimum standards for physical security. 
64. After the Agency's agreement with States 
Members of the European Atomic Energy Community{
8] had come into force, safeguards either of 
the NPT or non-NPT type would be in application 
in a great majority of the nuclear facilities of the 
non-nuclear-weapon States. To carry out that 
responsibility effectively, the Agency had to be 
assured that the resources available would continue 
to be adequate. He hoped that the compromise 
reached in regard to safeguards financing would 
serve as an assurance to Members that the inevitable 
and desirable growth of safeguards responsibilities 
would not be in any way detrimental to other 
Agency activities. 
65. Four safeguards agreements outside the 
scope of NPT had been concluded during the year 
and it might now be appropriate to define more 
precisely the technical scope and procedures for 
the non-NPT system[9] which had not been changed 
since 1968. 
[6] See document INFCIRC/207. 
[7] See documents INFCIRC/209 and 
Addendum 1 and 2. 
[8] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/193, 
[9] The system set forth in document 
INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2. 
66. The Agency was ready to provide to any nonnuclear-
weapon State the services for the peaceful 
uses of nuclear explosions referred to in Article V 
of NPT. The Board had just considered the 
detailed procedures by which the Agency would 
deal with requests for such services and the fourth 
of a series of technical meetings on that subject 
was planned for January 1975. Member States had 
so far shown only very limited interest in that 
field and countries able to arrange nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes would be performing a 
useful service if they were to provide the Agency 
with an evaluation of the present status and early 
prospects of that technology. 
67. The hopes which had attended the signing of 
NPT in the late 1960s had not yet been realized and 
of the 80 non-nuclear-weapon States that were party 
to it, only 44 had concluded safeguards agreements 
with the Agency. Moreover, the barrier to proliferation 
had been breached, and he could only repeat 
that a more widespread acceptance of NPT would 
depend in the first place on the determination of 
the depositary Governments. While Article VI was 
not a direct concern of the Agency, he felt sure 
that parties and prospective parties would support 
him in urging the depositaries to renew their 
efforts to ensure the implementation of that 
Article. 
68. The enhanced economic prospects for nuclear 
power in the developing countries would have a 
profound effect on both content and scope of the 
Agency's technical assistance activities. Members 
had responded to the appeals made to them and it 
appeared that in 1974 the target for voluntary 
contributions of $3 million for that year would be 
exceeded for the first time. For 1975, the Board 
had recommended a target of $4, 5 million. [10] 
69. Hitherto, the contributions of enriched 
uranium had been limited and he urged all Member 
States in a position to do so, to consider making 
donations of specific quantities of enriched material 
in the present period of currency instability. 
70. The Agency's participation in UNDP continued 
to grow. Four years previously, 35% of the 
Agency's technical assistance resources had come 
from UNDP and in 1973 the figure had reached 42%. 
In the technical assistance context he wished to 
take the opportunity to pay tribute to the work of 
Mr. Goswami, Deputy Director General for 
Technical Assistance and Publications, who would 
shortly be retiring and who had discharged his 
duties with the utmost competence and dedication, 
71. It was quite probable that the need for Agency 
assistance in detailed feasibility studies of nuclear 
plants would increase and it was possible that the 
Agency would eventually develop a standardized 
model approach for performing such studies. 
72. The International Nuclear Information System 
(INIS) was a unique achievement of the Agency, and 
was serving as an example for other organizations. 
[10] GC(3CVUI)/526, para. 30. 
-6 



GC( XVIII)/OR. 168 


for example the Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations (FAO), which, with the help 
of the Agency, was setting up an information system 
on agricultural sciences. 

73. The work of the Department of Research and 
Isotopes covered a very wide area. On the one 
hand, it was concerned with advanced research on 
problems of great long-term importance, for 
instance the co-ordination of research and the 
exchange of information on controlled thermonuclear 
fusion, on which the Agency was holding a 
major conference in Tokyo in November. At the 
other end of the spectrum the Department was concerned 
with the practical applications of radiation 
and radioisotopes. For a considerable number of 
Members nuclear power and other major technological 
applications would remain out of reach for 
many years to come despite continuing development. 
For those States the services offered in 
fields such as nuclear medicine and the application 
of nuclear techniques in agriculture and hydrology 
were of special interest and represented the main 
benefit they could obtain at the present time from 
their membership of the Agency. The Joint FAO/ 
IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Food and 
Agriculture, which belonged to that Department, 
was using nuclear techniques to help breed higheryielding 
varieties of food crops, increase livestock 
production and make better use of fertilizers at a 
time when the world's food reserves had sunk to 
one month's supplies and when there had been a 
sharp increase in the cost of the energy needed for 
producing fertilizers in developing countries. 
74. Food preservation by radiation was making a 
good deal of progress and many national clearances 
had been given. However, only three international 
clearances had been issued, namely for wheat, 
wheat products and potatoes, and they had been 
approved on a provisional basis only by the competent 
inter-agency committee in 1970. A meeting 
to reconsider the matter had been schedule for 1974 
but had now been postponed until the following year. 
Obviously the final decision would be of cardinal 
importance to the whole future of food irradiation 
and he hoped that other agencies in the United 
Nations family, and especially the World Health 
Organization (WHO), would join the Agency in 
pressing forward for an early decision. 
75. The increase in the total budget from 
$29,273 million in 1974 to $35,476 million in 
1975[ 11] represented programme increases in 
essentially three fields: technical assistance, 
nuclear safety and environmental protection, and 
nuclear power. Those increases were intended 
primarily, therefore, to respond to the needs of the 
developing countries. There was also an increase 
in the safeguards development programme which it 
was hoped would lead in time to savings in manpower 
by increased use of instrumentation. All 
other programmes had either been kept at practically 
the same level as 1974 or, in some cases, 
cut back. 
[11] Ibid., THE CONSOLIDATED BUDGET. 
7 6. During the year two committees had 
reviewed, respectively, the structure and function 
of the Department of Safeguards and Inspection and 
the activities and supporting role of the Laboratory. 
It had been planned to make a study of the desirability 
or otherwise of a greater degree of organizational 
separation of the Agency's promotional 
and regulatory activities, but that would now be 
deferred pending the important development in the 
Agency's regulatory work which had just been 
approved by the Board in formulating the Agency's 
nuclear safety programme. 
77, He again wished to pay tribute to the Govern


ment of Austria and the City of Vienna for their 

unfailing assistance and generosity as hosts, both 

in regard to the permanent Headquarters and in 

providing additional facilities for the laboratories 
at Seibersdorf. The new building was expected to 
be ready for occupancy towards the end of 1978 and 
it was already beginning to form part of the Vienna 

skyline. It was not too early to point out that the 

costs of moving to the new building would not be 
negligible and that operational costs were likely to 

be substantially higher than at present. 

78, The Agency had begun its first joint project 
with the International Institute for Applied Systems 
Analysis and had also received its first substantial 

financial assistance from the United Nations 

Environment Fund, notably for expanding the work 
of the International Laboratory of Marine Radio


activity in Monaco to include the study of certain 
non-radioactive pollutants. 

79, In conclusion, he wished to welcome the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and 
Mauritius to membership of the Agency. 

STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE 
SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

80. Mr. WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI (Director-
General of the United Nations Office at Geneva) 
noted that, during the current year, both the United 
Nations and the Agency had been involved in the 
preparation of the Review Conference of the Parties 
to NPT, which was to take place in May 1975. At 
that Conference, the Agency would be reporting on 
all its safeguards activities - an example of international 
controls accepted by sovereign States and 
on its role in fostering international collaboration 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. If, 
as seemed likely, the Agency's role was strengthened 
as a result of the Review Conference, fresh 
impetus would be given to the pursuit of its central 
objective, which was "to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world". 
81. At the present difficult juncture in world 
economic affairs, peace, health and prosperity had 
become immediate necessities. Seldom in the history 
of the United Nations system had there been a 
greater need for real creativeness in the approach 
to international economic and social relations. 
The United Nations had sought to meet the challenge 
by laying the foundations for a new international 
-7 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 168 


economic order and adopting a programme of action 
as a complement to the International Development 
Strategy. 

82, The implications for the Agency were farreaching; 
it was being offered fresh opportunities 
to make a constructive contribution to the common 
efforts of the United Nations system. By way of 
example, he pointed out that nuclear power had 
become a practical economic prospect for an 
increasing number of developing countries. It was 
evident that many of those countries would require 
special assistance. They would also need help in 
resolving complex problems relating to feasibility 
studies for nuclear power plants, capital financing, 
the training of specialized personnel and the 
formulation of laws and regulations - to mention 
but a few aspects of the question. With that in 
mind, the United Nations could not but commend 
the Agency's intention to strengthen its capacity to 
respond to the changing situation. As for the 
immediate future, it was gratifying to see the 
Agency expanding its efforts to determine the scope 
of the potential market for nuclear power in developing 
countries. 

83. At the same time, it was hardly surprising 
that the projected growth of nuclear power programmes 
had sharpened the controversy about the 
impact of nuclear technology on the environment. 
It deserved to be better known, however, that the 
Agency, with firm determination, had always 
striven to ensure that the utilization of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes and as an aid to 
development did not, at any stage, harm man or 
his environment. In its expanding nuclear safety 
and environmental protection activities, the Agency 
was receiving support not only from its Member 
States but also from the United Nations Environment 
Programme. Furthermore, the Agency was preparing 
itself to meet a growing number of requests 
for nuclear plant siting and safety missions. In 
fact, far from harming the environment, many of 
the projects in which the Agency was involved were 
designed to improve it. 

84. Also of interest to the United Nations were 
the programmes which the Agency and FAO were 
carrying out jointly in applying nuclear science and 
technology to increase world food production. In 
view of the imminence of the United Nations World 
Food Conference it was appropriate that the General 
Conference should review and, where necessary, 
strengthen those programmes. In that context, he 
wished to make particular reference to the research 
programme relating to the use of nitrogen fertilizers, 
which had recently assumed considerable 
importance owing to increases in energy costs. 
85. In conclusion, he expressed his gratification 
at the close co-operation which had become 
established between the United Nations and the 
Agency. It was based, of course, on the special 
relations arising out of Article III of the Statute and 
on the relationship agreement between the two 
organizations. [12] At the same time, it was due 
in large measure to the exceptional qualities of 
Mr. Eklund, to whom he wished to pay a warm 
tribute on behalf of the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations. 
• The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m. 
[12] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/ll. 
-8 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 
11 February 1975* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna., on Tuesday, 17 September 1974, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

8 Adoption of the agenda and allocation of 1-2 
items for initial discussion 

9 General debate and report for 1973-74 3-10 5 

Statements by the delegates of: 

United States of America 3 - 29 
South Africa 30 - 41 
Indonesia 42 - 59 
Germany, Federal Republic of 60 - 80 
Japan 81 - 97 
Holy See 98-105 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 19 September 1974. 
** GC(XVIII)/534. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 
74-9164 


GC(XVIII)/OR, 169 

THE RECORD 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION 
OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XVIII)/523) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee recommended it to 
approve an agenda for the session consisting of all 
the items on the provisional agenda in document 
GC(XVIII)/523, and also to allocate those items 
for initial discussion as indicated in that document. 
• 2. The Committee's recommendations were 
accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1973-74 
(GC(XVIII)/525, 532) 

3. Miss RAY (United States of America) said 
that the Director General and staff were to be 
commended on their response to the difficult, 
urgent and complex demands made upon them during 
the preceding year. The initiative, imagination and 
professional competence of the Agency would probably 
be tested even more in the years to come. 
However, the Director General had clearly indicated 
in his statement that he knew that those challenges 
must be faced and surmounted. 
4. She then read out the following message from 
the President of the United States of America: 
(a) "On this, my first occasion to address 
the General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, I want to emphasize 
the strong and affirmative role the United 
States has played in support of the IAEA. 
Our policy was initiated under 
President Eisenhower, sustained under 
succeeding Presidents and will continue. 
(b) "The IAEA helps all nations in promoting 
world-wide peaceful development of nuclear 
energy, meeting the challenge of increased 
energy requirements, protecting both man 
and his environment and providing assurance 
against diversion of this resource for nuclear 
explosives. 
(c) "The Agency exercises important responsibilities 
in carrying out safeguards in 
accordance with the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which I 
regard as one of the pillars of United States 
foreign policy. I wish to reaffirm my 
Government's offer to permit the application 
of IAEA safeguards to any US nuclear activity 
except those of direct national security 
significance. This offer will be implemented 
when safeguards are being broadly applied 
under the Treaty in other industrial States. 
Our offer was made in order to encourage 
the widest possible adherence to the Treaty 
by demonstrating to other nations that they 
would not be placed at a commercial disadvantage 
by reason of the application of safeguards 
under the Treaty, 
(d) "I have become increasingly aware of the 
world-wide expectation that nuclear energy 
should provide a far greater portion of power 
needs and of the world-wide concern about 
nuclear safeguards. The Member States of 
IAEA and Agency staff face important challenges 
in simultaneously expanding nuclear 
power production and safeguarding its fuel 
cycle. 
(e) "We in the United States look forward to 
continuing, and in fact increased IAEA contributions 
in bringing the benefits of the peaceful 
atom to all mankind and in bringing about 
closer collaboration among the nations of the 
world. 
(f) "It is a pleasure to extend to all delegates 
to this Conference my warmest greetings and 
best wishes for a successful meeting. " 
5. President Ford had thus clearly reaffirmed 
the strong support the United States of America 
gave to the Agency's programme. 
6. As many might recall, the United States 
Atoms-for-Peace programme and the establishment 
of the Agency had been proposed by 
President Eisenhower in his historic message 
before the General Assembly of the United Nations 
in December 1953. The development of peaceful 
uses of atomic energy during the 20 years since 
then had been characterized by impressive international 
co-operation. The ability of many countries 
to enter the nuclear age had been facilitated 
by the work of the Agency. Of its 104 Members, 
nearly 50 were actively engaged with research 
reactors, and by the end of the current year the 
Agency had estimated that there would be 121 operational 
power reactors in 17 Member States, in 
addition to the United States of America, with an 
installed nuclear capacity of nearly 32 000 MW. 
Similar projections by the Agency showed that by 
1980 those figures would have increased to 244 
power reactors in 25 Member States, with a total 
installed capacity of over 125 000 MW, The significant 
role played by the Agency in fostering dissemination 
of nuclear knowledge and in encouraging 
the responsible use of the technology arising therefrom 
had had remarkable results in the short 
period of 20 years. The Agency's importance would 
certainly increase in years to come. 
7. The Director General had provided the Conference 
with a carefully conceived and thoughtprovoking 
analysis of the problems facing nuclear 
energy throughout the world. [1] Her Government 
strongly supported a broad review of the prospects 
and problems of nuclear power in a world energy 
situation that was increasingly complex. As the 
availability of nuclear power for generating electricity 
expanded in both developed and developing 
countries, problems of safety, fuel supply and 
waste management would grow. Co-operation and 
exchange of information on an ever-broadening 
scale would be required. 
[1] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. If 
paras 45-79. 
-2 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 


8. The United States Government supported the 
Agency's expanded programme in the safety field. 
The results of a two-year independent study of 
safety in United States commercial nuclear power 
plants, referred to as the Rasmussen study, had 
just been published in draft form. That definitive 
analysis found the risks of serious accidents to be 
extremely low, and that even if an improbable 
accident should occur, the likelihood of deaths or 
illness or financial losses was far smaller than 
from several types of non-nuclear accidents to 
which people were already commonly exposed. 
The main report and a summary had been distributed 
to atomic energy organizations throughout the 
world, and a full set of the 14 volumes of technical 
appendices still in draft form had been provided 
to the Agency. Review and comments were invited. 
Detailed attention to safe design, construction, 
and operation of nuclear plants was essential 
everywhere because an accident in any nation 
would be of concern to all. 
9. The less developed countries should benefit 
considerably from the Agency's expanded activities 
of assistance in planning nuclear power projects. 
The draft IAEA guide-book and the advisory 
services that the Agency provided made the Agency 
the leading international body for assistance in the 
evaluation and introduction of nuclear power in less 
developed countries. 
10. With regard to fuel supply and fuel cycle 
services, the United States of America, as a major 
supplier of enriched uranium, viewed its responsibilities 
very seriously. The United States Atomic 
Energy Commission (USAEC) had recently 
contracted up to the present limit of its authority 
to meet the needs of approximately 355 domestic 
and foreign reactors representing about 
320 000 MW. Those contracts covered reactors 
that would require initial fuel deliveries up to 
June 30, 1982. Methods of extending capacity so 
that the international market could continue to be 
served reliably for decades to come were also 
under study. 
11. Her delegation recognized the need for much 
better data on uranium resources and enrichment 
capacity, and fully supported the Director General's 
call for a major international conference in 1977 on 
prospects and problems for nuclear energy. 
12. High-level radioactive wastes continued to 
pose long-term problems. The action taken by the 
Board on September 13 pursuant to the Convention 
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping 
of Wastes and Other Matter (the London Convention^ 
2] in connection with the definition of the 
kinds of wastes unsuitable for dumping at sea was 
welcome. She could see the Agency playing a 
significant role in the development of standards 
and safety criteria and perhaps also of methodology 
for the handling of those wastes. 
13. The Agency's technical assistance programmes 
had long been of great value to many 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/205. 
countries. Her Government continued to support 
and participate in those multifaceted programmes. 
For example, as an important early step in helping 
to prepare the less developed countries to use 
nuclear power, it had proposed co-sponsoring with 
the Agency a two- to three-week course on the 
principles and techniques of regulating nuclear 
power for public health, safety and environmental 
protection. That course, which it was proposed 
should be held at the USAEC's headquarters, would 
assist representatives of perhaps 20-30 countries 
to organize and administer effective national 
nuclear energy regulatory programmes. United 
States experience in that area had been wideranging 
and intense, and should be of considerable 
interest and utility to those Member States planning 
to embark upon nuclear power programmes. The 
essential role of specialized manpower training in 
that relatively new area as well as in the areas in 
which the Agency had been engaged for some time 
was fully recognized. 

14. In the same connection, it was most gratifying 
that the Agency had reached agreement on its 
programme for the preparation of a set of standards, 
in the form of codes of practice and safety 
guides, for nuclear power reactors. Her Government 
attached great importance to that activity. 
The programme would have the strong support of 
USAEC, as her delegation hoped it would from 
appropriate organizations in other Member States, 
Her Government was prepared to make important 
contributions, including expert services without 
cost to the Agency, to help accomplish the programme's 
objectives. 
15. She suggested a possible new emphasis for 
the Agency in close co-operation with the World 
Health Organization (WHO) to bring to developing 
countries the full benefits of nuclear medicine. 
Adequately trained medical personnel already 
existed in many countries, and the requisite radioactive 
materials could be shipped with modern air 
transportation. What often appeared to be lacking 
were sturdy, reliable, low-cost, yet sensitive 
instruments for diagnostic and therapeutic use in 
a wide variety of facilities and environmental 
conditions. The Agency might prepare an inventory 
of the potential world market for such equipment 
as a stimulus to manufacturers. 
16. For the sixteenth consecutive year, the 
United States renewed its pledge to donate up to 
$50 000 worth of special nuclear materials for use 
in Agency projects. As announced to the Board of 
Governors in June, parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[3] 
would be given preferential consideration in the 
donation of those materials. 
17. Her delegation continued to support the 
financing of the technical assistance programme 
by voluntary contributions. It was confident that 
voluntary contributions produced more funds and 
more assistance in kind than assessments could. 
The United States' cash and in-kind assistance the 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-3 

GC(XVIII)/OR.169 

previous year amounted in value to about $2 million. 
For the coming year, subject to governmental 
appropriations, the Government intended to 
contribute generously to the cash target and to 
make additional in-kind grants. Beginning in 1975 
it intended to give preference in allocation of inkind 
grants to developing countries which were 
parties to NPT. It considered both of those actions 
to be consistent with its obligations under 
Article IV of NPT. 

18. Events of the past year had caused a dramatic 
and renewed interest in nucLear energy, and she 
would focus discussion upon what she believed to be 
the most serious challenge facing the Agency and 
all those interested in nuclear energy: the need to 
design even more effective safeguards and to apply 
them to nuclear materials and facilities in order 
to deter proliferation of nuclear weapon capability 
and the need to design and apply additional measures 
to prevent the theft of nuclear materials. 
19. The Director General had taken the lead in 
assessing safeguards and proliferation issues at 
that General Conference, and she hoped that her 
remarks would generate additional comments. Her 
remarks reflected policy developments in her own 
country, bilateral discussions with other nations, 
and a desire to share those views with all present. 
20. Nations that exported and nations that purchased 
nuclear technology, equipment and fuels 
both had much to gain by making the international 
nuclear situation more secure. Her Government 
was concerned about export practices, reasonable 
control of the entire fuel cycle, physical security 
of nuclear materials, safeguards accountability for 
nuclear materials, clearly defined international 
responses to acts or threats of nuclear terrorism, 
and implications of peaceful nuclear explosions for 
nuclear proliferation. It continued to endorse 
fully NPT and urged nations which had not yet 
become party to it to do so as soon as was feasible. 
It also hoped that non-parties as well as parties to 
NPT could make a concerted effort within the 
Agency to enhance security and safeguards for 
nuclear plants and materials throughout the world. 
It was worth examining some aspects of the situation 
in more detail. 
21. With regard to conditions for export, some 
of the major nuclear exporting countries, including 
the United States, had reached agreement on 
procedures and criteria that served as minimum 
common standards for the implementation of the 
requirements of Article III. 2 of NPT which called 
for IAEA safeguards in connection with nuclear 
materials and equipment exported to non-nuclearweapon 
States. Furthermore, the United States, 
United Kingdom, and USSR had agreed, beginning 
on 1 October, to report to the Agency detailed 
information on their export and import of nuclear 
materials to and from non-nuclear-weapon States. 
22. Her Government recognized that many nations 
had well-trained scientists and engineers capable 
of applying or developing sophisticated nuclear 
technology for military as well as for peaceful 
purposes. It was to their great credit that so many 
of those nations had chosen not to develop nuclear 
weapons. As the Governor from the United States 
had emphasized to the Board in June, the use in or 
for any nuclear explosive device of any material or 
equipment subject to an agreement with the United 
States for co-operation for civil uses for atomic 
energy was precluded. It was intended to maintain 
that policy, and it was believed that other exporting 
countries shared the view that explicit agreements 

and effective verification were essential. 

23. Secondly, there was control of the fuel cycle. 
With the proposed and planned sale of reactors to 
countries throughout the world, including areas 
that were politically troubled, questions had been 
raised about the impact of such sales on proliferation. 
If each country that moved into nuclear 
generated electricity was faced with the necessity 
of developing its own means of handling the spent 
fuel, then each country would have to develop the 
technology for that purpose. As an alternative, 
the establishment of internationally-approved 
facilities to handle all the spent fuel from power 
reactors might be helpful to participating countries. 
It might also be reassuring to the rest of the world. 
24. Attention must also be directed to the different 
types of fuel cycles. Experience in her country 
had been mainly with light water reactors using 
low-enriched uranium. Cycles using natural 
uranium and heavy water moderation, uranium and 
thorium, highly-enriched uranium, or uranium and 
plutonium, would each require careful analysis to 
provide the best safeguarding methods and most 
efficient handling. Each fuel cycle had different 
degrees of vulnerability and should be analysed 
from that point of view also. In such analyses 
Member States and the Agency's staff could make 
great contributions. The United States was committed 
to such efforts on a national basis and would 
be pleased to participate in international activities 
in that area. 
25. Thirdly, there was physical security. In the 
face of terrorist activity in many places around the 
world, action had been taken in the United States 
to enhance significantly the physical security at 
USAEC and USAEC-licensed facilities and of 
materials during transport. The Government 
encouraged other nations to do the same. Widespread 
publicity concerning details of security 
plans would be unwise, but through appropriate 
technical working groups it would be pleased to 
share useful aspects of its approaches to greater 
physical security. In addition to improving conditions 
at existing locations, it anticipated that 
important changes could be incorporated into construction 
design to enhance physical security in 
new facilities. The booklet "Recommendations for 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials", 
published by the Agency in 1972, provided useful 
guidelines and a basis for further recommendations 
by the Agency. Her delegation supported the 
Director General's suggestion that prospects for 
an international agreement on minimum standards 
for physical security should be explored[4]. Fur[
4] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para. 63. 
-4 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 


ther, it agreed with his recommendation that the 
Agency should prepare to serve as a source for 
advice and assistance to those States that recognized 
the desirability of improving their capability 
in physical security systems. 

26. Fourthly, there was safeguards accountability 
for nuclear materials. The Agency had taken the 
lead for many years in safeguards accountability. 
Further improvements in methods could be anticipated, 
and increased attention must be paid to 
correction of deficiencies identified in the process. 
As President Ford had reaffirmed, the United 
States was prepared to implement its offer to permit 
the Agency to apply its safeguards to any of the 
nuclear activities in the United States, other than 
those with direct national security significance. It 
had offered to permit such safeguards, when they 
were applied broadly in non-nuclear-weapon countries, 
in order to demonstrate its belief that 
there was no risk to proprietary information and 
no danger of suffering commercial disadvantage 
under NPT safeguards. 

27. And lastly, nuclear explosions for peaceful 
purposes (PNE). The use of PNEs was a highly 
complicated matter, with ramifications under the 
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the 
Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water (the 
Partial Test Ban Treaty)[5] in tlie case of surface 
excavation, and of importance to the defining of 
threshold and complete test ban treaties. The 
Agency had done much to facilitate the exchange 
of information and to anticipate the needs for 
services. At a meeting the previous week, the 
Board had approved the approach to be adopted by 
the Agency in responding to requests from Members 
for such services. The Board had also authorized 
the Director General to establish within the Secretariat, 
at a suitable time, a separate organizational 
unit for implementing an international service for 
PNEs under appropriate international control. 
28. The need for in-depth studies to establish the 
feasibility and desirability of using PNEs for any 
project under consideration should be stressed. 
The United States was ready to contribute to the 
planning and performance of such feasibility 
studies. Where these studies demonstrated the 
practicability of conducting a PNE project consistent 
with the provisions of pertinent treaties or 
agreements, it was prepared to meet its obligations 
under Article V of NPT to provide PNE services at 
prices that would exclude any charges for research 
and development. 
29. It was clear that the role of nuclear power 
was being increasingly accepted around the world 
and that significant progress had been made in 
enhancing reactor safety. She was confident that 
co-operative international effort would meet the 
serious challenge of safeguarding nuclear materials 
and facilities as the benefits of nuclear energy were 
brought to many more countries. 
[5] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 480, No. 6964. 
30. Mr. von SCHIRNDING (South Africa) said 
that a gradual but profound change was taking place 
in the nature of the Agency's activities: the Agency 
had begun to exercise in full the important functions 
assigned to it by its Statute, in the field of nuclear 
safety and in the provision of assistance to Member 
States to introduce nuclear power. That was due 
largely to the impact on the Agency of the energy 
shortage and the growing international concern 
about the environment. 
31. On the energy side, the continuous exponential 
increases in the price of oil had further 
emphasized the need for a dynamic programme to 
meet the needs for nuclear energy in Member 
States, particularly in the developing countries, 
and it was obvious that the Agency would have to 
acquire the competence and the techniques to make 
meaningful overall energy surveys which would 
embrace alternative sources of energy besides 
nuclear power. As regards the concern about 
environmental aspects of nuclear energy, perhaps 
the main contribution which the Agency could make 
was to ensure as far as possible that the expansion 
of nuclear power took place with the minimum risk 
of nuclear accidents. While primary responsibility 
for plant safety must lie with Governments, manufacturers 
and operators, the Agency could help by 
providing technologists and safety experts to provide 
the training and guidance which were needed 
by Governments and planners, and by harmonizing 
and promoting internationally accepted standards 
for design, quality of materials, siting, construction 
and operation. Those contributions could go 
far towards ensuring that safety remained of 
paramount importance at all times and was in no 
way sacrificed to meet the demands of rapid capacity 
expansion, and that, at the same time, plant 
manufacturers were not deprived of reasonable 
freedom in the design of nuclear power plants. 
That activity would be very much in line with the 
steps already taken by the Board of Governors 
towards establishing safety codes and guides for 
nuclear power plants. 
32. The rise in oil prices had also revived an 
interest in nuclear-powered merchant ships, and 
a number of countries were moving towards that 
form of marine propulsion. The appearance of 
such vessels in the world's busy shipping lanes and 
their access to international ports, canals, etc. 
would raise new safety, legal and public acceptance 
questions, matters in which the Agency should be 
fully competent and which it should study in 
co-operation with other international bodies, A 
set of the minimum technical requirements with 
which a nuclear merchant ship must comply, stood 
out as a basic prerequisite for entry into ports. 
That should relate to such aspects as operating and 
safety personnel, handling of waste and cooling 
water, accident prevention and control measures, 
etc.; special provision might have to be made for 
nuclear supertankers. The problems associated 
with nuclear ships and their safety were not only 
of concern and importance in the day-to-day 
responsibilities of harbour masters and canal 
operators, but would also become an increasing 
preoccupation of the Governments of every country 
with extensive coastlines along the world's major 

-5 

GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 

shipping lanes, and Member States in that categoryshould 
be entitled to rely on wise guidance from the 
Agency. 

33. One of the problems caitsed by the increasing 
use of nuclear power to offset the rising demand 
for power and the threat of environmental pollution 
was the international implications of meeting the 
reprocessing needs of more and more countries as 
nuclear power programmes were introduced. A 
disproportionate proliferation of relatively small 
plants would be accompanied by a very substantial 
increase in the responsibilities of the Agency's 
Department of Safeguards and Inspection. It would 
seem imperative therefore for the Agency actively 
to expand its expertise and knowledge, not only of 
the technical and safeguards aspects but also of the 
economic and safety implications so as to be able 
to advise and guide Governments faced with the 
need for discussions in that field. Only in that way 
could a truly wise course be charted between the 
risks and costs of transporting irradiated fuel over 
great distances on the one hand, and the implications 
inherent in the erection of numerous dispersed 
reprocessing plants on the other. 
34. Physical security in the field of international 
transport would also be a growing preoccupation, 
and while the provision of armed guards and other 
internal security measures were essentially a 
matter for national Governments, the Agency might 
well study and make recommendations about the 
physical security problems that would arise in the 
international transport of fissile material by air, 
sea and even by land. That again, would involve 
co-operation with other international bodies and 
regional organizations. 
35. The problems encountered in the rapid 
growth of nuclear capacity, especially in the 
developing countries, would increasingly become 
the main preoccupation of the Agency during the 
years ahead, and that would put a considerable 
strain on its resources of manpower and expertise, 
as well as of finance. In that context the Agency's 
safeguards activities could have an indirectly 
beneficial impact on its safety programmes, since 
it was thereby acquiring considerable experience 
in nuclear materials management which was a 
basic requirement for an effective nuclear safety 
programme; in the process of setting up national 
nuclear materials accountancy and control systems, 
Governments would turn increasingly to the Agency 
for expert advice. 
3 6. Bearing that in mind, an inescapable conclusion 
was that the Agency, given its limited financial 
resources, would have to take a critical look at 
some of the other activities which had been 
embarked upon before nuclear power had come 
really into its own and which, though by now of 
comparatively marginal importance, were still 
reflected in its programme. If the Agency was to 
concentrate its efforts on energy, the environment, 
nuclear safety and safeguards, which his delegation 
felt should be its present main technical preoccupations, 
it would have to consider abandoning many 
such peripheral activities. The continued pressure 
of inflation and currency adjustments made such a 
review an urgent necessity and his delegation was 
glad to note that, as in so many other spheres, the 
Agency had responded positively and that the 
Director General intended to initiate discussions 
on the subject of priorities with the Scientific Advisory 
Committee. 

37. The subject of financing brought him to that 
other major component of the Agency's activities, 
namely, the technical assistance programme. 
That programme, being largely dependent on voluntary 
contributions had, of course, been hit as hard 
as any other component of the Agency's programme 
by the financial uncertainties which beset the world. 
It was therefore not unreasonable for the target for 
voluntary contributions for 1975 to be adjusted to 
take account of those developments. South Africa 
would, as in the past, continue to make its contribution 
in accordance with the base rate of assessment. 
However, while periodic reviews of the 
target figure were clearly desirable, voluntary 
cash contributions should not be viewed in isolation, 
because they were not the sole form of technical 
assistance to the developing countries. Bilateral 
assistance and gifts in kind were vital components 
of the Agency's technical assistance programme, 
while the large expansions in the Agency's programmes 
in nuclear power, reactor safety and 
training were related directly to the introduction 
of nuclear power in the developing countries and 
therefore also represented a valuable form of 
technical assistance. 

38. There were signs, in those days of roaring 
inflation, of growing reluctance to see the voluntary 
target figure continually increased, and it would 
not be surprising if any future proposal to raise the 
figure any further we.re met with firm resistance 
from more and more Member States coupled 
perhaps even with non-fulfilment of pledges previously 
made. On the other hand, it would often 
seem to be psychologically easier for Governments 
to make experts and equipment available OH a 
bilateral basis, than to commit themselves to 
regular monetary contributions. His delegation 
therefore urged the Secretariat to lay even more 
emphasis on that method of augmenting the Agency's 
ability to provide technical assistance. It might 
perhaps even devise a participatory financing 
system whereby both the Agency and one or more 
Member States jointly underwrote specific aid to 
any particular State. 
39. In that context, he wished to pay tribute to 
the contribution made by Mr. Goswami to the 
Agency's technical assistance activities and to wish 
him well on his retirement. 
40. Co-operation had always been a keynote of 
the Agency. With the world moving more and more 
towards the nuclear side to meet its energy needs, 
an increasingly higher degree of joint effort was a 
prime need. He was confident that all were at one 
in that common cause. 
41. In conclusion, he expressed his delegation's 
appreciation to the Director General for having 
made available advance copies of his interesting 
and thought-provoking statement to which all had 
-6 

listened with great attention. That was a most 
useful innovation which he hoped would be continued. 


42. Mr. ANAK AGUNG (Indonesia) recalled that 
under Article V. E. 4 of the Statute, the Conference 
had to consider the annual report for 1973-74 which 
was before it as document GC(XVIII)/525. The 
Director General and his staff were to be congratulated 
for producing that excellent document. 
43. The Indonesian delegation had no objections 
to the report and it warmly appreciated the work 
done by the Agency during the year elapsed. At 
the preceding regular session of the General Conference 
his delegation had pointed out that the 
extent to which the Agency could implement its 
programme for 1973-74 would depend on the 
Agency's financial policy, especially in view of the 
prevailing currency difficulties. It was gratifying 
to see that satisfactory solutions had been found 
and that the Agency had succeeded in economizing 
in various fields and had yet maintained a reasonable 
balance between the programmes. 
44. However, as in the preceding year, the 
report made practically no mention of regional 
co-operation and associated projects. It was to 
be hoped that in due time the difficulties which 
seemed to hamper those activities would be overcome 
and progress accelerated. Regional 
co-operation in atomic energy was very important 
and it would stimulate co-operation in other 
scientific fields as well. 
45. As for the projects financed by the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), however, 
his delegation thought they should be reported in 
greater detail since developing countries could 
learn much from other countries' programmes. 
Such projects should at least be covered in the 
same detail as those for which the Agency provided 
funds from its own resources. Of course, his 
delegation realized the difficulties faced by the 
Secretariat in preparing such reports, which 
apparently had to be drafted three to four months 
before the end of the period they covered. Perhaps 
it would be better if the report covered a calendar 
year, coinciding with the Agency's budgetary year, 
so that the Secretariat could base it on facts, 
46. It was gratifying to note that over the past 
year the Agency had not hesitated to change the 
relative emphasis on its various programmes, as 
required by economic considerations, especially in 
connection with world energy requirements. In 
that context his Government fully endorsed the 
expansion of the programme on nuclear power and 
associated activities including the programme on 
staff training referred to in Annex VI to document 
GC(XVIII)/526, but hoped that in pursuing that 
policy the Agency would not place food production 
second to the introduction of nuclear power. 
47. It was clear to everyone that the energy problem 
was a vital issue. Oil reserves would be 
depleted in 20 to 30 years. Even in the most advanced 
industrialized countries it would take 
several years before alternative energy resources 
GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 

could be developed on an economical basis. It was 
generally recognized that nuclear energy was a 
very promising alternative, but the use of that 
special kind of energy had several aspects requiring 
special attention, 

48. In the opening words of his statement, the 
Director General had pointed out that in some 
countries there was deep reluctance to accept 
nuclear power as a way of dealing with the world 
energy shortage. One reason was the fear of 
unauthorized use of fissionable material and the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Indonesian 
delegation felt that the introduction of nuclear 
power would encounter no great obstacles through 
misgivings regarding nuclear safety and waste 
handling problems, but concern regarding the possible 
proliferation of nuclear weapons was an important 
matter, and his Government shared that 
concern. It was unfortunate that one of the byproducts 
of nuclear power production could be used 
not only for peaceful but also for destructive purposes. 
Nevertheless his Government agreed that 
nuclear power was the only suitable immediate 
alternative to fossil fuel. 
49. As a means of preventing the possible proliferation 
of nuclear devices through the construction 
of nuclear power plants, his Government strongly 
supported the Agency's application of safeguards 
in States which were willing to put their installations 
voluntarily under Agency control. 
50. In a critical situation, where mankind was 
facing possible total destruction, salvation 
depended only on the sincerity of all attempts to 
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
Every endeavour must be made to enable the Agency 
to implement its safeguards system effectively and 
efficiently. 
51. Regarding the future programmes of the 
Agency, his delegation in general supported what 
was presented in document GC(XVIII)/526. He 
attached great importance to the Agency's programme 
of training. The policy of providing 
fellowship training for the nationals of developing 
countries was satisfactory and should be continued, 
but greater attempts were required to make the 
developing countries better able to train their own 
people, for instance by training university teachers 
in nuclear energy and the associated sciences. His 
country would welcome assistance from technically 
advanced countries to upgrade the teaching facilities 
of universities. The nuclear science teaching 
panels held jointly by the Agency and UNESCO with 
consultants from developing and developed Member 
States in 1968, 1970 and 1973 had also stressed 
the need for planning science teaching in the 
developing world. Since it regarded that question 
as a very important link in the transfer of technology 
chain, his delegation wanted to suggest that 
the Agency, in co-operation with UNESCO and 
UNDP, should establish and implement a purposeful 
programme to help developing countries to prepare 
the necessary facilities and teaching laboratories 
and to build up nuclear science teaching institutes 
of high standard. If that could be achieved, the 

-7 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 

developing countries would be very thankful to the 
Agency. 

52. Realizing the importance of that matter, his 
Government had decided to set up a national training 
centre for nuclear techniques, to give basic training 
in the different disciplines of nuclear science and 
technology. Any assistance from advanced countries, 
either bilaterally or through the Agency, 
would be welcome. As a token of its gratitude, the 
Government would then be willing to make the centre 
available for regional co-operation and training, 
53. His Government also wanted to express its 
deep appreciation of the work done by the Agency 
in co-operation with UNESCO and the Government 
of Italy in making the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste a success. That 
Centre was a forum, where scientists from technically 
advanced and technically developing countries 
had the opportunity to work together, and it had 
proved helpful to both advanced and developing 
countries. The Centre was now a useful link in the 
transfer of science and technology. The Agency 
was to be congratulated on that achievement and his 
delegation felt that more such centres should be 
established, preferably on a regional basis, where 
contacts would be facilitated. His delegation would 
support wholeheartedly any initiative of the Agency 
in that direction. 
54. His delegation also wanted to review briefly 
the problem of financing technical assistance, in 
the light of Resolution GC(XVII)/RES/307. Last 
June the Board had reached a consensus on that 
subject, basing its findings on objective data and 
information supplied by the Director General. [6] 
In a lengthy statement to the Board in the previous 
June the Governor from Indonesia had introduced 
a draft resolution, and pointed out that the problem 
of implementing the regular programme of technical 
assistance from the Agency's own resources could 
be best solved in two ways. 
55. The first way, which could be called the 
short-term solution, was to provide for an annual 
increase in the target for voluntary contributions 
so as to permit a reasonable programme increase 
and to offset the effects of price increases and 
currency realignments. The second way was based 
on a far-reaching approach and provided for inclusion 
of the technical assistance budget in the 
Regular Budget. His delegation had always hoped 
that other Members would appreciate the background 
of the proposals, for only in that way would 
it be possible to arrive at an equitable solution. It 
had always been an aim of his delegation to promote 
consensus decisions, since it was convinced that 
only such decisions could guarantee prompt implementation. 
His Government would always endeavour 
to work out compromise solutions based on mutual 
understanding, respect and interest. His delegation 
considered that the consensus pertaining to the 
financing of technical assistance reached during 
[6] See documents GC(XVIII)/529/Corr. 1 and 
GC(XVIII)/529 respectively. 
the June meetings of the Board was a reasonably 
objective and acceptable outcome. His delegation 
also wanted to express its appreciation to the 
Members of the Board, whose efforts had finally 
resulted in the consensus. 

56. It was clear from the Director General's 
report that the present system of financing Agency 
technical assistance could be improved, although it 
was agreed that for the present the financing of 
technical assistance from voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund would have to be continued. 
His delegation accepted that reality and warmly 
supported the consensus reached by the Board in 
June. It also wanted to propose the adoption of a 
resolution on the subject which would be in conformity 
with that consensus, and a draft would be 
introduced in the Programme, Technical and Budget 
Committee. [7] 
57. In regard to the nuclear developments which 
had taken place in Indonesia during the past year, 
he wanted to say that the programme of Indonesia's 
National Atomic Energy Agency continued to put the 
stress on the promotion of research and its applications 
in branches which were of immediate 
importance to the national development plan. 
58. The applications of radioisotopes and radiations 
in agriculture and hydrology were giving 
promising results and both fields enjoyed active 
support from the Agency and UNDP. The search 
for uranium in Kalimantan with the assistance of 
the French Government was already in its fifth 
year and still progressing. As far as nuclear 
power was concerned, it was regarded as an attractive 
alternative to conventional energy for the 
production of electricity, which should be feasible 
by about 1985. That conclusion was based on the 
findings of a series of seminars on the subject; 
although Indonesia had oil resources, the high oil 
price justified the eventual use of nuclear energy 
for electric power generation, especially if an 
economical uranium deposit could be found in 
Indonesia. The Indonesian Government had requested 
the Agency to assist it in carrying out a 
nuclear power plant study, and the Agency had 
promptly agreed. His Government was looking forward 
to a follow-up of that study, which it hoped 
could be finished by the end of the year. The great 
importance which the Government attached to the 
study was understandable, because the outcome of 
it would probably have an important impact on the 
Second Five Year Development Plan. 
59. Before concluding, he w.anted to convey his 
delegation's thanks to Mr. Goswami, Deputy 
Director General for Technical Assistance and 
Publications, for his devoted service to the Agency, 
in particular in technical assistance. 
60. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) said that, during the past year, the 
Agency's work had been affected to an almost dramatic 
extent by two political events: the oil crisis 
[7], GCiXVIII)/COM. 1/121 and Mod. 1. 

-8 



with its consequences for nuclear energy and the 
unsatisfactory situation existing with regard to 
measures for prevention of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. Those two issues undoubtedly 

called for detailed discussion and he would also be 
commenting on the subject of technical assistance 
for the developing Member States for, despite 
political crises, that permanent responsibility of 
the Agency must not be shoved aside. 

61. As from October 1973, the question of energy 
supply had become a central topic in world politics. 
The temporary shortage of oil and the steady rise 
in its price had clearly shown the need for developing 
alternative sources of energy. The conclusion 
to be drawn from all realistic assessments was 
that, sooner and to a larger extent than previously 
expected, nuclear energy would play a decisive 
role based on the considerable improvement in its 
competitive ability. Moreover, due to difficulties 
in respect of their trade and payments balances, a 
number of countries, and particularly developing 
countries, would no longer be in a position to 
afford oil imports or to step up such imports as 
required to meet the demands of their growing 
economies. 
62. Hence the chance and need for the introduction 
of nuclear power generation. And the great efforts 
in nuclear research and development made by a 
number of countries over a lengthy period gave good 
promise that the expectations now centred on 
nuclear energy could be fulfilled. Admittedly, 
many years of extensive and costly work lay ahead 
in order to improve proven advanced reactor 
systems and develop new ones but the experience 
gained thus far gave confidence in the successful 
completion of that task within the foreseeable 
future. 
63. In itself, however, that was not enough, since 
accelerated development of nuclear energy would 
have to be accompanied by the requisite measures 
in safety engineering and environmental protection. 
The securing of the energy supply by means of 
nuclear power must not be accomplished at the 
price of lessened safety, and efforts would have to 
be continued to convince the peoples of the world 
that everything possible and necessary was being 
done for their protection in face qf the potential 
hazards involved. Indeed, the onset of the energy 
crisis had facilitated more objective and dispassionate 
discussion at all levels on the conflicting 
objectives of ensuring a low-priced and safe energy 
supply on the one hand and an extensive environmental 
protection on the other. It was gratifying 
that the Agency had begun to participate in the 
international discussion of those extremely important 
issues. 
64. The fourth nuclear programme of the Federal 
Republic - the most important research and 
development programme his country had ever 
undertaken - took the above considerations into 
account. Public funds to the amount of some 
DM 1500 million would be allocated annually for 
the purposes of the programme, which was being 
supplemented by non-nuclear energy research 
focusing on the gasification and liquefaction of coal, 
together with energy-saving techniques. 
GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 

65. By 1980, installed nuclear power capacity in 
the Federal Republic would reach 20 000 MW(e) 
and would rise to between 40 000 and 50 000 MW by 
1985; in other words, 25% of his country's energy 
demand in 1980 and over 40% in 1985 would be met 
by nuclear power. To achieve that objective, five 
large nuclear power stations would have to be 
built each year, the plans for which were being 
based mainly on light-water reactor technology. 
66. In pursuing a consistent research and development 
programme, emphasis would also be laid 
on the development of the sodium-cooled fast 
breeder and the high-temperature reactors, for 
both the generation of electricity and process heat; 
intensified international co-operation and division 
of work was advocated on that part of the programme. 
The full fuel cycle would also be covered, 
with special attention to reprocessing and 
the treatment and ultimate safe storage of radioactive 
wastes. The utilization of nuclear fusion 
remained a long-term goal. 
67. In regard to the fuel cycle, particular mention 
should be made of the centrifuge process for uranium 
enrichment, a technique that had been jointly 
developed by the Netherlands, the United Kingdom 
and the Federal Republic. A relatively low consumption 
of energy was involved and the process 
could be adapted to market needs due to the flexible 
size of the facilities. According to a recent 
decision, the international company known as 
URENCO was to bring into operation a uranium 
enrichment capacity of 2000 tons of separative 
work per year in the early 1980s; by 1985, a capacity 
of 10 000 tons was expected to be available. 
It would thus be seen that the centrifuge technique 
had reached the stage of industrial application. 

68. In view of the changed situation as regarded 
energy policy, it was fortunate that the Conference 
had before it a new medium-term Agency programme 
for the years 1975-1980. [8] Both the 
industrialized and the developing countries would 
be utilizing nuclear energy to a greater extent and 
that would affect international co-operation, and 
also the Agency's work. 
69. The programme was characterized by a 
greater degree of concentration on the one hand 
and by the setting of new priorities on the other. 
The reduction of programme components from 96 
to 69 would enable the Agency to use its forces 
more efficiently. And the proposal to establish 
three priority areas covering nuclear power, 
nuclear safety and environmental protection, including 
training, was to be welcomed as providing 
the proper answer to the new challenge. 
70. The Agency would be in a position to continue 
and intensify its studies on the future development 
of nuclear energy, and to provide an international 
forum for discussion of the technical aspects of the 
various types of nuclear power station. The Agency 
could offer the technical know-how needed by devel[
8] GC(XVIII)/526 and Mod. 1. 
-9 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 

oping countries and could also help towards establishing 
the necessary infrastructures. More technical 
staff able to construct and operate nuclear 
facilities and capable of preparing and applying the 
necessary national safety rules had to be trained. 

71. The question was sometimes raised whether 
it might be appropriate to extend the Agency's 
tasks to cover energy problems outside the area of 
nuclear energy. There would seem to be technical 
and political grounds supporting such a step; the 
Agency had acquired experience in the co-ordination 
of various scientific and technical programmes; 
its work was highly regarded; and the atmosphere 
of international co-operation within the organization 
was good. Finally, the development of nuclear 
energy was being regarded more and more in the 
context of the overall energy situation. Nevertheless, 
he would advise,a cautious approach. It 
would first have to be specified what the new 
responsibilities would comprise, whether areas 
covered by other United Nations organizations 
would be touched, and whether the new tasks would 
be in line with the Agency's character. -Only then 
would it be possible to examine the effects on the 
Agency's Statute, programme and structure. The 
Agency, in carrying out its work, would not, however, 
be excluded from giving greater consideration 
to the role of other energy sources. The 
market survey made in 1973 concerning the prospects 
for nuclear power stations in developing 
countries, as compared to other sources of energy, 
was a good illustration of how general energy 
aspects could influence the Agency's work. He had 
noted with interest and approval that the Director 
General seemed inclined also to adopt the same 
rather prudent attitude in regard to the issue. 
72. Oh the subject of technical assistance, the 
General Conference had before it, pursuant to a 
request made in 1973, a report on the possibilities 
for the future financing of activities in that area. 
The study had been carefully prepared; and the 
proposal by the Board of Governors that for the 
time being the practice of financing technical 
assistance by means of voluntary contributions 
should be continued was a convincing one, as well 
as being in line with the general trend in organizations 
of the United Nations system. 
73.. An analysis of Agency expenditure for 1974 
showed that about $ 15 million, i. e. half of the funds 
available to the Agency, were being spent on projects 
of immediate interest to developing countries. 
The resources in question came to a lesser extent 
only from the General Fund; they were largely 
drawn from other sources, including, apart from 
UNDP funds, voluntary contributions in cash and in 
kind and the Agency's Regular Budget. The 
remaining half of the Agency's expenditure benefited 
all. Members, including the developing countries. 
The Agency had thus succeeded in attaining a 
reasonable distribution of its funds for the benefit 
of developing countries. In fixing the target level 
for the General Fund, the Board of Governors had 
recommended that account should be taken in particular 
of the volume of requests for technical 
assistance, as well as of price increases and currency 
fluctuations. Such action was certainly 

justified; but there were other important factors 
worthy of consideration, such as the amount of 
funds available for the work from other sources, 
as also the respective positions of the donor countries. 
The Agency could attain its goals only if 
Member States made adequate voluntary contributions. 
His delegation would like to see the more 
prosperous among the developing countries give 
additional help by making larger contributions than 
hitherto to meeting the costs of technical assistance. 


74. The voluntary contributions of the Federal . 
Republic for the year 1975 would comprise a 
number of items. In accordance with the Board's 
recommendation, it would raise its contribution to 
the General Fund from $220 000 in 1974 to $330 000 
in 1975. It again intended to provide 30 fellowships 
and was prepared to send at least 15 experts, free 
of cost to the Agency, on missions to developing 
countries. It was also prepared to donate equipment. 
Further, the joint programme of the Agency, 
FAO and the Federal Republic for improving the 
protein content of crops by the use of nuclear 
techniques was to be continued until 1978; and a 
co-ordinated research programme to combat the 
tsetse fly in Africa was shortly to begin with 
Federal Republic support. In addition the Federal 
Republic would bear the entire cost of more than 
$1 million for a new five-year programme aimed 
at studying the effects of nitrogen fertilizers and 
their residues by nuclear methods. That new programme 
would be carried out jointly with the 
Agency, FAO and laboratories in developing countries. 
Its dual purpose was to cover the economical 
use of fertilizers and the prevention of harmful 
environmental effects of agrochemicals in food and 
water. The total value of the Federal Republic's voluntary 
contributions in 1975 would therefore 
amount to more than $ 1 million. 

75. In regard to the question of the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, his Government would, in 
view of the great dangers further proliferation 
would bring for mankind, continue to support all 
efforts towards preventing misuse of nuclear energy 
of any kind. The Federal Republic had signed NPT 
in the interest of detente in Europe and of worldwide 
peace, having formally renounced the production 
of nuclear weapons as from 1955. Although it 
was already subject to effective European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM) safeguards, the 
Federal Republic had accepted, in the agreement 
between the Agency and EURATOM[9], signed in 
April 1973, verification of the EURATOM safeguards 
by the Agency. Preliminary ratification 
procedures relating to NPT and to the Verification 
Agreement had been completed earlier in the year 
and the ratification instruments would be deposited 
as soon as the other participating countries of 
EURATOM had met their respective requirements. 
76. It was his country's hope that States which had 
not yet acceded to NPT or not yet concluded safeguards 
agreements with'the Agency would follow 
[9] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/193. 
- 10 



its example. It also hoped that the negotiations on 
the offers of the United Kingdom and of the United 
States to subject their civilian nuclear activities 
to Agency safeguards would soon be completed and 
that the Board of Governors would shortly approve 
the relevant agreements. It could be of decisive 
importance for the future universality of NPT for 
other nuclear-weapon States to follow that example. 
Countries which had hitherto regarded the Treaty 
as discriminatory might thus be encouraged to 

accede to it. 

77. The conference to review NPT scheduled 
for 1975 would offer a welcome opportunity to 
consider all pending questions concerning safeguards. 
The Government of the Federal Republic 
was prepared to participate actively in the proceedings. 
78. With the growth in nuclear installations, 
there would be an unprecedented increase in the 
utilization, storage and transportation of nuclear 
material which, in turn, would increase the possibilities 
for diversion and misuse. Admittedly, the 
respective States were responsible for the physical 
protection of nuclear material, but the Agency had 
rightly assumed an advisory role in that area and 
should intensify its efforts in that direction. The 
suggestion by the Director General on exploring the 
prospects for minimum standards deserved careful 
study. National measures for the protection of 
nuclear material and international safeguards were 
closely related and should complement one another. 
79. With regard to the export of nuclear material 
and equipment, the Government of the Federal 
Republic welcomed the understanding among many 
exporting States on permitting exports only where 
the receiving State accepted international safeguards 
in respect of the material, the equipment, 
and the fissionable material subsequently produced. 
In that connection, the Agency would have an important 
role to play in concluding the requisite safeguards 
agreements with the importing countries; 
and the Federal Republic would recommend that 
appropriate procedures for the rapid conclusion 
of such agreements should be prepared in advance 
by the Agency. All those measures would be further 
steps towards a comprehensive universal 
system that, it was to be hoped, would effectively 
prevent the misuse of nuclear energy. 

80. In conclusion, he gave renewed assurance 
that the Government of the Federal Republic had 
confidence in the Agency's future and that it would 
continue to give it active support, 
81. Mr. FUJIYAMA (Japan) said that the oil 
crisis of the previous year had served as a valuable 
lesson and given warning of the approaching energy 
problem. In the 1960s and in the first half of the 
1970s, the world economy had taken a great leap 
forward, made possible only by the consumption of 
vast quantities of relatively cheap fossil fuels, 
such as petroleum. The anticipated increase in 
the world energy demand and accompanying depletion 
in world fossil fuel reserves, however, called 
for economies in the consumption of existing 
resources as well as a change-over to technology-
GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 


intensive energy sources. The development of 
energy technology was in that respect the common 
task of everyone today. 

82. Among such sources of power, nuclear 
energy could alone meet the qualitative and quantitative 
conditions required of a long-term source 
of supply. It would not be overstating the case to 
say that the future of mankind depended on the 
successful implementation of nuclear energy development 
programmes and that it was imperative to 
decide on a fundamental policy forthwith. 
83. Although nuclear power generation based on 
light-water reactors was already coming into 
commercial use, there was need to develop the 
utilization of nuclear energy in ways technologically 
more advanced and economically less burdensome. 
It was necessary, therefore, to put into effect the 
following overall plans for atomic energy development: 
firstly, in the short term, power generation 
by nuclear reactors already in operation, such as 
the light-water reactor, should be further promoted; 
secondly, the medium-term plan should 
aim at the development of multipurpose hightemperature 
gas-cooled reactors and fast-breeder 
reactors, with a view to the latter being far enough 
advanced for commercial use by the second half of 
the 1980s; and thirdly, the long-term objective 
should be to develop the nuclear fusion reactor for 
commercial use by about the year 2000, since that 
was to be the ultimate energy source by which mankind 
could be freed from further energy problems. 
84. Since development programmes of that scale 
required a vast amount of investment on research 
and development, together with the use of highly 
qualified personnel, the result would be effective 
utilization of resources and fair distribution, 
amongst the nations of the world, of the benefits 
of such research and development. The whole 
world should thus make concerted efforts to 
implement such programmes. 
85. With regard to the nuclear power situation 
in Japan, due to its high degree of dependence on 
overseas energy resources and growing energy 
demands, his country was particularly interested 
in nuclear power generation as a quasi-domestic 
source of power, and great efforts were being made 
to promote nuclear power plants based on lightwater 
reactors. At the present time, a total of 
seven commercial power reactors were in operation, 
with a total capacity of about 3000 MW. A 
further 16 reactors with an aggregate capacity of 
about 13 500 MW were under construction, and the 
figure was expected to reach 60 000 MW by 1985. 
86. History showed that the introduction into 
society of a new technology was usually accompanied 
by certain teething troubles. The bitter 
experience of the atomic bomb and the resultant 
"nuclear allergy" that still existed in Japan could 
potentially cause internal political problems affecting 
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Hence, from the very start of its nuclear 
power development, the Government of Japan had 
taken appropriate and far-reaching measures to 
ensure the safety and protection of the environment. 
- 11 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 

But some of the people living near the sites planned 
for power plants were not always convinced of that, 
and Japan's development programme had had, at 
times, to be suspended. 

87. Various measures had been adopted to overcome 
those difficulties, such as the acceleration of 
safety studies relating to nuclear power reactors, 
legislation to ensure that profits were channelled 
back into the locality, and the enhancement of 
public understanding of atomic energy. As a 
result, it was now expected that the Japanese 
nuclear power programme would be implemented 
according to schedule. But the problems mentioned 
were not only encountered in Japan; they were 
common, in greater or lesser degree, to all the 
countries of the world. It should be stressed in 
that connection that those countries would expect 
the Agency to promote still further international 
collaboration with a view to successfully solving 
such problems. 
88. To secure a stable energy supply in the long 
term, particular emphasis should be placed on 
nuclear power generation based, among other types, 
on light-water reactors, and on measures aimed 
at ensuring safety, protection of the environment, 
and safe radioactive waste management. At the 
same time, research and development work on the 
fast-breeder reactor and the nuclear fusion reactor 
should be conducted concurrently by all available 
means. 
89. Fully appreciating the importance of nuclear 
fusion studies and the necessity for international 
co-operation in that field, Japan would be acting as 
host for the Agency's "Fifth Conference on Plasma 
Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research", 
to be held in Tokyo in November. The conference 
would provide a forum for some 500 scientists, 
both from Japan and abroad, and it was sincerely 
to be hoped that it would be of outstanding significance 
in the field of nuclear fusion research. 
90. It was gratifying that the Agency had started 
work on drafting an international safety code, and 
formulating guidelines for nuclear power plants, 
at a time when nuclear power plant construction 
projects were no longer a matter of concern only 
to the developed nations and when steady progress 
was being made in that area by the developing 
nations as well. The Government of Japan firmly 
supported the Agency's decision to set up a senior 
advisory group in charge of the two-year compilation 
project and would co-operate in every way it 
could. 
91. The Agency should be commended for its 
recommendations on the prevention of marine 
pollution by the dumping of radioactive wastes, 
based upon the London Convention, although that 
did not mean that its work in that domain was finished. 
Quite to the contrary, the problem was 
gaining greater urgency than ever before, and the 
establishment of the international code and guidelines 
for the treatment and disposal of radioactive 
waste was obviously needed. The Agency would do 
well to continue its active initiatives in that respect. 
92. It was fitting that atomic energy should be 
made to benefit the developing and the developed 
nations equally. Its application, however, required 
the latest, most advanced technology, and the 
employment of highly trained personnel. The 
Agency's role in assisting those countries which 
had yet to start their atomic energy development 
work was therefore vital. 
93. From the standpoint of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, assistance to the developing nations 
was of cardinal importance and the need for such 
assistance was bound to grow. The Agency was 
planning to initiate, in 1975, a project for the 
training of nuclear power plant personnel in 
response to requests from countries which wanted 
to embark upon nuclear power generation. Japan 
was hoping to contribute to that project in as far as 
it could. 
94. In 1974, Japan had contributed approximately 
$260 000 to the General Fund for technical assistance 
to developing countries, i. e. a 66% increase 
over 1973, representing a contribution exceeded 
only by those of the United States and the Soviet 
Union, The decision to increase the target for 
voluntary contributions to $4 500 000 for 1975 was 
to be welcomed. Japan's assessed contribution 
in 1975 would be more than 7%, and its cash contributions 
to the General Fund would be sharply 
increased, in accordance with the new assessed 
contribution. Japan was also prepared to 
co-operate in other assistance programmes, such 
as visits by experts and the acceptance of trainees 
under the Agency's fellowship programme. 

95. The peaceful uses of atomic energy should 
continue to be promoted, but it was equally essential 
in every way to prevent the use of that vast 
energy source as a means of destruction. The 
prime responsibility for that lay with the five 
Powers which possessed nuclear weapons. For, 
if any of those countries threatened to use., or used, 
nuclear weapons already deployed, all the efforts 
exerted by non-nuclear-weapon States, including 
Japan, would have been wasted. But there was no 
doubt that the non-nuclear-weapon States also had 
their responsibilities. The thinking behind the 
nuclear explosion test recently conducted by a nonnuclear-
weapon State, and said to be for peaceful 
purposes did not meet with the approval of the 
Government of Japan, since nuclear explosions for 
peaceful and military purposes could not be differentiated. 
Japan's basic atomic energy act restricted 
the development and utilization of atomic energy 
exclusively to peaceful purposes, A proper system 
of accounting for all nuclear materials had been 
maintained under specific Government regulations 
to ensure that such was the case. With respect to 
the nuclear material supplied by other countries 
under bilateral co-operation agreements, Japan 
accepted Agency safeguards under the terms of 
the safeguards transfer agreements. All Japan's 
atomic energy activities conformed strictly with 
the basic law and were conducted solely for peaceful 
purposes. 
96. At the same time, however, every nonnuclear-
weapon State had the right to enjoy the 
- 12 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 


benefits to be derived from peaceful nuclear explosions, 
as soon as they became practical and subject 
to international control. The role that the Agency 
could play in that respect was extremely important. 
Technological data already accumulated in the 
nuclear-weapon States on peaceful nuclear explosions 
should be collected and evaluated, and it was 
for the Agency to take the first step in that direction. 
Accordingly, Japan attached great importance 
to the procedures for appropriate international 
observation of nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes, drafted by an Agency working 
group in April and discussed by the Board of 
Governors just before the present General Conference. 


97. At the present time when, in terms of nuclear 
problems, the international situation was extremely 
fluid, the Agency had itself undergone a change. 
It was no longer an organization of significance 
only to the advanced countries, but one that represented 
the developing States as well, thereby 
becoming a world-wide organization in the field of 
nuclear energy. That change, brought about by the 
decision to enlarge the Board of Governors as from 
1 June 1973, was the outcome of a deep-rooted 
awareness that the Agency had reached a turning 
point, Japan was determined to contribute still 
further, through the intermediary of the Agency, 
to the advancement of atomic energy in the developing 
countries. 
98. Mr. ABS (Holy See) said that there were 
three points which his delegation considered to be 
of special importance, both within the framework 
of the activities of the Agency itself and in relation 
to the Holy See, which by its very nature was not 
closely involved in the technical aspects of nuclear 
energy, but was more concerned about the general 
impact which it would have on all mankind. The 
three points were- first, the special problems of 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy; second, the 
dangers of misuse or of non-peaceful use of nuclear 
energy; and third, the institutional requirements 
necessary for more effective action with regard to 
the first two points. 
99. With regard to the first point he said that in 
view of the oil crisis atomic energy was now 
considered by many to be in the long run not only 
the most reliable, but also the cheapest, and, with 
respect to the developing countries, the most 
promising source for bringing about changes in the 
fields of production, consumption, and conservation 
of the human environment. The three factors, in 
the final analysis, were so closely linked together 
that success with regard to any one of them 
seemed impossible if the other two were neglected. 
Even in highly developed countries environmental 
protection was often seen as opposed to economic 
progress. Protection of the environment was 
often identified with the goals of the rich nations, 
and economic growth with the demands of those 
that had a smaller share in the goods of the world. 
Measures to cut back economic growth might appeal 
to countries with plenty of industry and severe 
environmental problems, but they were no remedy 
for those countries which still lagged behind in 
industrial, social and cultural development. The 
intensive utilization of nuclear energy seemed 
therefore an appropriate and effective answer to 
the problems the world was facing at the present 
time. 

100. His delegation noted with pleasure therefore 
that the prospects for the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy had improved, especially with regard to the 
developing countries. It supported the Agency's 
plans to aid the developing countries with feasibility 
studies and market surveys for nuclear power, 
approved of the Agency's efforts to speed up the 
programme of training specialized personnel for 
the implementation of nuclear power projects and 
was happy to see the good progress made by the 
joint IAEA/FAO programmes aimed at increasing 
the world's food production. Furthermore, his 
delegation noted with interest and approval the 
symposium that the Agency had held in Vienna in 
the spring on the development of water resources. 
In that connection he could inform the Conference 
that the Pontificial Academy of Sciences would be 
holding, in April 1975, a high-level study session 
on water desalination. Expressing the Holy See's 
support for the Agency's programme for 1975-80 
and budget for 1975, he said he was confident that 
implementation of the programme would contribute 
considerably to increasing the utilization of nuclear 
energy throughout the world, especially in the 
developing countries. 
101. Concerning the second point, namely the 
dangers involved in the misuse or non-peaceful 
use of atomic energy, the Holy See, as a party to 
NPT, and having concluded a safeguards agreement 
with the Agency, [10] had noted recent developments 
in that area with great concern. Although two more 
non-nuclear-weapon States had become parties to 
NPT and although a further two safeguards agreements 
had been concluded with the Agency in 
connection with NPT, and six more had entered 
into force, the Holy See's delegation could not 
ignore the fact that in recent months the situation 
with regard to restricting the spread of nuclear 
weapons had become more critical, and large sums 
were still being spent on programmes which did not 
exclude nuclear armaments. At the same time his 
delegation realized that the whole system of nuclear 
non-proliferation was bound to remain doubtful and 
unworkable as long as any great atomic Power 
remained outside it. He asked whether the world, 
the community of nations, should permit a few 
States to jeopardize common efforts towards 
general and complete nuclear disarmament, which 
was one of the goals of NPT. The Holy See's delegation 
could only appeal again to those concerned 
to reconsider the course they had chosen, and to 
change direction before it was too late and the 
world suffered the holocaust which threatened us all 
as a result of the vast quantities of nuclear weapons 
already stockpiled. 

102. The Holy See's delegation had noted with 
equal concern that the testing of nuclear weapons 
had taken place in the atmosphere as well as underground 
in spite of the dangers involved and the 
[10] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/187. 
- 13 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 169 

protests voiced. The delegate of the Holy See to 
the United Nations Conference on the Law of the 
Sea, which had been held that summer in Caracas, 
had also taken the opportunity to warn against the 
possibility of the seas becoming an arena for 
nuclear weapons. 

103. The slow progress, not to say the lack of 
progress, in establishing a security system under 
NPT brought him to the third point referred to 
earlier, namely the institutional requirements 
necessary for a more efficient implementation of 
action with regard to the first two items. 
104, All the efforts that the international community 
as a whole, and many States individually, were 
undeniably making towards the banning of war and 
armaments, and in particular nuclear weapons, 
would be in vain if the whole system could be 
rendered ineffective by a single country's refusal 
to co-operate. It was astonishing to see how, in 
the international community of today, not only the 
great Powers but also many small States still on 
their way to development seemed to shy away from 
a sense of international responsibility and solidarity. 
His delegation therefore hoped that countries 
would realize that they might, sooner or later, fall 
an easy prey to any Power that happened to be 
stronger, to have better armaments or just to be 
more fortunate in having an advantageous politico


geographical position. Collective security, which 
was the great idea underlying the United Nations 

and which was also at the root of NPT, would never 
become reality if States did not once and for all 
agree to establish a central, world-wide authority, 
able to protect each and any State against the 
encroachments of any and all of the others. 
Pope Paul VI had stressed the need for such an 
authority in his statement made to the General 
Assembly of the United Nations during his visit to 
the world organization in New York, [11] and the 
Holy See had incessantly repeated the call for more 
order through international institutions, the most 
recent occasion being at the United Nations Conference 
on the Law of the Sea. 

105. Mankind now stood at the crossroads. It 
could go on to international discord, war and 
disaster. But it might also turn to a bright and 
happy future in peace and international solidarity. 
Man certainly had one of the tools for such a future 
in his hands - atomic energy. He should make use 
of atomic energy, not for death and destruction, 
but for the construction of a new world, a world of 
economic justice, moral qualities, mutual respect 
and world-wide solidarity based on the brotherhood 
of man under the common fatherhood of God. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 

[11] See United Nations document A/PV. 13321351, 
official record of the 1347th plenary meeting, 
paras 15-46. 
- 14 

GC(XVIII)/OR. 
170 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
17 February 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 17 September 1974, at 3.20 p.m. 

President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Par agraphs 

9 
General debate and report for 1973-74 1 - 91 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Iran 
1 -8 

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
9-3 4 

Republic of Korea 
35 - 39 

Iraq 
40 - 44 

France 
45 - 53 

Italy 
54 - 61 

Philippines 
62 - 73 

Pakistan 
74 - 91 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 26 September 1974. 
** GC(XVIII)/534. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 
74-9544 


GC(XVIII)/OR. 170 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1973-74 
(GC(XVIII)/525, 532) (continued) 

1. Mr. ETEMAD (Iran), continuing the general 
debate, said that Iran's economic growth, with an 
annual rate of 10% which was forecasted to increase 
to as much as 25%, was based essentially on 
industrialization, thus creating a great need for 
energy and a demand for a rational energy policy. 
The energy policy laid down by the Shahinshah 
Aryamehr took account of the problems which arose 
in Iran just as in the rest of the world. The guiding 
principles of that policy were the rationalization of 
energy consumption and the use of energy sources 
other than fossil fuels, which were also a valuable 
raw material for industry. For the time being the 
essential aim was to develop nuclear energy. 
2. That was why the Iranian Government had 
launched a vast programme for the construction 
between 1980 and 1992 of a large number of nuclear 
power stations with a total capacity of 
23 000 MW(e). In that programme high priority 
was given to the use of nuclear energy for the 
desalination of sea water. A support programme 
was being worked out on education and the intensive 
training of specialists and technicians, on prospecting 
and the exploitation of resources used in 
the nuclear industry, on research and development 
in nuclear energy, and on the applications of 
radiations and radionuclides. 
3. Implementation of the programme had been 
entrusted to the Atomic Energy Organization of 
Iran, which had been specially established for the 
purpose. That organization was also the official 
intermediary between the Iranian Government and 
the Agency. The executive organ for all problems 
relating to atomic energy was the Atomic Energy 
Council, under the chairmanship of the Prime 
Minister. The Council was also called upon to 
approve regulations relating to nuclear safety and 
radiological protection. 
4. Implementation of the programme was 
impeded by two problems which were also known in 
other countries and which Iran hoped to solve with 
the Agency's assistance: the lack of qualified 
specialists and manpower and the sudden tension 
which the energy "crisis" had created on the 
natural uranium and enriched uranium markets, 
resulting in reluctance on the part of producers to 
conclude long-term contracts and in excessive price 
increases. 
5. The Iranian Government had decided to make 
a special voluntary contribution of $70 000 to the 
General Fund in 1975, in the hope that the Fund 
would thereby be assisted in intensifying the 
Agency's technical assistance programmes. 
6. Iran considered that the potentialities of 
nuclear energy should be exploited exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. It urged all States which had 
not yet done so to accede to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons(NPT)[l], as Iran 
had done, and urged all Members of the United 
Nations to support the proposal for a treaty banning 
nuclear weapons in the Middle East, an item which 
his country requested should be placed on the 
agenda for the forthcoming session of the General 
Assembly. 

7. Another matter, to which the Agency should 
devote close attention was the study of the impact 
of nuclear energy on the environment and the 
formulation of comprehensive nuclear safety 
criteria. 
8. In conclusion, he suggested that all non-
Member States should be invited to apply for admission 
to the Agency, which would make the latter 
more universal and would enable it to carry out its 
vital task, namely to promote the peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy. 
9. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) observed that the present session of the 
General Conference was taking place against a 
background of the efforts of peace-loving countries 
to reduce international tension and to establish a 
system of international relations based on the 
principles of peaceful co-operation, genuine security, 
and collaboration stemming from equality. 
10. Faithful to the Leninist principles of peace 
among the nations, the Soviet Union, together with 
other socialist countries, had taken many important 
steps to strengthen peace, to normalize the international 
situation, to reduce the risk of war and to 
limit armaments. It had taken an active part in 
the conference on European security, in Strategic 
Arms Limitation Talks and in the Vienna talks on 
the reduction of armed forces and armaments in 
central Europe. 
11. When peace and security were at stake, there 
was no question of resting on one's laurels, and 
there was still much to do. However, it was to be 
noted that during the preceding years valuable 
results had been achieved. Examples were the 
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the 
Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water, 
(the Partial Test Ban Treaty) concluded in Moscow 
in 1963[2], the Treaty on the Principles governing 
the Activities of States in the Exploration of Use of 
Outer Space, including the Moon and other Celestial 
Bodies (Outer space treaty)[3], NPT, the Treaty 
on the Prohibition of the Emplacement of Nuclear 
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction 
on the Sea Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil 
thereof[4], and the Convention on the Prohibition 
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) 

[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[2] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 480, Treaty No. 6964. 
[3] See United Nations document A/8701, 4th 
part, Chapter C. 
[4] See General Assembly Resolution 2260 (XXV). 
-2 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 170 


and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction[5]. 
In Moscow, in May 1972, such important international 
instruments as the Treaty between the 
United States of America and the Soviet Union on 
the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems[6], 
and the interim agreement relating to the limitation 
of offensive strategic weapons had been signed. 
The treaty between the Soviet Union and the United 
States of America on the prevention of nuclear war 
was of basic importance. 

12. The summit meeting between the leaders of 
the two countries which had taken place in the 
summer of 1974 had marked an important stage on 
the road to reduction of international tension. In 
that connection, special emphasis should be laid 
on the agreements which created conditions favourable 
to the application of atomic energy for constructive 
purposes. In the first place there was 
the Treaty between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the 
Limitation of Underground Nuclear Weapons 
Tests. [7] That Treaty represented, after the 
Treaty of Moscow, a new and important step 
towards the complete banning of all nuclear tests. 
It should be pointed out that under the provisions 
of Article III of the Treaty, the parties had undertaken 
to conclude as soon as possible an agreement 
on peaceful nuclear explosions. Great importance 
also attached to the agreement on the limitation of 
strategic weapons, which had been reached at the 
summit meeting. Another proof of the efforts 
which the Soviet Union was making to limit armaments 
was to be seen in the fact that it had 
proposed placing on the agenda for the forthcoming 
session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations the question of what action should be taken 
to eliminate the risks inherent in the application 
for military purposes of measures affecting the 
environment. 
13. All that constructive action aimed at the 
limitation and, finally, at the cessation of the arms 
race was inspired by the foreign policy of the Soviet 
Union, the general principles of which had been 
defined at the XXIVth Congress of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union. They were in keeping 
with the obligations which the USSR had assumed 
as an atomic power under the provisions of 
Article VI of NPT. 
14. In the joint communique of the Soviet Union 
and the United States relating to the results of 
the 1974 summit meeting, both parties had again 
stressed the great importance of NPT and had 
urged that it should be made effective. The recent 
trend in international relations rendered the Treaty 
even more important in the general context of 
measures to reduce the danger of nuclear war. 
During a speech at the celebrations marking the 
[5] See General Assembly Resolution 
2826 (XXVI). 
[6] See United Nations document A/Cl/1026. 
[7] Reproduced, with its accompanying protocol, 
in document INFCIRC/208. 
30th anniversary of the Polish People's Republic 
in July 1974, the General Secretary of the Central 
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union, Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, had said that the 
effective and universal application of NPT had never 
had such importance as at present. 

15. The control that the Agency exercised under 
NPT was one of the main functions which the Treaty 
conferred upon it. He wished to emphasize that 
the problems arising in connection with the application 
of safeguards and with other functions in 
connection with NPT deserved special attention in 
the light of the convening in 1975 of a conference 
of the parties to NPT for the purpose of proposing 
measures for its further application. The Soviet 
delegation therefore deemed it vital to draw the 
attention of the General Conference to the problems 
whose mode of solution would have a profound 
effect on the implementation of the main provisions 
of NPT, in particular those relating to the exercise 
of efficient control. 
16. Among those problems, a special place had 
as before to be accorded to increasing the number 
of accessions to NPT and to the conclusion of safeguards 
agreements with the Agency by the parties 
to the Treaty. It was to be noted that in 1974 the 
Parliament of the Federal Republic of Germany 
had ratified NPT, and that in the spring of 1973 the 
Agency and the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM) had signed a safeguards agreement 
within the framework of NPT. That agreement, 
however, to which States with an advanced nuclear 
industry were party, had not yet entered into force. 
The Soviet delegation hoped that the members of 
EURATOM, and also Japan, would complete the 
formalities for ratification of NPT as soon as 
possible and would proceed to put it into effect. 
17. The control functions stemming from NPT 
affected signatories with a developed nuclear 
industry just as much as those without. It was 
therefore extremely important that the Agency and 
various developing countries which had acceded to 
NPT should expedite the negotiation of safeguards 
agreements. 
18. Among the various measures aimed at 
strengthening NPT, special significance attached 
to the work which the parties to NPT and the 
Agency's Secretariat had accomplished during the 
preceding 12 months with a view to improving and 
expanding the Agency's control system. Of importance 
in that connection were the statements made 
by the depositary countries, according to which 
they undertook to inform the Agency of any intention 
to supply nuclear materials to non-nuclear-weapon 
States. [8] 
19. Emphasis should also be laid on the agreement 
reached among the main countries exporting 
nuclear materials and installations regarding 
implementation of Article III. 2 of NPT. [9] There 
[8] See document INFCIRC/207. 
[9] See documents INFCIRC/209 and Addenda 
1 and 2. 
-3 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 170 

was no doubt that the Agency would play an important 
part in that respect. That being so, the 
Agency's safeguards application procedures called 
for improvement. The Soviet delegation was 
gratified at what had been achieved as regards 
standardizing those procedures, modifying the 
model subsidiary arrangements and facility attachments, 
preparing technical directives and drafting 
codes of practice for their application. At the 
same time it should be stressed that the Agency's 
functions in connection with NPT demanded 
improved data processing techniques, and the 
establishment of a system for automatic processing 
of safeguards data was therefore required. It 
might also be opportune to examine the problems 
associated with implementation of the "old" safeguards 
system, [10] in order to identify technical 
ways and means for improving it and unifying it in 
the light of the advances made in recent years, so 

as to render it more efficient and more economical. 

20. Problems relating to the use of peaceful 
nuclear explosions (PNE) occupied a special place 
among the Agency's activities. During recent 
years various practical measures had been taken 
to implement the provisions of Article V of NPT, 
which dealt with the matter. As early as 1971 the 
General Assembly of the United Nations had 
stressed that under the terms of its Statute the 
Agency was the international organization competent 
to establish an international PNE service, in conformity 
with Article V of NPT, and had requested 
the Agency to pursue its activities in that direction. 
In application of the provisions of Article V of NPT 
and in accordance with the General Assembly resolutions, 
the Agency was now undertaking the 
preparatory work required for the furnishing of 
PNE services. In 1971 and 1972 it had laid down 
the guiding principles for international surveillance 
of such explosions, and the Board had approved 
them. In 1974 the Agency had drafted the procedures 
which it would follow in making PNE services 
available, and those procedures had likewise been 
approved by the Board. Finally, a few days 
previously, the Board had taken important decisions 
relating to the establishment of a special PNE 
service within the framework of the Agency. The 
Agency was thus genuinely preparing itself for the 
exercise of the functions incumbent upon it'under 
Article V of NPT. The Soviet delegation wished 
to draw the attention of the General Conference to 
the urgent need for completing preparation of the 
administrative and technical documentation, 
especially in regard to safety standards and criteria, 
which the Agency needed in providing PNE 
services and laying down the conditions governing 
the conduct of explosions. 

21. It went without saying that the role of NPT 
in the Agency's activities was not limited to control 
operations. The systematic application of the 
principle of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
opened up ever-widening prospects for international 
collaboration in the use of atomic energy for peace[
10] Set forth in document INFCIRC/66; see also 
document INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2. 
ful purposes. Under the terms of Article IV of 
NPT, the parties to the Treaty had undertaken to 
contribute by all possible means to the further 
development of the peaceful applications of that 
form of energy. One could state categorically that 
the entry into force of NPT marked a new stage in 
that collaboration. 

22. The Soviet delegation noted with satisfaction 
that the Agency's scientific and technical programme 
for 1975-80[ll] extended to areas of interest 
to all Members. It provided for the application 
of effort in various areas, particularly the following: 
nuclear power engineering, including studies 
on controlled thermonuclear fusion; environmental 
protection; improvement in the methods of applying 
safeguards; studies on problems connected with 
implementation of the provisions of NPT governing 
PNE services; improvement in the quality of 
nuclear documentation at international level; the 
establishment of a set of standards and rules relating 
to the safety of nuclear power stations. 
23. At the present time the accelerated development 
of nuclear power was a matter of special 
interest. With a view to finding a solution to that 
problem, the Soviet Union was collaborating 
actively with the Agency and numerous other countries. 
In 1974, the technical assistance provided 
by the Soviet Union had led to the commissioning of 
the first 440-MW unit of the "Bruno Leuschner" 
"Nord" nuclear power station in the German 
Democratic Republic; the second unit with the 
same capacity would go into operation at the end of 
the year. The first 440-MW unit of the "Kozlodui" 
power station in the People's Republic of Bulgaria 
had also been commissioned, and the first unit of 
the "Loviisa" nuclear power station in Finland had 
almost been completed. The construction of 
nuclear power stations equipped with reactors of 
the same type had been started in Czechoslovakia 
and Hungary. 
24. Greatly expanded construction of nuclear 
power stations called for the drafting of appropriate 
safety standards and regulations, tt was essential 
that that work should be performed under the auspices 
of the Agency and that all interested countries 
should participate therein. International safety 
standards should take account of the research 
carried out in all countries and of the experience 
which had thereby been accumulated. Questions of 
power station safety were intimately bound up with 
the protection of man and his environment against 
the harmful effects of nuclear radiations, and the 
Soviet Union was actively participating in the work 
carried out by the Agency in that field. The Agency 
had organized symposia and study tours in the 
Soviet Union devoted to the processing and disposal 
of radioactive waste. 
25. A convincing example of the value of close 
scientific and technical relations was provided by 
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(CMEA). CMEA, which was the first economic 
international organization in the socialist countries, 
[11] GC(XVIII)/526 and Mod. 1. 
-4 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 170 


had celebrated its 25th anniversary earlier in the 
year. Collaboration within CMEA had continued to 
develop, especially in regard to science, technology 
and nuclear power generation, and was concerned 
principally with the solution of problems of 
co-ordination and with the joint conduct of scientific 
and technical research. The plan of co-ordination 
for 1971-75 provided for study of more than 

60 important problems connected with nuclear 
physics, neutron physics, nuclear power generation, 
radiological protection, nuclear instrumentation 
and radioisotope equipment. Scientific and 
technical collaboration was now being paralleled by 
the development of diversified economic 
co-operation. The "Interatominstrument" organization, 
dealing with nuclear instrumentation, was 
returning satisfactory results, and a new CMEA 
organization, "Interatomenergo" had started work. 

26. Nuclear science and technology in the Soviet 
Union had made considerable fresh progress in the 
sphere of basic studies and the introduction of the 
practical uses of nuclear energy into the national 
economy. Assimilation of experience with, and 
operation of, the fast breeder power station at 
Shevchenko were continuing. The experience gained 
already illustrated the promise and the favourable 
safety characteristics of that reactor type. In 1974 
the first unit of the Leningrad nuclear power station 
had gone into service and had already reached a 
power of 80 MW, In a few days1 time the reactor 
would reach its rated power of 1000 MW. The work 
of erecting and equipping the second unit would 
soon be completed. 
27. Soviet laboratories were continuing to study 
controlled thermonuclear fusion. In view of its 
importance for the entire world, the technical and 
scientific difficulties that it involved, and the 
steadily rising cost of new generations of thermonuclear 
devices, the laboratories concerned in all 
countries should pool their efforts. In 1974, the 
agreement signed by the Soviet Union and the 
United States on collaboration in the field of nuclear 
energy had made it possible to co-ordinate the 
topics, the overall trend, and the forms that 
collaboration should take for the years 1974-75. 
It would mainly be concerned with quasi-stationary 
systems of the Tokamak type; experts in the two 
countries based great hopes on the Tokamak-10 
(Soviet Union) and the PLT (United States) devices, 
which were scheduled for operation in 1975. 
Collaboration with laboratories engaged in fusion 
research in the United Kingdom, France, the 
Federal Republic of Germany, Czechoslovakia and 
other countries was continuing according to plan. 
28. The results of basic research could sometimes 
be effectively applied in everyday practice. 
In that connection mention should be made of the 
work done by the Institute of Theoretical and 
Experimental Physics and the Joint Institute for 
Nuclear Research on the use of large proton 
accelerators for surgery in cases of malignant 
tumours. It had been found that a proton beam 
could act as a very exact and efficient surgical 
instrument. Major achievements in 1974 to the 
credit of Soviet physicists, working in collaboration 
with their foreign colleagues at the Joint Institute 
for Nuclear Research, included the synthesis of a 
new element - number 106 in the periodic table. 

29. True to its policy of aiding the countries of 
Asia, Africa and Latin America, the Soviet Union 
had provided, and would continue to provide, economic, 
scientific and technical assistance to the 
developing countries on a bilateral basis or through 
the Agency. 
30. Fulfilling the obligations which it had undertaken 
under NPT, the Soviet Union was making 
regular contributions, on an increasing scale, to 
the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
During the past three years alone the Soviet Union's 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund had 
amounted to 1 million roubles. That sum of money 
had paid for the provision of a large quantity of 
equipment, instruments and supplies of various 
kinds to more than 30 countries. 
31. Apart from its annual contributions to the 
General Fund, the Soviet Union offered the Agency 
fellowships for experts and scientists from the 
developing countries, enabling many States to train 
highly qualified staff in the field of nuclear science 
and engineering. Every year it organized two 
study tours on subjects of topical interest for the 
benefit of scientists and experts from States Members 
of the Agency. 
32. It provided, on an ever-increasing scale, 
uranium enrichment services at its isotope separation 
plants and in 1974 several long-term contracts 
had been signed to that end. The Soviet 
Union reaffirmed its desire to continue providing 
services on a bilateral basis as well as through 
the intermediary of the Agency. 
33. The Soviet delegation was authorized to state 
that, in accordance with its policy of technical 
assistance to developing countries, the Government 
of the Soviet Union had decided to increase its 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund for 1975 
to 500 000 roubles in national currency. That sum 
of money would be used for the provision, under 
the Agency's programme, of equipment, instruments 
and supplies from the Soviet Union to a 
variety of countries, first and foremost those that 
had acceded to NPT. 
34. Lastly, the Soviet delegation wished to 
emphasize once more that the Soviet Union favoured 
a rapid extension of international co-operation 
based on the principles of the United Nations 
Charter, and on the provisions of the Agency's 
Statute and of NPT. The Agency's work in that 
field was of great importance and was contributing 
to the strengthening of international peace and security. 
35. Mr. CHOI (Republic of Korea) said that, 
because of the world energy crisis, the nuclear 
programme of the Republic of Korea had had to be 
adjusted so that it would account for 40% of the 
total power produced in 1986. In addition to the 
595-MW plant which was to go into operation at the 
end of 1976, eight plants with a total installed 
capacity of 6000 MW were planned. 
-5 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 170 


36. With a view to increasing the country's energy 
resources, the Korea Atomic Energy Research 
Institute, which had become an independent body 
with a broader mandate, had embarked on research 
relating to geothermal, solar, wind and tidal energy, 
while the Environmental Research Laboratory 
affiliated to it was conducting research into ways 
of solving the ecological problems with which most 
industrial countries were faced. 
37. In an effort to promote industrial applications 
of radiation and radioisotopes, the Republic of 
Korea was planning to install a number of 
100 000-curie cobalt-60 irradiation facilities and a 
300-keV accelerator by January 1976. 
38. In the implementation of the projects in question, 
and especially the nuclear programme, difficulties 
had arisen with regard to: 
(a) 
The selection of the appropriate unit size and 
reactor types on the basis of technicoeconomic 
studies; 
(b) 
The training of operating, maintenance and 
engineering staff. His delegation fully supported 
the Agency's decision concerning the 
orientation of technical assistance towards 
that field; 
(c) 
Nuclear safety. The Agency was in a position 
to formulate an internationally acceptable 
code containing safety standards for the 
operation of nuclear reactors; 
(d) 
The assurance of a steady supply of fuel. 
Since a uranium crisis similar to the oil 
crisis was possible, the Secretariat should 
carry out a study of uranium supply and 
demand and advise Member States on how to 
save fuel and co-ordinate the production 
thereof; and 
(e) 
Fuel fabrication and reprocessing. The 
Agency should initiate regional co-operation 
in waste management and fuel reprocessing. 
It might also promote international co-operation 
in the field of environmental protection. 
39. In conclusion, he. hoped that the Agency's 
Members would collaborate more closely in reducing 
international tension and encouraging international 
co-operation in the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy. 
40. Mr. EL-SHAWI (Iraq) thanked the Agency for 
the assistance which it had rendered to his country. 
The Government of Iraq had embarked upon a 
large-scale programme of development and, realizing 
the importance of nuclear techniques in that 
connection, envisaged increased collaboration with 
the Agency. 
41. However, inflation and its financial implications 
hampered technical assistance activities, and 
his delegation therefore suggested an expanded use 
of an arrangement whereby the technical assistance 
provided by the Agency would be paid for, in part 
or in its entirety, by the receiving countries. 
42. The provision of technical assistance, which 
was one of the Agency's principal tasks, should be 
financed mainly from the Regular Budget, a supplementary 
budget based on voluntary contributions 
serving to meet programme increases. In that 
connection, his delegation was pleased to announce 
that his Government would be making a voluntary 
contribution of ten times the amount corresponding 
to its base rate of assessment. 
43. His delegation noted with satisfaction that the 
Director General had, in his report, paid more 
attention to small and medium-size power reactors, 
for large reactors did not suit developing countries 
whose electrical grids were small and which had 
only limited experience regarding personnel questions 
and the disposal and management of waste. 
However, his delegation regretted that small and 
medium-size power reactors were still not readily 
available. 
44. Lastly, the delegation of Iraq was extremely 
satisfied at the admission of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and Mauritius to the 
Agency. 
45. Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT (France) said he had 
listened with great attention to the statement by the 
Director General, [12] who had given an excellent 
account of events in the field of atomic energy 
during the past year, especially as regards its 
increased importance, the practical and political 
problems of its development and the role which the 
Agency could play. That role was perforce a limited 
one. The Agency had certainly not become the 
broker for special fissionable materials which 
President Eisenhower had proposed in his famous 
address of 8 December 1953; nor was it about to 
play the part of broker for enriched uranium, for 
the sale of that essential material would for a long 
time to come remain the subject of negotiations 
between buyer and seller. At the most, the Agency 
could act as adviser to the purchasing country. 
Nevertheless, the Agency had an important role to 
play in a large number of fields, which the Director 
General had clearly specified: advice to Member 
States embarking on nuclear development programmes, 
economic studies, the training of specialists, 
reactor safety, the protection of persons 
occupationally exposed to radiation and of the 
population as a whole, the problem of radioactive 
waste (its treatment and storage), applications of 
atomic energy in agriculture, biology and industry, 
and safeguards. 
46. Reverting to events in the field of nuclear 
energy during the past year, the French delegation 
wished to comment on three matters: the production 
and enrichment of natural uranium, small and 
medium-size reactors, and fast breeders. 
47. As regards natural uranium, there had been 
a real reversal. For about a decade, ample stocks 
and a relatively low demand had enabled customers 
[12] Summarized in document GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, 
paras 45-79. 
-6 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 170 


to keep prices down, even to a level which had 
involved financial loss to suppliers or which at all 
events had not yielded the funds necessary for 
further prospecting. Thus, prospecting activity 
had declined throughout the world to a disturbing 
extent. Contrary to the general trend, however, 
France had continued prospecting for uranium, 
both at home and abroad, and had discovered new 
deposits (for example, in Canada) and launched 
fresh projects in conjunction with foreign companies 
(for example, in the Niger). The situation had 
changed completely with the rise in oil prices and 
the increase in the importance of nuclear power; 
the tendency to stockpile natural uranium had 
resulted in an appreciable rise in the price of uranium. 
At the same time, through that price rise 
the producers had acquired the means to resume 
prospecting throughout the world. Unfortunately, 
the results of the resumed prospecting efforts 
would make themselves felt too late to prevent a 
certain scarcity at the end of the 1970s and would 
no doubt lead to a surplus in the mid-1980s. 

48. With regard to uranium enrichment, France 
had predicted that existing facilities would be 
operating at full capacity before the end of the 
1970s. That prediction had been made at a time 
when the world's main producer was claiming that 
it could meet all demands well into the 1980s and 
when some of its European partners were convinced 
that Europe was threatened by overproduction. The 
French Government had, on 22 November 1973, 
been the first to guarantee the project prepared by 
the EURODIF Company, in which partners from 
several European countries were participating and 
which had embarked on the construction - near 
Pierrelatte, in the Tricastin region of France - of 
a large gaseous diffusion plant for uranium enrichment. 
The decision taken by the French Government 
was only a first step, which would have to be 
followed by many others within the framework of 
European and world-wide co-operation if the 
expected increase in demand was to be met. 
49. As the Director General had pointed out, the 
increase in oil prices had considerably lowered the 
power threshold above which a nuclear power plant 
was sufficiently large to produce electricity at 
competitive prices. At Cadarache, work was in 
progress on the development of a reactor suitable 
for the propulsion of large merchant vessels, such 
as oil tankers, for electricity generation in isolated 
regions without large electrical grids, or for the 
supply of steam and electricity to industry or the 
desalting of sea-water in arid zones. 
50. Moreover, the past year had seen a prototype 
fast power reactor operating for the first time continuously, 
without incident and at its rated capacity; 
a considerable amount of further work 
would, however, have to be done with that 
250-MW(e) prototype, France's Phenix breeder, 
before it could be made available commercially. 
The reactor type in question represented one of the 
best ways of approaching independence in the field 
of energy, thanks to the fuel breeding process and 
the possibility of using the plutonium in the irradiated 
fuel elements from thermal reactors. The two 
industrial groups, one French and one Italian, 
holding the licence of the French Commissariat 

a. l'energie atomique (Atomic Energy Commission) 
for that reactor type, and the nuclear energy 
committees of both countries would be co-operating 
in that promising field. 
51. The problem of the safety of nuclear facilities, 
especially power stations, was a major one, 
and France approved the Agency's expanded programme 
in that field, it being understood, however, 
that responsibility for the safety of nuclear facilities 
would always rest with the countries operating 
them. The Agency could accordingly draw up 
codes of practice containing broad safety criteria 
and certain minimum regulations, but in relation 
to a specific reactor type it could only refer to the 
requirements laid down in the country where the 
technology had been developed and facilitate their 
adaptation to the conditions in the customer country. 
For that purpose it should maintain an up-todate 
collection of the standards and guidelines 
published in individual countries. 
52. The increasingly industrial nature of nuclear 
development was hampering more and more the 
organization - and above all the success - of largescale 
conferences like those which the United 
Nations had held at Geneva. At the moment, the 
nuclear field seemed to be well covered by the 
meetings organized by the Agency or other international 
institutions and by non-governmental bodies 
such as the Atomic Industrial Forum of the United 
States and of Japan and the European Nuclear Society, 
so that there did not appear to be any justification 
for holding a further Geneva Conference in 
the near future; certainly none should be held 
before 1977, and when one was convened its organization 
should be entrusted to the Agency. Admittedly, 
it had been the developing countries 
which had benefited most from previous Geneva 
conferences, but the Agency had many more effective 
ways of keeping such countries abreast of 
developments in the nuclear field: symposia, 
expert missions, evaluation missions, market 
surveys and the technical assistance programme 
proper. 
53. In conclusion, he wished to touch on the 
important question of safeguards, without reverting 
to the position of the French delegation with regard 
to safeguards financing. The Statute assigned to 
the Agency the functions of an association which 
provided its members with a service whereby it 
ensured, at their request, that a particular nuclear 
facility or item of nuclear material submitted to it 
voluntarily was used only for peaceful purposes. 
Those functions were undoubtedly important, but 
one should not go on to conclude that the Agency's 
success depended essentially on the number of 
installations subject to its controls. Such a distortion 
of the meaning of the Agency's functions 
went together with a tendency to discriminate 
between Member States, and he regretted that, in 
one part of the Director General1 s statement, 
Members had been categorized according to 
whether or not they had carried out nuclear explosions, 
whether or not they had signed NPT, 
whether or not they had ratified NPT, or whether 
or not they had concluded with the Agency a safe-
7 



GC (XVIII)/OR. 170 

guards agreement in connection with NPT. In the 
long run such a tendency to discriminate would 
inevitably be detrimental to the smooth operation 
of the Agency, which (as was worth stating once 
again) consisted of only one category of Members countries 
which, like France itself, were opposed 
to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 

54. Mr. CLEMENTEL (Italy) said that the Agency 
had continued its activities relating to the conclusion 
of an increasing number of safeguards agreements 
under Article III of NPT. Italy intended to 
lend the Agency every assistance in carrying out 
that mission, having due regard, of course, for the 
limits of the Agency's Regular Budget which, in the 
present circumstances, could not be exceeded. 
Italy, which had already accepted EURATOM safeguards 
and was now preparing to submit to the 
double safeguards of the Agency, hoped that that 
type of undertaking would become generalized and 
that NPT, from which those undertakings derived 
for the most part, would obtain the unanimous 
approval necessary for it to become fully effective. 
The Review Conference of the Parties to NPT would 
be held in 1975 and the Italian delegation sincerely 
hoped that consideration would be given on that 
occasion to ways by which the Treaty could be 
adapted even more effectively to the particular 
international requirements of the moment. That 
was the necessary condition for obtaining unanimous 
approval, which was the guarantee for the success 
of NPT. 
55. The Italian Government was very satisfied 
with the guidelines adopted and the objectives 
achieved in the Agency's scientific and technical 
activities, as described in the statement by the 
Director General. The activities which had been 
carried out in connection with technical assistance, 
agriculture, medicine, nuclear technology, and 
environmental safety and protection were evidence 
of the special competence and care with which that 
work had been done. 
56. However, it was especially in connection with 
the preparation of its programme for the years 
immediately ahead that the Agency had shown once 
again that it was capable of dealing with unforeseen 
situations and with new problems which arose. It 
had devoted considerable effort towards identifying 
and developing the activities which were becoming 
matters of absolute priority as a result of changes 
in the world situation with respect to power supply. 
World public opinion and Governments had had to 
take cognizance of the fact that nuclear energy was 
the most important and, from the technological and 
economic point of view, perhaps the only valid 
formula by which a contribution could be made to 
the energy balance. However, the expected upsurge 
in nuclear power production raised serious 
problems especially as regards supply of uranium, 
availability of enrichment services, siting and 
safety of nuclear installations, radioactive waste 
management and environmental protection. Each 
of those problems had been duly taken into account 
in the Agency's programme for the period 
1975-1978. 
57. On the subject of the Agency's activities 
relating to safeguards, he wished to emphasize the 
need for maximum intensification of research on 
techniques which could be used for implementing 

safeguards in connection with NPT. As was well 
known, the operators of nuclear installations were 

subject to particularly heavy obligations and therefore 
the imposition of additional burdens might 
discourage the use and development of the new 
source of energy and thus seriously prejudice the 
interests of the community as a whole. A suitably 
limited use of inspectors would be a way of achieving 
savings which could be used effectively in other 
essential activities of the Agency. To that end it 
was essential that the Agency should make maximum 
use of the regional systems of safeguards, especially 
when they afforded all necessary guarantees 
of rigour and credibility as was the case with the 
EURATOM system, which had been in operation 
for more than a decade. 

58. The activities of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste deserved special 
mention. It was unanimously believed that they had 
achieved a remarkably high level. Its methods of 
work, for example the close collaboration between 
the Centre and numerous research institutes 
throughout the world and the regular exchange of 
scientists, had enabled it to achieve the best possible 
results. For that reason the Italian Government 
had decided to increase its financial contribution to 
the Centre from US $250 000 to US $350 000 per 
annum. 
59. He wished to confirm that Italy, and in particular 
the National Nuclear Energy Committee 
(CNEN), was very willing to co-operate with the 
Agency in all activities where the knowledge gained 
could be advantageously applied. Collaboration of 
that kind was already in existence; it would suffice 
to mention the assistance lent by CNEN in the 
organization, at the Bologna Calculation Centre, of 
the Study Group on Nuclear Constants of Fission 
Products, and the Interregional Training Course on 
Plant Improvement from the Point of View of 
Resistance to Disease, which was to be held shortly 
at the Casaccia Nuclear Study Centre under the 
sponsorship of FAO, the Agency, the Swedish International 
Development Authority (SIDA) and CNEN. 
60. It was in connection with that form of co-operation 
that CNEN had decided to increase the number 
of fellowships available to the Agency for training 
technicians from developing countries. The 160 
monthly payments (corresponding to 20 fellowships) 
would be increased to 200 monthly payments 
(i. e. 25 fellowships). That increase followed on a 
decision taken by CNEN in 1973 to increase the 
number of fellowships themselves. 
61. During the past year particularly important 
decisions had been taken in Italy in relation to the 
future development of nuclear energy. In particular, 
the national electricity body had placed 
orders between the end of 1973 and 1974 for four 
nuclear power stations, representing a total output 
of approximately 4000 MW(e), which would come 
into operation by 1979 or 1980. At present an 
800-MW(e) plant, scheduled for commissioning in 
1975, was in an advanced state of construction. 
Accordingly, in 1980 Italy would have eight nuclear 
-8 



GC (XVIII)/OR. 170 


power plants representing a total output of 
5500 MW(e). Research activities in connection 
with nuclear power were also scheduled to be 
expanded considerably as a result of the approval 
in July 1974 of CNEN's third five-year plan 
(1974-1978) by the Interministerial Committee for 
Economic Programming, That plan provided for 
appropriations of 500 000 million lire (approximately 
$770 million). Moreover, the decisions of 
the Italian Government to participate in the 
EURODIF Company for the construction of the first 
plant for the production of enriched uranium by the 
gas diffusion process, and in the NERSA, for the 
construction of the first fast-neutron power plant 
(with a power of 1200 MW(e)), would likewise have 
profound effects on the overall development of 
nuclear power in Italy. 

62. Mr. FAROLAN (Philippines) thanked the 
General Conference for the honour which it had 
conferred on his country by electing Mr, Medina, 
leader of the Philippine delegation, as President. 
Congratulating the President on his election, he 
recalled the latter's untiring efforts to promote 
nuclear energy not only in the Philippines but also 
in the world as a whole, as Commissioner of the 
Philippine Atomic Energy Commission, as Director 
of the Agency's Division of Technical Assistance, 
and as Chairman of the Philippine National Science 
Development Board. 
63. In a resolution adopted the preceding year, 
the General Conference had requested the Director 
General to make a study of the possibilities and 
implications of all modes of financing the provision 
of technical assistance by the Agency, including in 
particular financing from the Regular Budget, [13] 
and he wished to make a few comments on the 
report prepared by the Secretariat in pursuance of 
that resolution[14]. First of all, since the Agency's 
establishment, the technical assistance programme 
had been financed from the voluntary contributions 
of Member States, and, as there was no compulsion 
on the latter to increase their contributions, the 
programme had suffered from a perennial shortage 
of funds, the situation being further aggravated by 
world-wide inflation and fluctuations in currency 
exchange rates. Some delegations had accordingly 
suggested that the financial stability of the Agency's 
technical assistance programme should be improved 
by financing it from the Regular Budget. If that 
solution were adopted, the Agency would be able to 
undertake long-term projects under its regular 
programme and avoid accumulating a backlog of 
unfulfilled technical assistance requests. 
64. It was indicated in the report that eight out 
of twelve United Nations organizations financed 
their technical assistance programmes from both 
assessed and voluntary contributions. That 
system, in his opinion, would be most appropriate 
for the Agency's programme, and he therefore 
suggested that the Conference should study how 
technical assistance could be financed both from 
[13] See Resolution GC(XVII)/RES/307. 
[14] GC(XVIII)/529 and Corr. 1. 
the Regular Budget and from voluntary contributions. 
With regard to the Agency's programme for 
1975-80 and budget for 1975, the Philippine delegation 
viewed with concern the growing imbalance 
between the technical assistance programme and 
the importance accorded to safeguards. The 
appropriations for safeguards had increased sixfold 
between 1968 and 1975, whereas the allocations 
for technical assistance had risen only by a factor 
of 1.5. The Philippines had always maintained 
that technical assistance was one of the most 
important, if not the most urgent, task of the 
Agency. Some reasonable relationship should 
therefore exist between the funds allocated for 
safeguards and those for technical assistance. 

65. The Philippines was a party to NPT and 
attached great importance to its being put into 
effect - especially Article IV. 2, which called for 
a substantial increase in technical assistance in 
atomic energy to developing countries party to the 
Treaty. It might be relevant to recall in that 
connection that a meeting was to be held at Geneva 
in May 1975 to review the operation of NPT with a 
view to ensuring that the objectives defined in the 
Preamble and the provisions of NPT were being 
implemented effectively. He wished to stress the 
direct relationship between the Agency's technical 
assistance programme and the implementation of 
Article IV. 2 of NPT. A satisfactory review of 
NPT could not be made if the parties to it, especially 
the Depositary States, did not endeavour to 
comply with its provisions. The Philippine delegation 
had noted with interest that one of the 
Depositary States intended, as from 1975, in allocating 
special nuclear material and in granting 
gifts in kind, to give preference to developing 
countries which were party to NPT. He expressed 
the fervent hope that all parties to NPT would see 
fit to follow that example. 
66. The Philippine delegation approved the initiatives 
taken by the Director General to expand 
the Agency's programme in nuclear power and 
reactors and nuclear safety and environmental 
protection. It realized the need for such expansion 
in view of the fact that most developing countries 
seemed resolved to embark on their own nuclear 
power programmes, but one could not help wondering 
whether sufficient funds would be available 
unless adjustments were made in other activities 
of the Agency. He therefore suggested that the 
Agency review its programme priorities with a 
view to phasing out activities which were no longer 
of prime interest or to transferring them to other 
United Nations organizations, so as to limit, as 
far as practicable, the financial burden imposed 
upon Member States. 
67. That the Agency's technical assistance programme 
should keep pace with the expansion of 
nuclear power programmes in Member States was 
natural. For that reason, the Philippine delegation 
favoured a substantially higher target for voluntary 
contributions for 1975. His Government, for its 
part, would be contributing to the General Fund an 
amount in excess of its normal share and would 
provide three Type II fellowships instead of two. 
-9 



GC (XVIII)/OR. 17 0 

68. The Philippines had decided to construct its 
first nuclear power plant in Luzon. That decision 
underlined the need for intensified and expanded 
technical assistance and advice from the Agency, 
not only in administrative and technical matters 
but also in matters relating to regulations and the 
application thereof. 
69. With regard to licensing and regulatory activities, 
he wished to thank the Agency for the assistance 
it had given his country in the preparation 
and promulgation of regulations for the licensing 
of atomic energy facilities and in the preparation 
of guides and relevant appendices. Referring to 
the market survey for nuclear power in developing 
countries conducted by the Agency in 1973[15], he 
pointed out that the increase in the construction 
costs of nuclear power plants during the year had 
been much higher than anticipated and that, if the 
trend continued, the capital investment required for 
nuclear power plants would be beyond the reach of 
the developing countries. He felt, therefore, that 
the Agency could render further help to those countries, 
for example by arranging for reasonable 
financial terms to be granted, or by securing for 
them nuclear fuel and expert services at various 
phases of plant construction. The supply of nuclear 
fuel would undoubtedly be a problem as reliance 
came to be placed increasingly on nuclear plants 
for electric power generation. To obviate that 
difficulty, the Agency should give priority to the 
requests of developing countries interested in 
acquiring their own capability for nuclear fuel 
fabrication. 
70. He recalled that the Philippines had consistently 
supported regional co-operative undertakings 
as a means of overcoming common problems of 
Member States belonging to the same region. The 
Philippines was currently involved in two regional 
projects, one on neutron scattering and the other 
on environmental monitoring. It also attached 
great importance to co-operative work in food and 
agriculture and was awaiting with optimism the 
early implementation of the regional co-operative 
project on radiation preservation of fish and fishery 
products. The arrangements proposed by the 
Agency for implementing that project had been 
found acceptable by the Philippine Government. 
The Agency should be encouraged further to intensify 
its efforts in promoting regional co-operation. 
Furthermore, his Government believed that the 
Agency could help to lessen environmental pollution 
through the use of proven nuclear techniques and 
know-how in research work. His delegation had 
also taken note of the systematic efforts the Agency 
was making to develop health and safety standards 
covering every type of activity in which nuclear 
energy or techniques were employed. It hoped that 
the Agency would continue its efforts in that 
direction and undertake periodic reviews of those 
standards and guidelines with a view to adapting 
them to current needs. 
71. He recalled that the Philippines was opposed 
to nuclear tests in the atmosphere. It was deeply 
[15] For details, see document GC(XVII)/506. 
concerned about all other forms of nuclear tests, 
too, including those carried out underground, as 
they were subject to no appropriate international 
control and might cause serious environmental, 
ecological and geological disturbances. He 
expressed the earnest hope that the Member States 
concerned would take those objections into account 
and pay heed to the clear wishes of the peoples 
affected by those activities. 

72. He wished to call upon all Member States 
party to NPT to observe and fulfil the objectives of 
that Treaty, especially those relating to the 
exchange of equipment, materials and scientific 
and technological information for the further 
development of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy, with due consideration of the needs of the 
developing regions. 
73. The Philippine delegation hoped that, on the 
basis of the experience gained by the Agency in the 
administration of safeguards, it would be regarded 
as the appropriate international body for prescribing 
procedures and preparing international agreements 
which aimed at making available to nonnuclear-
weapon States party to NPT the potential 
benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear explosives. 
74. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) welcomed the admission 
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and 
Mauritius to the Agency. 
75. He then recalled that on 18 May India had 
exploded an underground nuclear device. That 
event, which was of far-reaching consequences for 
the peace and security of the world, had come as a 
shock not only to neighbouring States but also to 
many other peace-loving countries. India had 
described that test as a peaceful nuclear explosion 
but from the point of view of technology there was 
hardly any difference between a nuclear device of 
that type and a nuclear weapon. Pakistan, which 
had on many occasions expressed grave apprehensions 
at India's preparations, regretted that no 
steps had been taken to dissuade India taking that 
step. 
76. The action represented a very serious blow 
to international efforts to contain and prevent any 
further spread of nuclear weapons. The delicate 
balance of power had been shattered, the barriers 
had been breached and the way had now been opened 
for a race for the acquisition of nuclear weapons 
which could spread to an entirely new group of 
nations, to the detriment of their economic development 
and at the risk of nuclear conflict. The underlying 
principle of NPT had suffered a setback and 
the Review Conference on the operation of NPT 
scheduled for May 1975 as well as the plans for 
expanding the Agency's activities in connection 
with NPT would inevitably be affected. 
77. India's attitude might also hinder the assistance 
of advanced countries to the developing 
countries in matters affecting nuclear power just 
when the latter, in the throes of an energy crisis, 
would need it most for building the nuclear power 
plants which they required. The poor countries 
should bend their efforts in the direction of eco- 
10 



GC(XVIII)/OR.170 


nomic and industrial development and not of 
mutual destruction. The general welfare of the 
masses should take precedence over the illusion of 
power. 

78. Having reached a crucial moment in its history, 
mankind should mobilize all the wisdom, 
restraint and dispatch at its command, because 
there was no time to be lost. If India had serious 
economic reasons for carrying out tests with 
nuclear devices, it should conduct them under the 
auspices of the Agency and give an undertaking 
that it would not manufacture or acquire nuclear 
weapons. 
79. Pakistan was prepared to join India and other 
States in declaring the entire South Asian subcontinent 
a nuclear-free zone, in line with the 
concept embodied in the Treaty for the Prohibition 
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the 
Tlatelolco Treaty)[16]. In November 1972 
Mr. Bhutto, then President of Pakistan, had made 
such a proposal and recalled that his country, 
which believed in using atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes, had placed its nuclear facilities under 
the international safeguards of the Agency and 
would like to see other States in the region do the 
same. The atom should become a symbol of hope, 
not of destruction. The Government of Pakistan 
was now formally submitting the same proposal for 
the consideration of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations. 
80. Pakistan had signed the Partial Test Ban 
Treaty and had joined 94 other countries in voting 
for NPT at the United Nations in 1968. In spite of 
what had happened across the border, Pakistan 
would continue pursuing its peaceful activities. 
81. The Pakistan delegation felt that the nuclearweapon 
States now faced a grave responsibility. 
If they acquiesced in the fait accompli, there was 
reason to fear that sooner or later other countries 
would follow the Indian example. The hesitant 
attitude of all those States could raise serious 
doubts about their determination to uphold effective 
compliance with NPT. As evidence of their sincerity 
they should lend full support to all efforts to 
establish nuclear-free zones in sensitive regions of 
the world and extend firm guarantees against 
nuclear threats or blackmail from any quarter. 
The super Powers should also set a good example 
by moving towards the nuclear disarmament 
envisaged in Article VI of NPT. They should stop 
all underground nuclear weapons tests and conduct 
any peaceful nuclear explosions only under the 
auspices of the Agency. 
82. It was necessary to deal with that question 
at some length because, if immediate and effective 
measures were not taken now to arrest the proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction, world 
peace and security would be threatened, the 
Agency's efforts to promote peaceful applications 
[16] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
of nuclear energy would be negated and faith in the 
system of safeguards would be undermined. 

83. The energy crisis now affecting the world 
and the sharp increase in oil prices had particularly 
affected the economies of the developing countries 
with limited fossil fuel resources. The only 
practical solution for them was to acquire a nuclear 
energy potential. The Agency would have an 
important role to play in that connection. 
84. Pakistan commended the Director General 
for having proposed a considerable increase in the 
activities relating to nuclear power and nuclear 
safety. In that connection the International Conference 
on Nuclear Energy proposed for 1977 would 
come at the right time. The measures for assisting 
developing countries in problems relating to 
nuclear power deserved unreserved support. The 
steps taken by the Secretariat were constructive 
but much still remained to be done. The advanced 
countries should join with the developing countries 
in building and marketing reactors of relatively low 
power, which the energy crisis was now making 
potentially competitive and advisable. 
85. Pakistan endorsed the steps proposed by the 
Agency for enlarging its programme of environmental 
protection, radioactive waste management 
and nuclear safety, which was of very great 
importance from the point of view of wider acceptance 
of nuclear power and its introduction on a 
large scale, 
86. The world food shortage was another problem 
whose dimensions and gravity had not been fully 
appreciated. World food reserves had shrunk to 
merely one month's supplies; famine conditions 
prevailed and were threatening many parts of the 
world. A world food conference was to be held 
shortly. The Agency should be prepared to play 
its proper role by promoting the application of 
nuclear techniques for increasing food production 
and improving food preservation. However, the 
Agency proposed to devote only 3. 4% of its 1975 
budget, i.e. $1 million, to the activities of the 
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Atomic Energy in Food 
and Agriculture. That was too small an amount to 
lead to concrete results. In the light of the world 
food crisis it would be a matter of urgency to 
expand that Division's activities and programme. 
87. As regards technical assistance, the increase 
in the target of technical assistance to $4. 5 million 
as voluntary contributions in cash - with the 
expectation of obtaining a further $1.5 million in 
kind - was a satisfactory compromise. As the 
number of requests for Agency help were bound to 
increase, it was to be hoped that those targets 
could be revised upwards in the following year. 
88. The activities of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste, a joint IAEA/ 
UNESCO undertaking, were a source of real 
gratification, particularly from the point of view 
of assistance to developing countries. It was a 
source of satisfaction to note that 73% of its budget 
had been spent on visits of scientists from developing 
countries. 
- 11 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 170 

89. Pakistan's programme for the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy was developing rapidly. The 
Karachi nuclear power plant had already produced 
more than 1000 million kWh. Plans were now under 
way for constructing a 600-MW station, which 
would be followed in the 1980s by several such 
units. By the end of the century, nuclear power 
would account for more than two thirds of the total 
energy produced in Pakistan. Prospecting for 
uranium in the country had been stepped up in an 
effort to meet national requirements. Plans were 
being made to establish some of the basic facilities 
and auxiliary plants needed to support the nuclear 
power programme. 
90. Pakistan was at present establishing a 
separate institute for the training of nuclear power 
plant engineers, operators and technicians. It 
looked forward to receiving visits by scientists and 
trainees from abroad. The two atomic energy 
agricultural centres were busily at work and 
construction of a third such centre was to begin 
shortly. The Institute of Radiotherapy and Nuclear 
Medicine, the fifth such centre in Pakistan, would 
enter into operation in the following year. 

91. Pakistan wished to express its appreciation 
for the technical assistance and advice which it had 
received from the Agency, 
• The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m. 
- 12 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 

International Atomic Energy Agency 19 February 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday, 18 September 1974, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

9 General debate and report for 1973-74 1 -106 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

The Netherlands 1 -11 
United Kingdom 12-28 
Yugoslavia 29-50 
Viet-Nam 51 -57 
Republic of Zaire 58-59 
India 60-82 
Belgium 83-91 
Bangladesh 92-106 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 20 September 1974. 
** GC(XVIII)/534. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 
74-9548 


GC (XVIII) /OR. 171 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1973-74 
(GC(XVIII)/525, 532) (continued) 

1. Mr. BOT (Netherlands), continuing the 
general debate, said that apart from the many 
problems the changed world situation in energysupply 
had created since the last session of the 
General Conference, there was an important 
positive element of that development which should 
be stressed: people all over the world had woken 
up to the fact that the existing energy resources 
were limited and that intensified international cooperation 
was necessary in order to secure an 
adequate energy supply for future generations. 
2. As the Director General had pointed out, 
recent developments had led many Governments 
to accelerate the introduction of nuclear energy 
for power generation. [1] His Government had 
not yet finished the studies of all the aspects of 
energy supply started following the events of the 
previous year; it would announce its policies on 
the question in due course. Without anticipating 
the outcome of those studies, it should be stressed 
that his Government was most carefully weighing 
all relevant factors regarding the possible further 
application of nuclear energy. It could be said, 
however, that the Government deemed it imperative 
for a solution to be found to the unsolved 
problems a considerably increased application of 
nuclear energy would entail before nuclear energy 
was used for power purposes on a large scale. 
His Government had noticed with satisfaction that 
the Agency was performing many useful tasks in 
connection with those problems. It welcomed the 
fact that the need for additional efforts, especially 
in the field of environmental protection, had been 
emphasized in the proposed programme for 
1975-80 [2], The work on harmonization of safety 
standards for radiation protection and for radioactive 
wastes, especially high-level and alphabearing 
wastes, and on problems related to the 
decommissioning of nuclear facilities was fully 
supported by his Government. 
3. Although the application of sophisticated 
safety measures in nuclear installations made 
the probability of nuclear incidents which could 
pose any threat to the surrounding population 
very slight, his delegation still thought that plans 
should be prepared without further delay so that 
the consequences of any such nuclear incident 
could be limited as much as possible. His 
Government knew from experience that the 
elaboration of such plans was a complicated 
matter and that many problems remained to be 
solved. While it welcomed the fact that the 
Agency was to give its attention to the problem, 
it would appreciate higher priority being given to 
the subject so that a systematic elaboration of 
principles to govern measures to be taken in the 
event of nuclear accidents could be achieved in 
due course. 
[1] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para. 48. 
[2] See document GC(XVIII)/526 and Mod. 1, 
4. The recent energy crisis had made it 
economically attractive for many developing 
countries to start developing or expanding programmes 
for the application of nuclear energy 
to power generation. In that connection, he noted 
with interest from the annual report [3] that the 
economic and commercial prospects for small 
and medium-sized power reactors were considered 
to be favourable; at the previous session of the 
General Conference, he had pointed out the 
advantages of such small and medium-sized 
reactors, in particular for developing countries [4], 
5. As the Director General had rightly 
emphasized, an important prerequisite for the 
application of nuclear energy on a larger scale 
in the developing countries was the existence of 
appropriate technical and administrative infrastructures. 
[5] Besides the training of technicians, 
the Agency could provide useful advice and 
support in working out standards and procedures 
for licensing as well as in organizing appropriate 
administrative bodies. His delegation considered 
it to be of the utmost importance that systematic 
studies should be made first of all and without 
delay to establish whether other energy sources 
requiring less complicated technical and administrative 
procedures could provide an attractive 
alternative for a number of developing countries 
which urgently needed rapidly increased power 
generation. 
6. As was well known, his Government attached 
great importance to the tasks performed by the 
Agency under the technical assistance programme. 
He was therefore happy to announce that his 
Government had decided, subject to parliamentary 
approval, to make a voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund of US $45 000. His delegation 
shared the views expressed by the delegate of 
Indonesia regarding the financing of technical 
assistance. 
7. His Government was greatly concerned 
'about the explosion of a nuclear device in May 
that year by a non-nuclear-weapon State as 
defined in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [6], It had also taken 
note of the Indian Government's statement that it 
remained committed to a policy of using nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes only. However, 
since it was difficult to distinguish between nuclear 
tests for peaceful purposes and tests for defence 
purposes, his Government considered that the 
event in Rajasthan constituted a nuclear proliferation, 
at least in the technical sense. As such 
it represented a setback to international efforts 
to ban nuclear tests everywhere and by everyone, 
nuclear Powers and non-nuclear-weapon States 
alike. The event had strengthened his Government' 
s conviction that more than ever efforts 

[3] GC(XVIII)/525. 
[4] See document GC(XVII)/OR, 163, para. 5. 
[5] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para, 54. 
[6] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 


should be continued to obtain nuclear arms control 
and disarmament. An important means of 
achieving that goal was, without any doubt, the 
widest possible adherence to NPT. In that 
connection, the Netherlands Parliament had 
recently ratified NPT and approved the safeguards 
agreement in connection with it. Furthermore, 
his Government hoped that the fullest possible 
use would be made of the Review Conference of 
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (the Review Conference), 
which offered a welcome opportunity of enhancing 
the viability of the Treaty in all its aspects. 

8. The agreement reached by a number of 
States which exported nuclear materials and 
equipment for peaceful purposes, on procedures 
relating to exports to any non-nuclear-weapon 
State of certain categories of equipment and 
material especially designed or prepared for the 
processing, use or production of special fissionable 
material, [7] was encouraging for the future 
of NPT. His Government fervently hoped that all 
exporting States which had not yet adhered to 
those agreements would do so, so that generally 
accepted standards for exporting nuclear materials 
and equipment could be arrived at. In that context 
he fully shared the opinion of the Director General 
that the technical scope and procedures for the 
non-NPT safeguards system should be defined 
more precisely in the light of developments and 
experience since 1968. [8] 
9. The Agency had been studying the question 
of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes (PNE) 
for a number of years and had proved itself to be 
fully competent in the matter. While his Government 
welcomed the Board's decision concerning 
the eventual establishment of a separate organizational 
unit for PNE-related services as representing 
an attempt to internationalize PNE, it 
considered that a careful evaluation of all aspects 
of peaceful nuclear explosions should be made 
before more definitive steps were taken. The 
possible political and economic benefits of an 
international PNE system had, for example, to 
be weighed against the risk that such explosions 
could be misused for conducting nuclear weapon 
tests, especially in the context of a comprehensive 
test ban. Furthermore, it was imperative that 
under such a system, services for PNEs should 
be provided on a non-discriminatory basis and 
should, as far as possible, be the same for nonnuclear-
weapon States and nuclear Powers alike. 
10. In his statement, the Director General had 
expressed the opinion that the Agency should expand 
its activities in the field of peaceful protection of 
nuclear materials and installations. [9] The 
Netherlands Government would welcome that. 
The United States delegate had quite rightly made 
that subject one of the main themes of her state[
7] See document INFCIRC/209 and 
Addenda 1 and 2. 
[8] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para. 65. 
[9] Ibid., para. 63. 
ment the previous day. Though the responsibility 
for physical protection was primarily a national 
one, there were good reasons to justify the Agency 
playing an active role in that field. Generally 
speaking, States did not only have a domestic 
responsibility in that field, they also had a 
responsibility towards the international community, 
since the consequence of misuse of stolen material 
need not necessarily be limited to the frontiers of 
the State in which it had been stolen. Inasmuch as 
all States using nuclear energy would be obliged 
to take appropriate physical protection measures, 
sharing of experience would be useful to all 
Governments. Moreover, the increase in international 
transport of nuclear materials also 
called for internationally agreed protection 
measures. The undertaking of a study of the 
subject by the Agency would be welcome. But 
any such study should not be limited to working 
out protection standards alone, but should cover 
the more general problem of how fuel cycle activities 
should be located geographically so as to 
minimize the risks of theft or sabotage. 

11. In conclusion, he expressed his Government's 
confident hope that the Agency would continue to 
perform its many useful tasks in close cooperation 
with other international organizations 
both inside and outside the United Nations system. 
Only in that way could optimum results be achieved 
from the available manpower and funds. 
12. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) said that it 
was a great pleasure to welcome two new Members 
to the Agency. 
13. The shortfall in oil supplies and the increase 
in price had given greater impetus to the introduction 
of nuclear power. The use of nuclear 
energy for electricity production had now been 
shown conclusively to be substantially cheaper 
than the use of fossil fuels and he was fully 
confident that nuclear energy would henceforward 
provide an increasing share of the world's power 
demand. If its long-term potential was to be 
realized to the full, the search for additional 
supplies of uranium must be intensified and 
technology must continue to be improved and 
solutions to long-term waste problems to be 
perfected. 
14. The United Kingdom had recently decided 
in favour of the steam generating heavy water 
reactor (SGHWR) for its next nuclear power station 
orders. It believed that the SGHWR would best 
meet its domestic needs. It had confidence in the 
technology, and the 100-MW prototype had been 
operating successfully for the past six years. A 
programme of 4000 MW of orders over the next 
four years was being embarked upon, which 
provided a base for developing industrial capability 
and an expansion of the SGHWR programme 
in the future. 
15. Efforts in the fast reactor field were being 
maintained, and an important milestone had been 
reached that year with the commissioning of the 
250-MW prototype fast reactor at Dounreay. The 
United Kingdom had now more than 10 years' 
-3 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 

operating experience with the forerunner of the 
prototype reactor, and the next stage was 
commercial design and exploitation. His Government 
attached particular importance to further 
international collaboration in that important field, 

16. Increasing attention was also being devoted 
to a number of areas of development work concerned 
with safety and with the broader aspects 
of nuclear power. Those included study of the 
general environmental impact of nuclear power, 
general safety studies, the investigation of waste 
management and long-term waste treatment, the 
study of plutonium handling and accounting, and 
the study of the problems of transporting nuclear 
materials. 
17. With the upsurge of orders for nuclear 
power stations there had been a corresponding 
increase in interest in fuel services. Under 
their tripartite centrifuge collaboration, the 
Federal Republic of Germany, the Netherlands, 
and the United Kingdom had now completed the 
pilot-plant stage of their gas centrifuge process 
for uranium enrichment and had commenced 
construction of two major commercial plants: 
one at Capenhurst in the United Kingdom and the 
other at Almelo in the Netherlands. Those plants 
were expected to achieve a total output of 
400 tonnes of separative work per annum by 
1976-77, Capacity was being increased to at 
least 2000 tonnes by 1982 and was expected to 
reach 10 000 tonnes by the mid-1980s. Almost 
all the first 2000 tonnes was now covered by 
orders or options from European utilities which 
amounted to an order book worth over 
£180 million. 
18. The Association for Centrifuge Enrichment 
(ACE), established in 1973 to study aspects of 
centrifuge plant usage, including technology, 
construction and finance, had successfully concluded 
its initial task. The ten member countries 
had been provided with an analysis of the construction 
costing and production of enrichment by 
the centrifuge process. All the countries agreed 
that the next phase would be concerned essentially 
with bilateral discussions between the individual 
countries and the tripartite partners. Discussion 
at government level covering the application of 
appropriate safeguards and protection of classified 
information would have to precede any commercial 
and industrial negotiations, 
19. In the long term, an alternative to fission 
reactors was nuclear fusion with the prospect of 
utilizing virtually unlimited fuel supplies. During 
1973 the United Kingdom had decided to expand 
its programme of fusion research somewhat, and 
to carry out the expanded programme in association 
with the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM). It had been happy to have at Culham 
a European design team which had been working 
on the so-called Joint European Torus ('JET') 
project. The team had prepared an outline design 
of a large Tokamak device so that both the project 
itself and the site for it could be considered by 
the partners and by the Council of Ministers of 
EURATOM. 
20. At the previous year's General Conference 
the United Kingdom delegation had welcomed the 
signature of the IAEA/EURATOM safeguards 
agreement [10] and had stated that it was the 
Government's intention to negotiate a similar 
agreement, suitably adjusted to meet the United 
Kingdom's own circumstances, with the Agency 
and with EURATOM. Good progress was being 
made in the negotiation of such an agreement, 
directed to the implementation of the United 
Kingdom's voluntary offer to accept safeguards on 
its civil nuclear facilities. There was agreement 
on the general issues, and discussions would 
resume in October when detailed consideration 
would be given to specific articles of the draft 
agreement. 
21, It had always been made clear that entry 
into force of the resulting agreement would 
depend upon progress in ratification of NPT and 
acceptance of safeguards by major non-nuclearweapon 
States. In that context, he was pleased 
to note the progress being made in Europe towards 
the ratification of the IAEA/EURATOM agreement 
which he hoped would soon result in all the 
EURATOM non-nuclear-weapon States becoming 
party to NPT. It would be fitting if the EURATOM 
non-nuclear-weapon States which had still to ratify 
NPT, and indeed all others which had indicated 
their confidence in it but had not yet become party 
to it, could do so in time to participate in the NPT 
Review Conference. 

22. His Government had always fully supported 
NPT as the most practical and realistic means 
of containing the risk to world security of the 
spread of nuclear weapons. It realized that some 
of the criticisms of NPT might be justified; no 
international agreement designed for universal 
acceptance was perfect. If NPT did not exist, 
however, the world would be less safe for all, 
and consequently all should surely regard NPT as 
the foundation stone upon which to build. The 
forthcoming Review Conference should be taken 
as an opportunity to strengthen it, to improve its 
operation and to ensure its universal application. 
23, No State represented at the Conference 
could but abhor the further proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. It was their duty to ensure 
that the benefits of nuclear technology were 
enjoyed by all without being overshadowed by the 
threat of a nuclear holocaust. Progress in 
nuclear disarmament might not be as rapid as 
desired but it was at least progress in the right 
direction. The further proliferation of nuclear 
arms could only jeopardize that progress and 
would, in itself, be retrogressive and against the 
interests of all Members of the Agency. It was 
essential that in reviewing the first few years of 
operation of NPT, opinions of as many parties to 
NPT as possible should be heard, so that improvements 
could be made to the non-proliferation 
machinery to enable it to cope with the fastmoving 
development of nuclear technology. 

[10] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/193. 
-4 

GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 


24. His Government's determination to assist 
the effective implementation of NPT could be seen 
from recent actions. He had already referred to 
the progress made in the implementation of the 
United Kingdom's safeguards offer. Together 
with the United States of America and the USSR 
it had also undertaken to assist the Agency by 
notifying exports and imports of nuclear 
material. [11] It had also announced its 
adoption of certain procedures in implementation 
of its obligations under Article III. 2 of NPT and 
in order to prevent safeguards requirements 
becoming an element of competition in international 
nuclear trade. Furthermore, it had 
participated in the Agency's efforts to arrive at 
a greater degree of standardization with respect 
to the duration and termination of safeguards 
agreements other than those concluded in 
implementation of NPT; and, when providing 
items in connection with which safeguards were 
called for, it would require that the relevant 
agreements reflected the concepts contained in 
a memorandum by the Director General on the 
formulation of certain provisions in agreements 
under the Agency's Safeguards System (1965, as 
Provisionally Extended in 1966 and 1968), which 
was before the Board of Governors in 
February 1974. 
25. On behalf of his delegation, he warmly 
thanked the Director General and his staff for 
their valuable work during the past year and for 
the way they were continuing to meet the challenges 
of today. The difficulties sometimes seemed 
quite irreconcilable: on the one hand there was 
the need to reorientate and expand the programme 
in response to the world's needs and on the other 
hand there was a need to contain the budget to a 
level which countries could support during a 
period when it was being eroded relentlessly 
away by inflation. He urged the Director General 
to continue vigorously to pursue, as he had always 
done, his policy of good housekeeping. The 
United Kingdom Government had always been 
prepared to make in full its assessed contributions 
to the Regular Budget and its voluntary contributions 
to the technical assistance programme. 
The previous year it had supported along with 
other Member States the setting up of a contingency 
fund to meet shortfalls in the Regular Budget, and 
had subsequently agreed to make a pro rata 
increase in its contribution to technical assistance, 
thus exceeding its voluntary contribution for 1974 
by 18%. For 1975 the United Kingdom was 
prepared to make its assessed contribution to the 
Regular Budget, and following the recent recommendation 
by the Board of Governors to raise 
the target level for technical assistance to 
$4. 5 million it had pledged to meet in full its 
share of the new voluntary target. 

26. In response to the Agency's needs the 
United Kingdom had the previous year provided 
facilities for 53 trainees and the services of 
29 cost-free experts. An expansion of the 
[11] See document INFCIRC/207. 
Agency's training programme was currently 
under discussion. In the meantime the United 
Kingdom remained ready to provide training in 
appropriate fields for Agency fellows from the 
developing countries. 

27. With the expansion of nuclear power, it 
was desirable that there should be a move towards 
establishing acceptable and recognized safety 
codes and guides for reactors on a world-wide' 
basis. The efforts of the Agency in that direction 
were welcome. However, care should be exercised 
to ensure that the particular characteristics 
of any system could be taken fully into account and 
that no undue constraints were placed on design 
and development. 
28. As regards the question of physical security 
it was important to be clear that that was not a 
question of nuclear safety in any general sense, 
but of the particular problems which might arise 
from activities of lawbreakers. It was his considered 
opinion that the general interest would 
not best be served by public debate on that 
particular topic. To evolve measures and 
establish procedures designed to cope with such 
situations was a task of great complexity and of 
high security, and any disclosure of the precautions 
taken could only reduce their effectiveness. 
29. Mr. DENES (Yugoslavia) said that as time 
went on the world was facing ever greater 
difficulties in connection with the energy crisis, 
which meant that one of the Agency's main 
purposes, the utilization of nuclear energy, 
assumed ever greater importance. 
30. The present international situation was 
characterized by crises in various parts of the 
world, and the consequent threat to peace, 
security and the unimpeded development of 
nations was all the greater since some of the 
existing crises were not being settled, while many 
new and dangerous ones were appearing on the 
scene. 
31. The energy crisis had led to a considerably 
enhanced interest in nuclear energy throughout the 
world, particularly among the developing countries. 
On the other hand, the utilization of nuclear energy 
called for urgent solutions to various problems, 
ranging from nuclear fuels to health physics and 
safety devices. 
32. Much time had been spent on emphasizing 
the distinction between safeguards and technical 
assistance, but real life had demonstrated their 
interdependence as two parts of a whole. 
33. His delegation considered that the Director 
General's approach to the problems at issue was 
a realistic one, and at the same time was 
sufficiently imaginative to yield fruitful action. 
34. The declaration by the Yugoslav Government 
of 27 February 1970 had described the motives 
impelling Yugoslavia to accede to NPT. His 
delegation also wished to recall recent statements 
5 


GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 

in favour of general and complete disarmament, 
including the prohibition of the manufacture and 
use of nuclear weapons, the destruction of all 
existing stocks, and the prohibition of all nuclear 
tests in all media throughout the world. During 
the recent meeting of the Committee on Disarmament 
at Geneva, the Yugoslav delegation 
had expressed anxiety at the new dimensions 
assumed by the armaments race, especially the 
nuclear one. The Agency's General Conference 
was clearly the appropriate forum in which to 
reiterate such fears. It had unfortunately to be 
concluded that hardly anything had been done 
about stopping or limiting the rush towards 
nuclear rearmament, and the results achieved 
in making nuclear technology available to developing 
countries had been very modest during the 
four years since NPT had come into force. 

35. The present situation was a consequence of 
the monopolistic position of the nuclear Powers, 
in connection not only with weapons but also with 
the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. If 
the nuclear Powers did not take the quickest 
possible path to nuclear disarmament and the 
fulfilment of their obligations towards the developing 
countries, it could be expected that some of 
the latter would seek their own solutions to their 
problems, by the utilization of nuclear energy in 
all its forms. That was now becoming an 
increasingly feasible proposition for quite a large 
number of countries, even for those with a very 
low level of general development, 
36. A comprehensive test ban was an important 
prerequisite for the establishment of an internationally 
co-ordinated system in connection with 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes. 
Article V of NPT provided that non-nuclearweapon 
States party to the Treaty would be able 
to enjoy the benefits of peaceful nuclear explosions, 
"pursuant to a special international agreement or 
agreements, through an appropriate international 
body with adequate representation of non-nuclearweapon 
States. Negotiations on this subject shall 
commence as soon as possible after the Treaty 
enters into force. " However, no such international 
agreement had yet been concluded and 
neither had any negotiations taken place. His 
delegation felt that it was high time to convene 
the appropriate international conference, with 
participation open to all States, nuclear and nonnuclear. 
37. The system which would emerge from the 
negotiations would have to be non-discriminatory 
and capable of equitable implementation in relation 
to all countries. The capacity of a number of 
States to develop the scientific and technological 
potential of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
was full justification for a timely international 
initiative as regards the regulation of activities. 
38. The intensive utilization of nuclear technology 
for peaceful purposes, which was always 
advocated by non-aligned countries at their various 
summit meetings, could be a significant factor in 
the effort to accelerate the economic development 
of developing countries. Interest in nuclear 
energy had increased owing to the energy crisis, 
as nuclear power was a feasible and immediately 
available solution for the energy problem. Interest 
had been stimulated also by the fact that nuclear 
power plants were now the cheapest way of 
supplying electric power for many developing 
countries. Numerous countries, including 
Yugoslavia, had acceded to NPT because they 
believed that the Treaty provisions relating to the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy and the 
transfer of nuclear technology would be honoured 
and implemented by the nuclear States party to 
NPT. 

39. The resources at present available for 
financing peaceful nuclear activities could not 
keep pace with the ever-increasing requirements. 
A considerable part of the human and material 
potential of the Agency had been devoted to developing 
the Agency's supervisory functions in 
connection with NPT. The acute needs of the 
developing countries as regards the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy had still not been 
adequately met. Significant results had indeed 
been obtained in certain areas (agriculture, 
medicine, and so on), while progress in other 
domains was still the privilege of the highly 
developed countries. He believed that energetic 
action under, for example, the programme for 
utilization of nuclear fuel would considerably 
strengthen confidence in NPT and would promote 
its universal acceptance, 
40. In the Agency's programme - as reflected 
in the statement by the Director General - the 
utilization of nuclear energy as a power source 
held a significant place. The Yugoslav delegation 
was of the opinion that that represented a concrete 
contribution by the Agency to solving the problems 
caused by the energy crisis. That policy should 
continue to guide the future activities of the 
Agency, and would enjoy Yugoslavia's full support, 
41. Yugoslavia was among the first countries 
to have concluded, under the Agency's auspices, 
an agreement with the United States of America 
for the construction of a nuclear power plant and 
for the supply of nuclear fuel. [12] He wished to 
take the opportunity of thanking the United States 
representatives, the Agency Secretariat and the 
various experts concerned for their spirit of 
understanding and co-operation in that important 
work, which had been brought to a most satisfactory 
conclusion. The Yugoslav Government 
believed that all action throughout the world 
concerned with the generation and use of nuclear 
energy should be undertaken under the aegis of 
the Agency. For that purpose, it might be useful 
for countries already constructing nuclear power 
plants, or about to do so, to exchange relevant 
experience and information. 
42. Yugoslavia had been consistently in favour 
of a substantial increase in the Agency's technical 
assistance to developing countries. In that 
[12] See document INFCIRC/213. 
-6 



GC (XVIII)/OR. 171 


connection his Government would fulfil its 
obligations regarding the target for voluntary 
contributions, as provided in the decision taken 
by the Board of Governors on 13 June 1974. 

43. His delegation approved the report on the 
provision of technical assistance by the Agency 
with special reference to 1973. [13] It was particularly 
in favour of the new orientation of technical 
assistance towards nuclear power. It hoped 
also that the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) contribution would be increased 
so as to meet the needs of the developing countries. 
44. A number of developing countries already 
possessed significant experience and capability in 
the field of nuclear energy. Those countries 
should co-operate with one another in that field 
through active participation in the work of the 
Agency. Isolated and poorly integrated requests 
should give way to programmes co-ordinated 
particularly on a regional basis. In that way the 
most rational use would be made of available 
funds. 
45. Turning to co-operation between the Agency 
and Yugoslavia, his delegation believed that such 
co-operation had been especially varied and 
fruitful since the last session of the General 
Conference. Among other activities, a Seminar 
on Radiological Safety Evaluation of Population 
Doses and Application of Radiological Safety 
Standards to Man and the Environment had been 
organized in Yugoslavia as a joint project with 
the Agency. The discussions and exchange of 
views and experiences had lasted several days 
and had covered those problems of human and 
environmental protection which were becoming 
increasingly important thanks to the projected 
construction of numerous nuclear power plants. 
His Government would lend continued support to 
all the Agency's activities in that direction. 
46. On the subject of the report for 1973-74 and 
the programme for 1975-80, he wished to associate 
himself with the suggestion put forward by the 
delegate of Indonesia for more detailed descriptions 
of UNDP projects. [14] He also believed it 
would be helpful if the Agency's annual report 
were to cover a period coinciding with the Agency's 
budgetary year, 
47. The report for 1973-74 gave a detailed 
analysis of the results achieved as well as of 
outstanding problems. His delegation approved 
the report as presenting a cross-section of the 
Agency's work during the past year. It showed 
that during that period many problems had been 
solved, especially in the field of nutrition, agriculture, 
natural sciences, economics, nuclear 
power engineering, safety, environmental 
protection and application of safeguards. 
[13] GC(XVIII)/INF/148. 
[14] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 169, para. 45. 
48. The above areas would be the scene of the 
Agency's principal activities during the period 
1975-80, which would also - he was gratified to 
see - witness a further expansion in the provision 
of technical assistance, particularly in connection 
with the introduction of nuclear power. 
49. He welcomed the admission of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and Mauritius to 
membership of the Agency, thus strengthening 
the universal character of the organization. 
50. Finally, he wished to emphasize that 
Yugoslavia was expecting much from the Agency 
and he also believed that the world had similar 
expectations. He was confident that the Agency 
would not fail in its mission of making available 
to mankind the marvellous benefits promised by 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
51. Mr, LE-VAN-THOI (Viet-Nam), noting the 
Agency's active role in the development of international 
collaboration directed at exploiting 
atomic energy in the interests of peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world, said that, 
in addition to its research and promotional 
activities in various fields of nuclear science 
and technology, the Agency was doing valuable 
work in the field of environmental protection and 
contributing - through the strengthening of its 
safeguards in connection with NPT - to world 
security. 
52. The Agency was engaged in careful studies 
of the safety problems posed by power reactors 
and in the formulation of standards for the 
management of radioactive waste, and he was 
sure that, in view of the present energy crisis, 
the Agency's recommendations would be welcomed 
by most Member States. The developing countries 
would undoubtedly have recourse, during the forthcoming 
decades, to nuclear power, which would 
become less and less expensive and would at all 
events be cheaper than other forms of energy, 
especially as the risks involved in nuclear power 
reactor operations were very slight. 
53. He was pleased to see that the Agency was 
giving high priority to the technical assistance 
programme, which would, in the opinion of his 
delegation, have the most lasting effect of all the 
Agency's programmes, helping the underprivileged 
countries to increase their economic potential 
and raise their living standards. He feared, 
however, that the Agency would not be able to 
meet the growing number of requests for technical 
assistance if the funds for that purpose continued 
to derive almost entirely from voluntary contributions. 
He was therefore in favour of financing 
a larger part of the technical assistance programme 
from the Regular Budget. 
54. Technical assistance projects should, as far 
as possible, be grouped on a regional basis, so 
as to derive maximum benefit from the services 
of experts and to strengthen regional ties. As far 
as South Asia, South East Asia and the Pacific and 
the Far East were concerned, an agreement 
along those lines had been concluded thanks to the 
-7 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 

Agency's efforts. [15] Under that agreement, a 
project relating to the radiation preservation of 
fish and fishery products would be starting soon 
and a regional meeting on radiation protection 
was to be held in Bombay towards the end of the 
year. He hoped that other regional projects would 
be initiated in the near future under the agreement 
and that they would yield concrete results within 
a reasonable time, thereby encouraging Governments 
to go further in the regional co-ordination 
of national research activities. 

55. The shortage of qualified personnel was 
seriously hampering nuclear research in all 
developing countries and constituted a problem 
to which the Agency ought to devote special 
attention. Efforts should be made to train such 
personnel at the regional level, using the nuclear 
installations and research facilities in the region, 
and to organize regular courses designed to ensure 
a continuous supply of technicians qualified to 
carry out work in different fields of research. In 
that context, Viet-Nam was prepared to make 
available for training in nuclear medicine the 
Cho-Ray Hospital's modest radioisotopes laboratory, 
which had been equipped entirely by the 
Agency. 
56. Turning to administrative questions, he 
proposed that the Agency's annual report be 
prepared on a calendar-year basis so as to 
facilitate comparison with the programme and 
budget. 
57. He regretted that Viet-Nam's contribution 
to the development of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes had remained so modest. The war in 
his country, which had lasted so long and which 
his people had not wanted, had paralysed all 
teaching and research efforts, and while the 
Paris Agreement had put an end to the war, the 
return to peace was a difficult process. Looking 
ahead, however, his delegation hoped that 
Viet-Nam would become increasingly involved 
in the Agency's work and help to achieve the 
common aim of really putting the atom to the 
service of peace. 
58. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) said that 
among the major issues concerning the General 
Conference were the financing of technical 
assistance, the amendments to the Rules of 
Procedure, and, of course, the energy crisis. 
Whereas the first two problems had been under 
discussion for quite a long time and certain 
progress had been made in overcoming the difficulties 
involved, the energy crisis was a matter 
that still required careful deliberation. 
59. In that connection, the Agency was in a 
position to take the lead by making a concerted 
effort to organize a more effective distribution 
of information on nuclear power generation, and 
an efficient safeguards system that was not unduly 
costly. 
[15] See document INFCIRC/167 and Addenda. 
60. Mr. SETHNA (India) said his delegation 
welcomed the admission of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and Mauritius as 
new Member States of the Agency, India had 
excellent relations with both those countries and 
looked forward to co-operating with them in the 
Agency. 
61. The Indian delegation wished to express its 
appreciation of the work of the Secretariat and 
the excellent documentation produced by the Agency. 
It was a matter of satisfaction that the Agency 
had responded with its customary speed and 
efficiency to the demands placed on it by the 
anticipated expansion of nuclear power programmes 
in the wake of the present energy crisis. 
62. Recent events had underscored the importance 
of nuclear energy in the production of electric 
power especially in the developing countries, 
whose economies were more vulnerable to steep 
fuel-cost escalations. The Agency could play a 
meaningful role by arranging for exchanges of 
information and expertise so as to reduce the 
lead time in the construction of nuclear power 
plants, thereby ensuring that nuclear power would 
have a more direct and immediate impact upon 
the world energy situation in the near future. 
63. In the longer term, also, nuclear energy 
was of immense significance, promising to help 
bridge the energy gap as advanced technologies, 
especially those relating to fast breeder reactors, 
became feasible. The Agency's enlarged plans 
relating to nuclear power reactors and nuclear 
safety and environmental protection had India's 
full support. The Agency had shown wisdom in 
assigning priority to those two areas. 
64. Defining nuclear power production and 
related sectors as priority subjects did not mean, 
however, that attention should be diverted from 
certain other subjects of equal importance, 
particularly to the developing countries - the 
Agency's work in food and agriculture and in the 
life sciences. 
65. The Agency's technical assistance programme 
for the immediate future had done well to make 
provision for the training of personnel for the 
operation of nuclear power reactors and for work 
relating to the establishment and expansion of 
nuclear power projects in the developing countries. 
India was willing to play its part in that important 
work. 
66. One of the pressing concerns at the time of 
the last session of the General Conference had 
been the state of the Agency's finances, particularly 
the anticipated increases in the budget following 
widespread inflation and the re-alignment of 
currency exchange rates. While the Agency, 
through careful housekeeping and timely provision 
of funds for anticipated changes in the exchange 
rates, had kept the expansion of the budget within 
reasonable limits, there was still need for longterm 
discussion, in association with other United 
Nations bodies, on how the Agency could respond 
effectively to the external pressures put on its 
-8 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 


finances. Inflation had had a particularly serious 
effect on activities of special importance to the 
developing countries, e. g, the technical assistance 
programme. 

67. The Conference had before it at the present 
session a paper on different modes of financing 
the technical assistance programme of the 
Agency [16], which followed from the deliberations 
of last year. While the conclusions reached in 
the paper represented a reasonable compromise 
within present-day limitations, India felt that a 
continuing review of all aspects of the technical 
assistance programme was an essential prerequisite 
to its satisfactory implementation. 
68. Hitherto the Agency's technical assistance 
programme had been administered on the admirable 
basic principle of non-discrimination between 
States on political or other considerations. At 
the present session of the General Conference, 
his delegation had heard some suggestions to the 
effect that States parties to NPT should in some 
way be preferred in the matter of provision of 
technical assistance. India could not fail to 
express concern that such a suggestion had been 
voiced. It could not agree to any proposal by 
which, in the provision of technical assistance or 
in the implementation of any other statutory 
function of the Agency, an element of discrimination 
was introduced as between States which were 
and those which were not party to a particular 
international treaty. 
69. With the growing importance of nuclear 
power for the developing countries, it was 
becoming increasingly imperative to ensure 
that technically sound requests for assistance 
received by the Agency should be met and that 
funds should be made available for the purpose. 
The target for the General Fund set from year to 
year should, therefore, include not only a 
component to compensate for inflation but also a 
real growth component taking into account the 
increasing needs of the developing countries. 
70. His Government was happy to announce a 
contribution of $ 60 000 in Indian rupees to the 
General Fund for the year 1975, which amount 
was about 7. 5% more than its assessed share. 
71. India had been making resources available 
to facilitate the provision of technical assistance 
by the Agency to other developing countries. In 
addition to cash contributions to the General Fund 
it had made available a number of fellowships, the 
services of Indian experts, facilities for visits by 
scientists from other developing countries, and 
training courses, seminars and symposia. India 
had frequently expressed the view that the Agency's 
programme of seminars, symposia and allied 
activities should be dispersed geographically, 
with particular emphasis on holding them in the 
developing countries so that a larger number of 
scientific staff from those countries could participate 
in and benefit from such activities. 
[16] See documents GC(XVIII)/529 and Corr. 1. 
72. It was a matter of great satisfaction that 
the emphasis in technical assistance had shifted 
from basic radiation and isotope applications to 
nuclear engineering and studies directly related 
to the introduction and expansion of nuclear power 
and to agricultural applications of nuclear energy. 
The work of the Agency in the coming years would 
therefore be in line with the major world trends, 
focusing increasing attention on problems of food 
and power. It was also gratifying that in recent 
years the Agency had devoted considerable 
attention to developing co-ordinated programmes 
of research in which a number of institutions in 
various countries had co-operated in well-defined 
areas. The Agency could profitably think in 
terms of a few regional projects enabling the 
various geographical regions of the Agency to 
collaborate on an intraregional basis. Such 
projects would offer young scientists and engineers 
challenging opportunities in their home 
countries and help avoid a brain-drain. 
73. The formula for the financing of safeguards 
approved by the Conference in 1971 had been conceived 
before the implications of the present rate 
of growth in the safeguards activities of the Agency 
had been fully realized. Practically all the developing 
countries were already paying more towards 
the safeguards budget than the minimun envisaged 
in the formula. As delegates were well aware, 
the question of safeguards financing was to be 
reviewed at an appropriate time after 1975. The 
Indian delegation believed that some advance 
thinking needed to be done on the present concept 
of safeguards financing. In view of recent developments 
in nuclear power production and their 
consequent implications for the Agency's safeguards 
activities, there was every reason that 
such a review should be carried out soon. 

74. The nuclear energy programme of India had 
maintained its momentum. The UNDP-assisted 
ISOMED Project (Trombay) for the radiation 
sterilization of medical products was being 
implemented in collaboration with the Agency. 
The cobalt-60 source totalling some 125 000 curies, 
fabricated in the Trombay Isotope Laboratory, 
had been loaded into the plant in December 1973. 
The plant now provided irradiation services to 
manufacturers of medical products on a regular 
basis. Thanks to the comprehensive expertise 
gained with the commissioning of the plant, it 
would now be possible to use it as a centre for 
training scientists, engineers and technicians 
from developing countries in all aspects of 
radiation sterilization. A beginning had already 
been made with the training of scientists and 
technicians from some South East Asian and 
East Asian countries. Further assistance in that 
technology would be provided to developing countries 
in Asia through training or by the provision 
of experts on radiation equipment and sources. 
75. The Nuclear Fuel Complex in Hyderabad 
had been set up some years ago for the production 
of fuel for the country's nuclear power programme. 
Its plants were now fully commissioned for fuels 
based on natural uranium oxide for the reactors 
at Rajasthan and those under construction in 
-9 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 


Madras and Narora as wel] as the Tarapur reactors 
based on slightly enriched uranium oxide. 

76. Plants had also been set up for processing 
zirconium sands for the production of finished 
Zircaloy products to nuclear standards. 
77. The above-mentioned facilities for fuel 
production had made the country selfsufficient 
as far as fuel requirements for initial cores and 
replacements of various Indian reactors was 
concerned, 
78. His delegation noted with regret some of the 
statements made at the Session regarding India's 
policy of nuclear experiments for peaceful 
purposes. It did not think, however, that any 
useful purpose would be served by entering into 
arguments over the unfounded allegations that had 
been made on the subject. Nevertheless he did 
wish to set the record straight. As the world 
community was aware, the Indian Atomic Energy 
Commission had on 18 May 1974 successfully 
conducted an underground nuclear experiment for 
peaceful purposes. It had been a completely 
contained experiment at low cost. Investigations 
were in progress to determine the depth at which 
the activity was contained. The experiment 
formed a part of India's programme for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. In conducting 
the experiment India had not violated any agreement, 
bilateral or multilateral, nor any agreement 
involving the Agency or the Treaty Banning 
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in 
Outer Space and Under Water (the Partial Test 
Ban Treaty). [17] India had been one of the 
earliest signatories of the Partial Test Ban 
Treaty, which it had ratified in 1964, and it was 
fully aware of the obligations it had undertaken 
under that Treaty. 
79. The potential economic benefits of nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes, which were 
already well known to the International scientific 
community, hardly needed to be underlined. The 
conclusions of the Agency's technical panels held 
in 1970, 1971 and 1972 had further underscored 
that aspect. 
80. India had always reserved the right to pursue 
its own independent policy of using nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes and of carrying out research 
and development into all meaningful applications 
of nuclear energy for economic development. The 
use of nuclear explosion technology underground 
was an integral part of that policy. In a competitive 
market for fuels and natural resources, 
such a technology was vitally important to India. 
India had a right to develop its own natural 
resources in accordance with well-established 
principles of international law and it saw no reason 
why it should allow itself to lag behind other 
countries in the acquisition of the latest techniques 
relating to the application of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. 
[17] Reproduced in United Nations Treaty Series, 
Vol. 480, Treaty No. 6964. 
81. It was a curious argument to say that India's 
nuclear experiment for peaceful purposes had 
damaged NPT and the cause of non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. It became even more curious 
when that allegation was made by a country whose 
leaders had openly welcomed the large number of 
nuclear weapon tests conducted in the atmosphere 
by China, India had not become a party to NPT 
for certain reasons of principle, which had already 
been made sufficiently clear in different forums of 
the United Nations. It had considered, and 
continued to consider, that NPT was an unequal 
legal instrument and it would object to it so long 
as it remained discriminatory in character. 
However, India had never campaigned against 
the Treaty. India was opposed to nuclear weapons 
and naturally also to their proliferation. It had 
categorically repeated that it did not intend to 
manufacture nuclear weapons. That had been 
India's policy long before NPT had been conceived 
of. It could not therefore understand the argument 
that India's nuclear explosion for peaceful 
purposes had had an adverse effect on the future 
of NPT. NPT would stand or fall on its own 
merits or demerits. 

82. The Indian Government had repeatedly 
declared that it intended to use nuclear energy 
solely for peaceful purposes and that it was 
totally opposed to the development of nuclear 
weapons. That remained the policy of the 
Government of India and he wished to reaffirm 
that policy in that august assembly. 
83. Count de LIEDEKERKE (Belgium) said that 
the past year had been marked by many different 
changes and by the weakening of certain economic 
traditions. In nuclear energy, for instance, the 
atom had assumed greater importance as a 
result of the increase in oil prices. The Agency 
could play a vital role in helping Member States, 
especially developing countries, to acquire the 
technology required for the construction and 
operation of nuclear power stations, and the 
programme for 1975-80 showed that the Agency 
had properly apprehended that function. 
84. Belgium supported the new philosophy 
underlying the Agency's programme for 1975-80, 
recognizing the urgent need to intensify activities 
relating to nuclear power production, nuclear 
safety, environmental protection, and the training 
of staff to introduce nuclear techniques in developing 
countries. Since, in addition to those vital 
activities, the Agency had to continue to promote 
other important programmes, it would be 
necessary in view of the present budget situation 
to suppress programmes which were not of high 
priority, 
85. Although his delegation in general endorsed 
the programme proposals formulated by the 
Director General for the period starting in 1975, 
it felt grave concern regarding the rate at which 
the Regular Budget was increasing. The programme 
proposals for 1975 represented an 
increase of some 18.4% compared with the 
Regular Budget for 1974, corresponding to an 
increase of 15. l%in the regular contributions of 
- 10 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 


Member States. Compared with the budget figures 
for 1973, moreover, the proposals for 1975 
represented a 49% increase in the Regular Budget, 
with a corresponding increase of 30% in the 
regular contributions of Member States. In spite 
of currency difficulties and the increasing cost 
of living, his delegation could not approve such 
an increase in contributions. The Agency's 
budgets should be kept within proportions compatible 
with the financial possibilities of Member 
States. His delegation wanted to issue an urgent 
appeal that all parts of the programme which were 
not of first priority should be either eliminated 
or spread out over longer periods of time, so 
that some of the Agency officials could be allocated 
to programmes of high priority. His delegation 
would have more to say regarding those matters 
in the Administrative and Budgetary Committee. 

86. He had listened with special interest to the 
Director General's statements relating to NPT 
and the question of peaceful nuclear explosions. 
Although the fundamental matters relating to 
NPT were the concern of the Preparatory 
Committee for the Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons and not of the Agency, his 
delegation shared the misgivings of the Director 
General and of many other countries regarding 
the lagging accedence to NPT. It was well known 
that one reason for that state of affairs was that 
so far NPT had merely endorsed a situation in 
which the non-nuclear-weapon States, which 
were in the vast majority, agreed to immediate 
restrictions of their sovereign rights, while the 
nuclear-weapon States Party to NPT undertook 
"to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective 
measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms 
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, 
and on a treaty on general and complete disarmament 
under strict and effective international 
control". [18] It had to be admitted that results 
so far were somewhat disappointing. The ideal 
way to restore the faith of States still in doubt 
would be not only for States which had not yet 
ratified NPT to do so immediately, but also for 
the nuclear-weapon States to show their good 
faith by stemming the vertical as well as horizontal 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. One truly 
significant gesture would be for the nuclearweapon 
States Party to NPT to agree immediately 
to Agency control of underground nuclear tests for 
peaceful purposes. The extension of international 
control to all Parties to the agreement would be 
justified in regard to peaceful underground nuclear 
tests since it was hardly possible to differentiate 
between them and military tests. It might then be 
possible to establish a better equilibrium between 
the obligations of all States, and NPT would assume 
its true role as a step on the way to prevention of 
both horizontal and vertical proliferation and not 
as an end in itself. 

87. As far as safeguards were concerned, the 
Belgian delegation fully acknowledged the impor[
18] See Article VI of NPT. 
tance of the programme but wondered whether the 
manpower and budget estimates were entirely 
justified. The proposed increases were largely 
based on the number of States expected to accede 
to NPT during 1975 and the following years. Of 
course, it should not be forgotten that NPT provided 
for controls based on the entire fuel cycle. 

88. In a report on its activities under Article III 
of NPT, presented to the Preparatory Committee 
for the Review Conference, the Agency compared 
its NPT safeguards with the ordinary safeguards 
based on document INFCIRC/66 and made the 
following statement: 
"In other words, INFCIRC/66 permits and 
implies the desirability of a considerably 
higher inspection effort being applied at each 
individual facility than the NPT system, 
which is designed to take advantage of the 
fact that all nuclear material in all peaceful 
activities are under safeguards in a State, 
so that there are no unsafeguarded areas in 
the national peaceful programme. As a 
result the main inspection effort may be 
concentrated where it is most needed and can 
be most effective. " 

89. In explaining its manpower requirements, the 
Agency had based its estimates largely on the entry 
into force of the agreement between the IAEA, 
EURATOM and the Member States of EURATOM 
stating that: 
"The manpower needed in 1975 for meeting 
the larger work load, due also to increased 
safeguards activities in other States, has 
been assessed facility by facility. ..."[19] 

90. That approach seemed rather contradictory 
and could lead to a false estimate of manpower and 
budget requirements for the effective and economic 
application of NPT controls. 
91. Reverting to the question of the ratification 
of NPT, he recalled that the Member States of 
EURATOM Party to NPT were taking the necessary 
national action for approval of NPT. Belgium 
hoped to have completed that work at the latest by 
the end of the year. Immediately after ratification 
of NPT, his country would follow the interpretation 
given to Article HI. 2 of NPT by a group of countries 
exporting material and equipment and 
referred to by the Director General. The provisions 
of the Treaty of Rome would of course also 
be observed in commercial transactions within the 
European Community. 
92. Mr. CHOWDHURY (Bangladesh) said that 
since 1945, when the first nuclear bomb had been 
detonated, the problem of controlling the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons had caused great anxiety, 
for the number of weapons and countries possessing 
them had gradually multiplied and it was not clear 
what the number would be by the end of the century. 
[19] GC(XVIII)/526, para. M. 4. 
11 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 

It had to be recalled that nuclear reactors were 
intended for peaceful purposes, and it was therefore 
high time that a serious attempt be made to 
establish effective control over the spread of 
nuclear weapons. In that respect NPT had been a 
major step forward. 

93. Nuclear generators could provide a substitute 
for other sources of energy, but the proliferation 
of plutonium sources could have dangerous 
consequences. 
94. The safeguards activities undertaken by the 
Agency were important but the Agency was fundamentally 
a technical organization. On the basis 
of the reports of the Board of Governors, the 
General Assembly and the Security Council of the 
United Nations could take action against countries 
for non-compliance with NPT. Many countries 
possessing nuclear power and research reactors 
had not acceded to NPT, and no effective measures 
had been taken to persuade them to do so. Nuclearweapon 
States should bring more of their nuclear 
installations under the Agency's safeguards system, 
thus boosting the confidence of non-nuclear-weapon 
States. There should be a complete ban on all 
nuclear weapons tests whether underground, in the 
ocean, or in the atmosphere. The United Nations 
and particularly the Agency should bolster up international 
efforts to halt the arms race. 
95. Bangladesh was pledged to the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy. Despite the suffering of the 
people of Bangladesh in 1971 and in recent natural 
disasters, Bangladesh had been engaged on a 
gigantic task of reconstruction, rehabilitation and 
economic development, and the development of 
science and technology had high priority. 
96. The Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission 
had undertaken a modest programme for the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. An important part of 
the programme was scientific research and 
development directly applicable to agriculture, 
food, health, industry, the exploitation of natural 
resources, and the development of nuclear power. 
Great importance had been attached to harvest 
improvement and the preservation of food by 
nuclear radiations. The Commission had also 
promoted basic and applied research in nuclear 
sciences and allied fields and the development of 
nuclear engineering. The skilled personnel of the 
Commission had been employed for small-scale 
production of scientific instruments for national 
educational and research institutes. 
97. The Commission had rendered valuable 
services in weather forecasting with the aid of 
weather satellites. It also helped the universities 
in the maintenance and repair of scientific equipment 
and in teaching and research programmes. 
98. Bangladesh felt strongly that nuclear power 
would play an important role in most of the 
developing countries where conventional energy 
resources were limited. Oil price increases had 
made small nuclear power plants economically 
competitive but there were many problems in the 
way of nuclear power in developing countries. 
99. Owing to the tremendous demand for nuclear 
power plants in the wake of the energy crisis, it 
was now a seller's market. Turnkey contracts 
were no longer available, and for the promotion 
of nuclear power a country now had to build its own 
capability with expert assistance from outside. 
To enable developing countries to shoulder such a 
large and unprecedented responsibility, a very 
broad practical training programme was desirable. 
The Agency could play an important role in that 
respect by facilitating the free transfer of nuclear 
technology from the more advanced to the less 
advanced countries. 
100. Most of the recent orders on the nuclear 
power market were for large plants of 600 MW or 
above. There was reluctance on the part of 
reactor suppliers to offer smaller plants, in which 
the developing countries would be interested. He 
noted that the Agency was convening a panel 
meeting in November on reactors of interest to 
developing countries and he hoped that panel would 
make definite recommendations and fruitful suggestions. 
101. Along with 14 other developing countries 
Bangladesh had participated in the market survey 
undertaken by the Agency in 1972-73, and it 
welcomed the Agency's decision to undertake a 
more detailed study to update the market survey 
report published the year before. 
102. His Government had decided to establish a 
nuclear power station at Rooppur in the western 
zone of the country. The decision was based on 
the findings of a large number of reports and 
feasibility studies prepared by the Agency and 
international consulting firms. The necessary manpower 
was being trained. 
103. Bangladesh attached great importance to the 
Agency's objectives particularly in respect of 
technical assistance, which would bring the 
benefits of nuclear energy to the developing countries, 
and also in respect of the safeguards system. 
His Government was grateful for Agency help in 
terms of fellowship training and equipment, the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS)-, 
and advice relating to safety standards, regulations 
for safe transport of radioactive materials, the 
exchange of information in nuclear and allied 
fields, etc. 
104. The financing of technical assistance was very 
important to the developing countries. Unfortunately 
the budget share for technical assistance was 
decreasing and financing was by voluntary contributions 
and not by the Regular Budget. His Government 
would contribute its assessed share to the 
voluntary fund in Bangladesh currency. 
105. He strongly supported the Agency's role in 
promoting and implementing international 
co-operation in nuclear science and technology. 
His delegation wanted to urge the Agency to promote 
larger programmes of technical co-operation so as 
to enable the developing countries to share fully in 
the benefits of nuclear technology. The Agency 
should facilitate the free transfer of nuclear 
- 12 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 171 


technology from the more advanced to the less 
advanced countries. Regional co-operation was 
important in that respect. 

106. His country's link with the Atomic Energy 
Commission in India had been maintained and 
strengthened and a joint programme of visits, 
consultations, training and research had been 
established for promoting the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. Implementation of an agreement 
with Australia for pilot-plant studies on beach-sand 
minerals had also started. The Government of 
Bangladesh had also approved the regional co-operative 
agreement for research, development and 
training related to nuclear science and technology 
sponsored by the Agency. 

• The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 
- 13 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 

International Atomic Energy Agency 13 March 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday, 18 September 1974, at 3. 20 p.m. 

President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 
later: Mr. HABASHI (Sudan) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

9 General debate and report for 1973-74 1-127 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Poland 1-12 
German Democratic Republic 13 - 21 
Argentina 22 - 29 
Arab Republic of Egypt 30 - 46 
Brazil 47 - 56 
Sri Lanka 57 - 62 
Bulgaria 63 - 77 

Mexico 78 - 85 

Sweden 86 - 99 

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 100 - 119 

Kenya 120 - 124 

Gabon 125 - 127 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 2 October 1974. 
** GC(XVIII)/534. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 
74-9552 


GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1973-74 
(GC(XVIII)/525, 532) (continued) 

1. Mr. FELICKI (Poland), continuing the general 
debate, stressed the enhanced role which the 
Agency was required to play as a result of the 
widespread development of nuclear power generation 
programmes brought about by the new situation 
with regard to conventional fuel resources. The 
expansion of the network of nuclear power stations 
throughout the world would therefore proceed at a 
faster rate than foreseen and exchanges of nuclear 
materials among countries would be much more 
frequent. It was therefore essential that the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT)[1] and the complementary agreement concluded 
with the Agency shouLd be signed and ratified 
by the largest possible number of States; it would 
also be fair if States parties to the Treaty were to 
be the first to benefit from technical assistance. 
2. Poland welcomed the statement of the Soviet 
Union, the United Kingdom and the United States 
of America that the Governments of the three 
countries concerned would in future inform the 
Agency of imports and exports of nuclear materials 
which were subject to Agency safeguards[2]. The 
Polish Government for its part had decided to 
follow the procedures relating to the export of 
nuclear material and certain categories of equipment 
and other material which were set out in an 
information circular of the Agency[3]. 
3. The Polish Government was pleased to note 
that the Agency had made the adjustments in its 
work programme for 1975-80 entailed by world 
nuclear energy developments; it also approved the 
Agency's budget for 1975[4]. However, it considered 
that the anticipated savings should not be 
made to the detriment of basic activities. A 
considerable part of such savings for 1975 was to 
be made at the expense of equipment for the 
Agency's Laboratory. Since the Agency would be 
responsible for carrying out more and more verifications 
of nuclear materials, it would be preferable 
under the circumstances if economies were made 
by reducing the number of administrative staff. 
The Agency should likewise consider the question 
of the ratio of scientific and technical personnel to 
auxiliary staff. 
4. The Polish Government attached particular 
importance to the question of safeguards and was 
fully aware of the difficulties confronting the 
Department of Safeguards and Inspection. It 
considered that its expenditure was high in relation 
to the relatively small volume of work at the present 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[2] See document INFCIRC/207. 
[3] See documents INFCIRC/209 and 
Addenda 1 and 2. 
[4] See documents GC(XVIII)/526 and Mod. 1. 
time. If, therefore, the Department were given 
the responsibility in the next few years of compiling 
a register of all inventories of nuclear materials 
throughout the world, it would not be able to meet 
the expenditure involved unless its present methods 
of working were radically changed, 

5. Nuclear safety was another field in which the 
Agency played a leading part, particularly in 
developing countries which had neither the necessary 
experience nor personnel to ensure the safety 
of nuclear facilities and work involving nuclear 
energy. Radiological protection, to which all 
States attached the highest importance, was also 
one of the primary functions of the Agency and no 
organization was better qualified to assume it. 
To deal with the future development of the nuclear 
industry and the setting up of various organizations 
for research on nuclear power, the Agency should 
pay particular attention to the elaboration of 
standards and guidelines concerning all aspects of 
the safety and protection of workers as well as the 
safety of facilities. 
6. The Polish Government supported the proposal 
that a conference should be held on the 
development strategy of nuclear energy including 
the fuel cycle. It would provide an opportunity for 
all Member States and organizations concerned to 
discuss the problems of nuclear power with complete 
objectivity, taking into account the energy 
resources available in the world. 
7. The Polish Government was also very pleased 
with the development of the Agency's information 
activities under the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) programme, which was well 
planned and was being successfully implemented. 
8. The Agency should devote all its efforts both 
at present and in the future to those activities 
which he had just mentioned as well as to the 
training of personnel. It was faced with a considerable 
task and therefore it might be worth considering 
handing over activities of lesser importance 
to other international or national organizations or 
laboratories, 
9. Nuclear research institutes and industry in 
Poland were at present faced with serious difficulties 
in finding ways of promoting the rapid development 
of nuclear power. 
10. A 60-MW(th) experimental reactor had been 
commissioned on the 30th anniversary of the 
People's Republic of Poland. It should become 
critical between 1974 and 1975. The reactor 
would be used in studying power reactor materials 
and techniques. At the same time nuclear techniques 
would continue to be used for studying 
various industrial processes and also in the fields 
of medicine, agriculture and environmental protection, 
11. In all those fields Poland had been collaborating 
with the Agency for a long time and intended 
to intensify that co-operation. Poland's voluntary 
contributions to the Agency1 s General Fund 
increased from 300 000 zloty in 1973 to 600 000 
-2 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 


zloty in 1975. He assured delegates that his 
Government would do everything possible to 
increase its voluntary contribution in the future. 
He recalled that each year the Polish Government 
offered through the Agency ten fellowships in 
Polish research institutes to scientists from developing 
countries. 

12. One of the main factors in scientific progress 
was international co-operation. Increased collaboration 
between the Agency and the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy could only accelerate the 
development of such applications for the benefit of 
mankind. 
13. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic 
Republic) said that he welcomed the decision taken 
by the General Conference to admit the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and Mauritius to 
membership of the Agency. That decision was in 
line with the efforts to improve the atmosphere of 
detente in the world. 
14. The eighteenth session of the General Conference 
was being held at a time when the political 
climate was characterized by important positive 
changes. Thanks to the implementation of the 
peace programme of the Soviet Union and its 
socialist allies, the forces of aggression were 
losing ground and the trend towards a relaxation of 
tension had become the determining factor in world 
developments. The continuance of detente was the 
very basis of the development of international 
co-operation in the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy. The agreements concluded between the 
Soviet Union and the United States on the prevention 
of nuclear war and on the further limitation of 
strategic arms and the Treaty on the Limitation of 
Underground Nuclear Weapons Tests[5] were 
important factors in international detente which 
contributed to improving peaceful coexistence 
between States with different social systems. 
15. One of the important international agreements 
which limited the arms race was NPT, which would 
remain one of the great events of our time. That 
Treaty provided a stimulus for the Agency, which 
was responsible for ensuring the compliance with 
its provisions. The German Democratic Republic 
was pleased to note that more than 80 States had 
become parties to the Treaty and that 44 of them 
had concluded safeguards agreements with the 
Agency. Other non-nuclear-weapon States should 
follow their example. The Government of the 
German Democratic Republic had, for its part, 
decided to accede to the agreement on the consistent 
application of Article III. 2 of NPT concluded by the 
Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United 
States and other countries. Furthermore, his 
country sincerely hoped that the Review Conference 
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (the Review Conference) to be 
held in May 1975 would encourage other countries 
to become parties to NPT and thus contribute to 
improving its effectiveness. 

[5] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/208. 
16. In the preceding year, the commissioning of 
the first unit of the "Bruno Leuschner" nuclear 
power plant had been a significant step towards 
the large-scale industrial use of nuclear energy. 
Intensive work was being carried out on commissioning 
the second unit, and preparatory work on 
another big nuclear power plant was under way. 
Research on nuclear and reactor physics in the 
German Democratic Republic was concerned 
mainly with few-nucleon systems, certain nuclear 
reactions and nuclear spectroscopy and also with 
fast breeder physics. Considerable progress had 
also been made in the production and application 
of stable and radioactive isotopes, in particular 
those used in the management of water resources. 
His country had started participating in INIS early 
in 1974. 
17. Being a socialist State, the German 
Democratic Republic considered the protection of 
man against the harmful effects of ionizing radiations 
to be a matter of priority and was applying 
the safeguards agreement under its system of 
materials control. The competent authority in 
those matters was the Board of Nuclear Safety and 
Radiation Protection, which was also responsible 
for co-ordinating all national activities with the 
Agency in order to achieve the most effective 
co-operation possible. 
18. The German Democratic Republic approved 
the Agency's programme for 1975-80. It attached 
great importance to the sub-programme on safeguards 
in connection with NPT and considered that 
no obstacle should be allowed to stand in the way of 
the implementation of the Treaty. 
19. His country believed that it was necessary to 
make greater use of nuclear energy to meet the 
growing energy demands. It approved, in particular, 
the sub-programme relating to nuclear safety 
and environmental protection and the formulation 
of recommendations on the subject. It also wholeheartedly 
endorsed the proposed expansion of INIS. 
20. As regards the financing of the Agency's programme, 
his delegation considered that the 
financial difficulties resulting from the capitalist 
monetary crisis should not be resolved by means 
of additional contributions from Members; contacts 
with other United Nations organizations should be 
intensified with a view to co-ordinating programmes 
and tapping resources. 
21. Stable and long-term co-operation, in his 
opinion, was the most effective means of assisting 
the developing countries in overcoming their 
economic difficulties. So far, more than 500 
industrial projects had been started in those countries 
with the assistance of the German Democratic 
Republic. At the Sixth Special Session of the 
United Nations General Assembly, the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs of his country had expressed his 
Government's firm intention of expanding its 
commercial, scientific and technical relations with 
developing countries. His country was also anxious 
to support the Agency's technical assistance programme 
to the fullest extent possible by supplying 
materials and equipment, providing fellowships and 
-3 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 

experts' services and organizing training courses 
and study tours. In 1974, the German Democratic 
Republic had made a voluntary contribution of 
120 000 marks to the Agency and would make 
160 000 marks available in 1975. As had been 
emphasized in the Director General's study[6], 
voluntary financing of technical assistance was of 
advantage to all concerned and its voluntary nature 
should be strictly maintained. 

22. Mr. IRAOLAGOITIA (Argentina) recalled 
that his country had been associated with the work 
of the Agency since its inception. It had participated 
actively in the meetings which had led to the 
adoption of its Statute and had taken part continuously 
in all the Agency's activities thereafter. 
23. Referring to the energy situation in 
Argentina, he said that for many years his country 
had suffered from a chronic energy shortage which 
was growing steadily worse now that the demand 
for electricity was increasing by more than 11% 
each year. In the course of the next 25 years it 
would be necessary to build new power stations 
with a total capacity of around 80 000 MW(e), At 
present most of Argentina's power stations were 
oil-fired. The problems associated with the 
prospection and extraction of oil in Argentina, to 
which was added the need to allocate a part of that 
oil to the petrochemical industry, had made 
Argentina conscious of the fact that it would have 
to diversify its energy resources and, consequently, 
have to construct large nuclear and hydroelectric 
stations as well as intensify prospection for 
uranium resources. For the moment there were 
only two promising developments to record: the 
commissioning of the Atucha nuclear power 
station and of the Chocon hydroelectric complex 
which had contributed greatly to improving 
electricity supply in Argentina, As regards the 
power situation in the long term, efforts were 
currently being concentrated on the construction 
of a nuclear power station at Embalse in Cordoba 
province and of an Atucha II station. 

24. From the economic point of view the nuclear 
fuel industry was of prime importance as a basis 
for national independence in energy matters. 
Argentina had the natural resources and the 
technological means to enable it to establish a 
strong industry encompassing the whole fuel cycle 
and plans had been drawn up with that aim in view. 
Prospection for uranium was going to be intensified 
and in 10 to 12 years the extent of Argentina's 
uranium resources should have been determined. 
At present the known resources would suffice to 
cover an installed capacity of only 6000 MW(e). 
New deposits would be exploited only if they 
represented at least ten years' reserves. The 
production of uranium on an industrial scale would 
be carried out in commercially sized plants like 
that at Sierra Pintada - currently in the project 
stage - so that the nuclear industry would have a 
sound economic and financial base. 
[6] See documents GC(XVIII)/529 and Corr. 1. 
25. As far as fuel element fabrication was concerned, 
Argentina possessed the necessary basic 
technology and was capable of optimizing and 
developing fuel elements and their mode of utilization. 
As with uranium production, the fabrication 
of fuel elements would be carefully planned. A fuel 
element plant was to be constructed at the Ezeiza 
Atomic Centre and should be in operation by 1978. 
26. For operating the various installations, the 
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission, after more 
than 24 years of effort, now had the specialists 
needed to manage the development of nuclear 
energy. Like the majority of national atomic 
energy commissions, that of Argentina had been 
obliged to review the structure of its legal apparatus 
in order to adapt it to the demands of the new situation. 
27. As safety considerations represented the most 
important aspect of any nuclear programme, the 
Argentine Atomic Energy Commission closely 
followed the recommendations of the International 
Commission on Radiological Protection and noted 
with satisfaction that the Agency was basing its own 
standards on those recommendations. 
28. Argentina had long ago commenced using 
radioisotopes for medical purposes as well as 
training the necessary medical personnel. To 
date, the Argentine Atomic Energy Commission 
had already granted 7500 diplomas in that speciality. 
In addition, radioisotopes were being used in 
industry in general and for labelling purposes in 
particular. The supply of radiopharmaceuticals 
containing labelled molecules was also another 
activity with good prospects for the future. 
29. Progress in nuclear energy was dependent 
on international collaboration. It was thanks to 
such collaboration that Argentina had been able to 
come to terms with its nuclear problems. It was 
grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance 
it had received; however, at the stage now reached 
by Argentina in the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy, a change in the character of that assistance 
was called for; it should not only be of a 
high level but should also be supplied rapidly. It 
might be an idea to set up, on the model of the 
safeguards inspectorate, a small group of highly 
qualified experts who could go anywhere immediately 
to deal with the various technological problems 
which could arise in countries like Argentina. 
30. Mr. GOHAR (Egypt) congratulated 
Mr. Medina on having been unanimously elected 
President of the eighteenth regular session of the 
General Conference. He also expressed his 
appreciation to the Austrian Government for its 
continuous support of the Agency and for its 
generous hospitality. 
31. For the past two years world attention had 
been focused on one of the principal problems 
facing mankind, namely how to provide adequate 
energy resources to meet its ever-growing needs. 
The energy crisis, which had as its main features 
the sharp increase in oil prices and the threat of 
domestic and industrial fuel shortages, had had a 
-4 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 


particular impact on nuclear energy, which now 
more than ever was assuming a new and important 
role as a competitive source of energy. 

32. There was no doubt that that trend would be 
maintained throughout the coming decades not only 
because of the competitiveness of nuclear power 
stations but also of the need to save other conventional 
fuels such as oil or coal and gas as raw 
materials for industry. However, that situation 
was bound to present a number of new and diversified 
problems, for the solution of which it would be 
necessary to plan appropriate programmes on both 
the international and national levels. 
33. The rapid development of nuclear power programmes 
would have a considerable effect on the 
future activities of the Agency in many areas: raw 
materials and essential services in connection with 
the nuclear fuel cycle, in particular the prospection 
and exploitation of nuclear ores, enrichment 
services, fuel element fabrication and the reprocessing 
of irradiated fuel, the planning and construction 
of nuclear power stations for the production 
of electricity and desalination of water, 
safety standards, quality assurance, environmental 
protection, waste disposal and management and the 
application of safeguards to fissionable materials. 
34. Such being the case, many of the Agency's 
present activities would have to be intensified and 
reoriented in order to respond to the needs of 
Members, in particular the developing countries. 
In the course of the coming decade the Agency 
would be called upon to provide a large amount of 
assistance in connection with nuclear power, for 
example in elaborating long-term nuclear power 
programmes for developing countries, carrying 
out feasibility studies for specific projects and 
providing assistance to the maximum extent 
possible during the various stages of implementation 
of those projects. 
35. Applications of nuclear energy for purposes 
other than electricity generation would become 
increasingly important, in particular the 
desalination of sea-water and the use of steam for 
process heating in industry. Such applications 
would become economically attractive through the 
construction of dual-purpose nuclear plants, in 
which the cost of steam would be considerably less 
than that of steam produced by conventional means, 
36. The Egyptian delegation felt strongly that the 
Agency was the most competent organization for 
dealing with those urgent problems and that a 
comprehensive review of the present programmes 
and the organization of the respective Divisions 
should be carried out, to take account of the new 
requirements. 
37. To mention but one example: in connection 
with the nuclear fuel cycle it was necessary to 
accelerate the exploitation and prospection of 
uranium ores and other nuclear materials at the 
national, regional and international levels and to 
increase the present capacity of uranium enrichment 
services and of fuel element fabrication and 
reprocessing plants. It would be particularly 
useful for the Agency to undertake a market survey 
of world requirements in those areas in the light 
of the present and future nuclear power programmes 
in different countries. 

38. As one of the community of developing countries 
Egypt had always been of the opinion that an 
effective safeguards system with no loopholes could 
be established only on the basis of universality, 
non-discrimination and equality between all countries. 
His Government's policy was to support all 
international efforts in that direction, and it had 
always supported the objectives of NPT and had 
taken an active part in the work of the Agency's 
Safeguards Committee, However the ultimate aim 
should be to establish a foolproof system of safeguards, 
applied by the Agency and accepted by its 
Members, not only as parties to NPT but also as 
signatories of the Agency's Statute, safeguards 
which would be applied to all nuclear activities 
and facilities in the Member States. Egypt had 
always expressed its readiness to co-operate in 
achieving that very important objective. 

39. With all those considerations in mind, Egypt 
had signed NPT but had not yet ratified it for wellknown 
reasons. Egypt's first nuclear power 
station, which was to have a capacity of 600 MW(e) 
and be built on the Mediterranean coast 30 kilometres 
west of Alexandria under a bilateral 
co-operation agreement on the civil uses of atomic 
energy between Egypt and the United States of 
America, would be the subject of a trilateral safeguards 
agreement to be negotiated and concluded 
with the Agency, 
40. The Government of Egypt was co-sponsoring 
with Iran an item on the agenda of the forthcoming 
meeting of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations aimed at making the Middle East a nuclearweapon-
free zone. 
41. His delegation had repeatedly stressed the 
importance of consolidating the Agency's technical 
assistance programme by introducing a stable 
system of financing. At the last General Conference 
Egypt had joined other developing countries in 
submitting a draft resolution providing for the 
financing of technical assistance from the Agency's 
Regular Budget, That proposal should be kept 
under constant study and meanwhile the target for 
voluntary contributions should be increased, not 
only to meet new requests from Members but also 
to offset the losses due to inflation and fluctuations 
in exchange rates. 
42. The Egyptian delegation wished to put forward 
a proposal aimed at increasing the efficiency of 
technical assistance and that was to provide 
assistance in the form of major facilities, equipment, 
experts and fellowships for relatively large 
integrated projects. Such projects could be carried 
out on a biennial or triennial basis similar to the 
practice followed by the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP). 
43. His delegation considered that the staff of the 
Division of Technical Assistance should be 
increased to cope with the growing needs of the 
-5 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 

developing countries and in particular that the post 
of Director of that Division should be filled. 

44. Egypt had decided to maintain its contribution 
to the General Fund for 1975 at the same level as 
in 1974; that meant that it would be contributing a 
fraction of the target greater than its share of the 
assessed budget; if a large number of Members, 
particularly the advanced and rich Member States, 
were to follow that example, it would be possible 
to expand technical assistance activities. 
45. The Egyptian delegation fully supported the 
unanimous decision of the General Conference to 
admit the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
and Mauritius to membership of the Agency and 
wished to extend a welcome to those new Members. 
He was confident that that enlargement of the 
Agency's membership would contribute to promoting 
the utilization of nuclear energy throughout the 
world for the peace and prosperity of mankind. 
46. In conclusion, he wished to congratulate the 
Director General on the constructive programmes 
announced in his statements ] aimed at developing 
the use of nuclear power in the developing countries. 
He was sure that under Mr, Eklund's able 
leadership the Agency would successfully acquit 
its role of promoting the use of atoms for peace. 
47. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) said he was glad 
that the Director General, in his statement, had not 
only clearly defined problems but in most cases 
also suggested an appropriate solution. He 
(Mr. de Carvalho) knew how important it was for 
the developing countries to gain industrial experience 
in the construction, operation and maintenance 
of nuclear power plants, hence he found the 
Director General's remarks on the training of 
engineers assigned to key projects and on-the-job 
training in construction, operation and maintenance 
techniques as well as safety matters highly 
encouraging; his delegation had no doubt that 
adequate financial resources and manpower would 
be allocated to those programmes. The part to be 
played by nuclear power should be studied from 
various angles and it was for that reason that a 
conference on the role of nuclear power and other 
energy sources in meeting future energy requirements 
had been proposed for 1977. His delegation 
had also been gratified to note that the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 
was taking a much more positive attitude with 
regard to the financing of nuclear power plants. 
48. Brazil's Second National Five-Year Plan, 
which had just been issued, envisaged that by 1979 
the population of the country would reach 120 million, 
and that the per capita income would exceed 
US $1000. The power programme was the most 
important single element of that Plan: installed 
capacity, which had been 15 600 MW at the end 
of 1973, was expected to reach 32 400 MW by 1980. 
That expansion, entailing a rate of growth greater 
than 12% per year, was to be based mainly on 
[7] GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, paras 45-79. 
hydroelectric plants, but some nuclear plants 
would be required, too. It had been decided to add 
a second unit of 1200 MW at the Angra dos Reis 
site, and a third unit of the same size was under 
study. It was planned that by 1990 the capacity of 
the nuclear power plants would reach 10 000 MW, 
although those estimates had not been finally 
approved by the public authorities. 

49. The evolution of world affairs had helped to 
speed up the exploration and exploitation of Brazil's 
energy resources, for which purpose $14 000 million 
were to be appropriated during the coming 
five years. Brazil would have to spend more than 
$3000 million in foreign exchange for the import of 
petroleum products, but its rapidly expanding 
economy could absorb that burden, and no slackening 
of the Gross National Product growth rate, 
which had been 10% for the last six years, was 
foreseen. One of Brazil's most important nuclear 
development programmes related to prospecting 
for uranium, and more than $20 million would be 
allocated for that purpose in 1975. 
50. He wished to record the encouraging results 
of his country's international co-operation, notably 
with France, Germany, Italy and the United States 
under bilateral agreements. 
51. For years his delegation had been stressing 
the importance that it attached to the technical 
assistance programme, which did not seem to be 
evolving properly to meet the growing needs of 
developing countries. Technical assistance was 
in fact the item showing the lowest percentage 
increase, and it was hoped that steps would be 
taken to remedy that imbalance in the next few 
years through the joint efforts of the industrialized 
States and the developing countries. In accordance 
with the Director General's suggestion the 
Brazilian Government's voluntary contribution to 
the General Fund in 1975 would be a fraction of 
the target distinctly greater than its share of the 
assessed budget. 
52. His delegation was also disturbed by the 
considerable increase in activities relating to the 
application of safeguards, and believed that it was 
time to sound a note of warning if a balance 
between control functions and planned programme 
activities was to be maintained. 
53. The Director General was to be commended 
on his efforts in the field of environmental protection. 
The Agency was doing everything necessary 
to place in proper perspective the very small 
risks entailed in the proliferation of nuclear 
facilities throughout the world. Since smaller and 
smaller power plants were becoming competitive, 
nuclear power now appeared economically attractive 
to a much larger number of developing countries; 
but alongside the question of economic viability one 
had to consider safety and reliability. Dependability 
of fuel supplies would be a key requirement 
of any power programme. The developing countries 
could not opt for light-water reactors unless they 
were quite certain of being able to obtain enriched 
fuel on advantageous terms. 
-6 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 


54. In the present economic situation those countries 
could not really make accurate forecasts of 
their fuel requirements in ten years' time; the 
Agency could perform a valuable service by acting 
as an intermediary and helping to guarantee supplies 
for Member States. It would be of great benefit 
if, through the Agency, the suppliers offered the 
developing countries sufficient quantities of 
enriched uranium on realistic terms and renounced 
the policies previously adopted. The task was a 
very difficult yet very important one, and Brazil 
called upon all Member States to co-operate to 
prevent the problem of uranium enrichment from 
impeding the development of the rest of the world. 
55. His delegation was happy to see that the 
Agency had decided to provide assistance in setting 
up regional secondary standards laboratories. The 
Brazilian Institute of Radioprotection and Dosimetry 
had benefited from the advice of Agency experts 
in setting up its own secondary standards laboratory, 
which was mainly engaged in the maintenance 
and operation of secondary standards 
dosimeters. The Legal Division was to be commended, 
among other things, for having organized 
the first seminar on nuclear law in Latin America. 
56. His delegation appreciated the excellent way 
in which the Director General's reports were 
presented. He considered that the reports should 
always cover an entire calendar year so as to 
avoid the publication of supplements; for purposes 
of standardization he would prefer them to cover 
the period 1 January-31 December. 
57. Mr. SIRIWARDENE (Sri Lanka), recalling 
that the first steps towards developing the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy in Sri Lanka had been taken 
as far back as 1956, said he would like to give an 
account of the present status of nuclear applications 
in his country. Sri Lanka had appreciable deposits 
of certain radioactive minerals, the most important 
of which was monazite, and prospecting for such 
minerals was being carried out with the Agency's 
assistance. Good deposits of graphite also existed, 
a mineral useful in the nuclear industry. 
58. Agriculture was the basis of his country's 
economy. With the Agency's assistance, studies 
were being undertaken, using radioisotopes, on 
fertilizer uptake and plant improvement. The 
main studies were on rice, the coconut and tea, 
but other crops were being investigated as well. 
His country was carrying out an intensive programme 
aimed at attaining self-sufficiency in food, 
particularly with regard to rice. The new varieties 
evolved required heavy fertilizer applications, 
the cost of which was high. It was therefore 
gratifying that the Agency, in its programme for 
1975-80, was placing greater emphasis on the more 
efficient utilization of fertilizers. 

59. His country was grateful to the Agency for 
the assistance given towards developing nuclear 
medicine, including the use of scanning techniques 
in diagnosis. The Agency was also giving help in 
the planning of a programme in isotope hydrology, 
covering sedimentology, seepage studies, studies 
on ground water and direct recharge measurements. 
60. The current session of the General Conference 
was of special significance in that particular attention 
was being given to the energy crisis. His 
country was severely affected by the energy situation 
and, even before the crisis had developed, it 
had been faced with a critical balance of payments. 
Its energy production at the present time was 
based on hydropower, but that would require to be 
backed up by thermal sources in 10 to 15 years' 
time, and alternative sources of energy were also 
under study. It would be necessary to call on the 
Agency's assistance to determine the feasibility 
of using nuclear power. Since generating costs 
for nuclear power were now at least 50% lower 
than the cost of generating electricity with 
imported oil, the time seemed opportune to 
envisage the possibility of using nuclear power and 
to begin training national personnel and forming 
plans. There were some parts of the country where 
water supplies were inadequate, and the production 
of fresh water by desalting would not only provide 
domestic water but would also allow the development 
of agro-industrial complexes in those areas. 

61. As the Director General had pointed out in his 
• statement, the main problem in many developing 
countries, such as Sri Lanka, was the lack of 
industrial experience and of the infrastructure 
needed to build, operate and maintain nuclear 
plants; the Director General had given an assurance 
that the Agency would help to remedy that 
situation by expanding its nuclear power training 
programme. In that regard, he would stress that 
it was the programmes of the Department of 
Research and Isotopes in areas such as agriculture, 
medicine and industry which were of immediate 
importance to Sri Lanka and other developing countries. 
The technical assistance programme on the 
applications of radiations and radioisotopes was 
also of immediate practical value and the Agency's 
efforts to increase its technical assistance budget 
were to be welcomed. 
62. Regional co-operation was of great value and 
its advantages could not be over-estimated; for 
example, it enabled common problems to be 
resolved, projects suited to local conditions to be 
put in hand, and quicker results to be obtained. 
That was especially true in regard to agriculture 
and food preservation. Regional training programmes 
were a corollary to that type of co-operation. 
Some years back a course of that kind had 
taken place at the Radioisotope Centre in Sri Lanka 
and the Centre was at the Agency's disposal for any 
similar courses it might wish to organize. Scientists 
from Sri Lanka were continuing, moreover, 
to use the facilities of the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste. 


63. Mr. VASSILEV (Bulgaria) said that the 
eighteenth session of the General Conference was 
characterized by fresh efforts to strengthen peace 
in the world. The agreements concluded over the 
past few years had had a favourable effect on international 
relations. The Conference on Security 
and Co-operation in Europe had fostered an atmosphere 
of confidence and co-operation among States 
of different economic and social structure. The 
agreements signed by the Soviet Union and the 
-7 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 

United States had greatly contributed to the 
strengthening of peace, to removing the risk of a 
nuclear conflict and to limiting the arms race. 

64. As a result of that slackening of international 
tension, it had become possible to expand and 
intensify co-operation among peoples in the utilization 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. As 
a member of the United Nations family, the Agency 
was called upon to play a front-rank part in that 
evolution. Its mission derived from the obligations 
it had assumed under Article III of NPT. At the 
forthcoming Review Conference it would undoubtedly 
be able to report positive results and to show that 
NPT really did contribute towards the greater use 
of nuclear energy applications, particularly power 
generation. Since the rise in oil prices a number 
of countries had already decided to resort to 
nuclear reactors in order to meet the energy 
crisis. 
65. Rapid growth in the number of nuclear power 
stations had an inevitable effect on the Agency's 
activities, as could be seen from its programme 
for 1975-80, where nuclear power was accorded a 
significantly larger place than in the past. The 
use of nuclear power presented a number of 
problems relating not only to the construction and 
operation of power stations but also to environmental 
safety and protection. But it was gratifying to 
realize that, according to the specialists, nuclear 
power stations contributed less to environmental 
pollution than other forms of power production. 
66. The Agency was also preparing to draw up 
health and safety standards, as required by the 
steady increase in the capacity of nuclear power 
stations. His country attached great importance 
to that work, which was also included in the 
programme of the Permanent Commission of 
CMEA. 
67. The general trend towards the use of nuclear 
power inevitably had some effect on the type of 
technical assistance provided by the Agency. 
Henceforward, a greater share of its resources 
would have to be allocated to problems in that 
area. The Agency was already giving priority 
attention to requests for assistance relating to 
the training of specialists for the design and 
operation of nuclear reactors. Its assistance 
should go in the first instance to countries that 
had already concluded safeguards agreements in 
conformity with Article III of NPT. 

68. He wished to stress again that technical 
assistance was an area to which his country 
attached very great importance. It was participating 
in that work by contributing to the General 
Fund, in conformity with the Agency's recommendations, 
and the detailed and objective document 
drawn up by the Director General on the financing 
of technical assistance was to be welcomed. 
69. Developments in the area of nuclear power 
would also have repercussions on safeguards. His 
delegation endorsed the efforts to expand the scope 
of application of NPT and thereby to promote the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In that regard, 
it was worthy of note that the Soviet Union, the 
United Kingdom and the United States had reached 
agreement not to supply nuclear fuel to countries 
that had not adhered to NPT unless the fuel in 
question was placed under the Agency's safeguards. 

70. As his delegation had already had occasion to 
state, Bulgaria had decided to turn to nuclear 
power to meet its energy needs. Work on the 
first nuclear power station, at Kozlodui, had been 
started on 6 April 1970. Four years and three 
months later, its first 440-MW unit had been put 
into service. The second unit, which would have 
the same capacity, was due to start up in 1975. 
That would be the end of the first stage in the 
construction of the power station. The two 
following stages, to be undertaken in the next five 
to six years, would bring its aggregate output up 
to 2440 MW. The entry into service of the first 
nuclear power station in Bulgaria and the Balkans 
as a whole was not only an important milestone in 
relation to electricity production; it took on added 
symbolic significance as a mark of the disinterested 
friendship existing between the people of Bulgaria 
and the Soviet Union. The first stage, as a whole, 
had been executed by Soviet design offices in 
collaboration with Bulgarian institutions and 
specialists. 

71. One of the main problems arising out of the 
development of nuclear power in Bulgaria was the 
supply of material and equipment. The Bulgarian 
Government had accordingly decided to set up a 
number of installations that would operate in close 
co-operation with enterprises and institutions of 
CMEA Member States. 
72. Specialized training also presented a problem. 
For that purpose, advanced courses of six months' 
duration had been organized and new specialized 
higher education establishments and technical 
institutes set up. In addition, a large number of 
trainees were taking part in the construction and 
installation of the Kozlodui I power station and in 
the drawing up of practical instructions for its 
operation. 
73. Lastly, nuclear power also presented problems 
of radiological safety and environmental 
protection. Bulgaria was taking measures to provide 
effective health and safety services and to 
determine natural radiation on the site of the first 
power station and in the Danube. Essential standards 
and regulations were drawn up on the basis 
of experience in the Soviet Union and of Agency and 
CMEA Permanent Commission documents. 
74. In 1972, the Institute of Nuclear Studies and 
Power Technology had been established under the 
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, with a view to 
resolving certain scientific problems presented by 
the development of nuclear power. A scientific 
service had also been instituted at the Kozlodui 
power station. To meet the country's needs in 
nuclear technology, the Government had set up a 
unified company called "Nuclear Technique" whose 
programme encompassed research and planning, 
production, project design, assembly work and the 
installation and maintenance of radioisotope equip-
8 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 


merit in most industrial enterprises. Two factories, 
two institutes, and a specialized assembly service 
with a design office participated in those activities. 
The new company was engaged in the production of 
radiometric and dosimetric appliances, instruments 
for the control and automation of various operations, 
fire alarm devices, nuclear medicine 
equipment, safety devices and nuclear defectoscopy 
apparatus. 

75. It was worth emphasizing that the equipment 
in question was being built in close collaboration 
with institutions and enterprises of CMEA Member 
States. Indeed, the Permanent Commission of 
CMEA had greatly expanded its activities over the 
past few years and had made an exceptional contribution 
to the application of nuclear energy in 
science and industry. 
76. Lastly, his delegation endorsed the Agency's 
programme for 1975-80 as a whole, as also the 
budget for 1975. It understood the difficulties 
arising out of inflation and monetary fluctuations 
and welcomed the efforts of the Secretariat to 
concentrate certain activities. Those efforts 
would undoubtedly enable savings to be effected; 
however, expenditure on administration and particularly 
on staff still accounted for too large a share 
of the budget. Admittedly, expansion of the 
Agency's activities in safeguards would inevitably 
entail expenditure and his delegation unreservedly 
supported the estimates for that purpose. 
77. In conclusion, he stated that Bulgaria would 
continue to support the Agency in its efforts to 
promote the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. 
78. Mr. GRAEF FERNANDEZ (Mexico) said that 
his country had carried out a review of its power 
programmes in order to meet the present energy 
crisis. In the present situation it was important 
to use national resources to the full and to intensify 
scientific and technical research for the development 
of the economy and industry and the prosperity 
of all. For that purpose the Government of Mexico 
had drawn up a long-term programme aimed at 
ensuring increased utilization of nuclear science 
and technology, which were major factors in 
economic and social growth. 
79. As the President of Mexico, 
Mr. Luis Echeverria Alvarez, had pointed out in 
an address at the Agency's Headquarters, posterity 
would judge the twentieth century by the way in 
which it had used nuclear energy, that favourable 
instrument which was capable either of ennobling 
our civilization or of destroying it. Nuclear 
energy marked the frontier of modern history. 
But before all the anticipated benefits could be 
reaped it was vital to renounce its use as an instrument 
of destruction or of political pressure. One 
of the functions of the Agency was indeed to give a 
positive direction to the results of nuclear research. 
80. Mexico fully supported the Agency's activities. 
It welcomed the results obtained in both 
safeguards and technical assistance. The Agency, 
whose purpose was to promote and to facilitate the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the 
world, and in particular for generating electricity, 
was a perfect example of an efficient international 
organization in all its activities: the exchange of 
scientific and technical documentation, training, 
the provision of equipment and experts' services, 
the application of safeguards - the importance of 
which for preventing fissionable materials as well 
as the services, equipment and information provided 
by the Agency from being used for non-peaceful 
purposes was well understood - and the formulation 
of safety standards for the protection of 
workers and the public against ionizing radiations. 

81. Mexico considered nevertheless that the 
Agency should increase its technical assistance to 
developing countries considerably. In view of the 
fuel shortage which affected the whole world, 
advanced and developing countries should combine 
their efforts to extract the energy they needed 
from the atom. The assistance of international 
organizations such as the Agency would enable 
small States and developing countries to obtain 
quickly the necessary knowledge. But nothing 
could be done until there was lasting peace in the 
world. The Agency could contribute to such a 
peace by intensifying its technical assistance to 
developing countries. 
82. In February, Mexico had concluded with the 
Agency an agreement on technical assistance for 
the implementation of the Laguna Verde nuclear 
power plant project[8] and another agreement with 
the Agency and the United States on uranium 
enrichment services[9], 
83. Knowing that any nuclear engineering plan 
depended first and foremost on uranium resources, 
Mexico had laid particular emphasis on geological 
and geophysical prospecting for nuclear raw 
materials in its territory, and the results obtained 
so far were very promising. Several areas that 
seemed particularly favourable were at present 
undergoing quantitative exploration. 
84. Mexico had embarked upon the construction 
of a domestic nuclear fuel industry and hoped that 
the Agency would increase substantially the 
assistance which it was already providing in that 
area. 
85. Mexico was not limiting its activities to 
nuclear power: the medical, agricultural and 
industrial applications of radiations as well as 
fundamental research were in no way neglected. 
Its aims in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were 
ambitious but consistent. The Agency, by providing 
the services of experts and training fellowships, 
could help Mexico to carry out those various undertakings. 
86. Mr. PETRI (Sweden) said that in view of the 
energy supply difficulties experienced the previous 
year, Sweden, like other importing countries, had 
[8] INFCIRC/203. 
[ 9 ] INFCIRC / 2 03 /Add. 1, 
-9 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 

been studying ways and means of utilizing its 
indigenous energy resources. Since there were no 
resources of fossil fuel, Sweden was in a vulnerable 
position in that respect; according to a recent 
report on Sweden's future energy needs, energy 
consumption per capita would continue to rise, 
although at a diminishing rate. A decision was to 
be taken the following year on the extent to which 
additional requirements in the 1980s would be met 
by nuclear power. 

87. During 1974 three large nuclear power plants 
had been commissioned, bringing the total number 
in operation to four with an aggregate capacity of 
2600 MW. With the eleventh nuclear power plant 
foreseen in the programme, authorization for the 
construction of which had recently been given, 
aggregate capacity would reach 8300 MW in 1980. 
88. The use of nuclear energy had led the Swedish 
public to be concerned with two major problems: 
safety hazards connected with the radioactive 
waste from nuclear power plants and the dangers 
of using plutonium in nuclear explosives, Sweden 
had always been of the opinion that such problems 
should be dealt with at the international level and 
therefore his Government noted with satisfaction 
that the Agency attached high priority to such 
activities. 
89. With regard to NPT, the States which had 
become party to NPT'had done so at the cost of 
making certain sacrifices, in the conviction that 
by preventing any further spread of nuclear weapons 
they were acting in the fundamental interests of the 
international community. The fact that India had 
carried out a nuclear explosion was cause for 
alarm. It was to be feared that such action might 
interrupt the steady increase hitherto maintained 
in the number of States acceding to the Treaty, 
and might even undermine the Treaty's authority a 
consequence which could not be tolerated. By 
placing all its nuclear activities under Agency 
safeguards, India could help to prevent such a 
development. 
90. For its part, the Agency had, since the entry 
into force of NPT, been studying ways and means 
of observing and controlling nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes. It had asked a group of experts 
to draw up a set of procedures, the adoption of 
which, on an international level, should curb the 
desires of any State that wished to develop its own 
nuclear weapons. However, while such procedures 
might be consistent with the interests of disarmament, 
some doubted whether peaceful nuclear 
explosions could be carried out to any effective 
purpose without jeopardizing the principles 
normally accepted in connection with the other 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
91. Some encouraging facts could be seen in 
connection with NPT in addition to grounds for 
serious concern. A number of major industrialized 
countries whose peaceful nuclear capacity was 
growing rapidly were on the point of acceding to 
the Treaty and concluding the concomitant safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. On 
4 September Sweden itself had signed an NPT safeguards 
agreement with the Agency which would 
supersede the agreement previously concluded. 

92. The time taken for NPT to enter into force 
was due to the complexity of the Treaty itself. It 
was to be hoped that an increasing number of NPT 
agreements would be implemented the following 
year; a considerable proportion of the nuclear 
activities in the world could thus be placed under a 
uniform control system. 
93. He informed the General Conference that 
Sweden, in accordance with its obligations under 
Article III. 2 of NPT, would soon introduce regulations 
concerning the export of certain equipment 
and special materials under which such exports 
would be authorized only if the facility of the 
recipient State for which the equipment or materials 
were destined, together with any material subsequently 
produced in the facility, were placed under 
Agency safeguards, 
94. Sweden attached very great importance to the 
regulatory functions of the Agency, particularly in 
relation to the long-term storage of highly active 
waste, a question which was being studied in 
Sweden and which presented complexities that could 
be satisfactorily resolved only by close international 
co-operation. A further question was that of the 
provisional rules to be applied to the dumping of 
radioactive waste in the oceans, drawn up pursuant 
to the Convention on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 
(the London Conventional 0], which the Board of 
Governors was to examine again in 1975. 
95. In the same general sphere, the safety codes 
and guides for nuclear power plants which the 
Agency proposed to draw up were also a matter 
of primary importance. Sweden considered that 
they were essential in order to convince public 
opinion that the generation of nuclear power was 
safe; and such work could also be useful to the 
technical assistance and training programmes of 
the Agency. 
96. The Swedish Government was very much 
interested in the Director General's proposal for 
an international conference in 1977 on the prospects 
and problems of nuclear power[ll]. His Government 
would make its views known at a later date, 
97. Sweden saw no criterion in the Agency's 
Statute that specified how to determine which 
countries were the most advanced in the technology 
of atomic energy, but felt that it satisfied the 
conditions required for appointment to membership 
of the Board under Article VI. A. 1 of the Statute. 
98. In conclusion, he was please to confirm that 
Sweden's voluntary contribution to the General 
Fund for 1975 would be $60 750, which was 
considerably higher than the figure for 1974. He 
noted that if one took into account the payment of 
[10] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/205. 
[11] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para. 58. 
- 10 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 


the order of $30 000 provided by Sweden under the 
special agreement concluded between the Swedish 
International Development Authority (SIDA) and the 
Agency, and its contribution to UNDP, where its 
share represented 10% of the total budget of the 
programme, its aggregate contribution to the 
Agency's technical assistance and training activities 
was ten times the amount pledged to the General 
Fund. 

99. Furthermore, SIDA had made available to the 
Agency a sum of approximately $1.3 million to 
assist the Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture 
for the period July 1974 to June 197 9. In 
making a substantial contribution to the technical 
assistance activities of the Agency, Sweden was 
convinced of the need to provide the Agency with 
the necessary resources to fulfil its functions 
effectively in an area of such high priority. 
100. Mr. NEMETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said it was gratifying to note that the 
preceding year had been characterized by a relaxation 
in world tension. The peoples of the world 
were seeking to establish between themselves 
relations based on the principles of democracy and 
justice, eliminate for good the threat of a thermonuclear 
war and achieve a security which would 
enable the present and future generations to 
concentrate their efforts on solving the great 
problems facing mankind. 
101. The international atmosphere had been 
favourably influenced by the agreements signed by 
the Soviet Union and the United States of America 
for the purpose of preventing nuclear war and 
limiting strategic offensive weapons, underground 
nuclear-weapon tests and tests of high-power 
explosives. As Mr. Leonid Brezhnev had observed 
on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the 
liberation of Poland, those agreements represented 
a further step forward towards the complete 
cessation of nuclear testing, which was all the more 
necessary because the danger still existed that the 
achievements of science and technology would be 
utilized for producing new weapons of mass 
destruction. 
102. All peoples aware of their solidarity in the 
struggle for peace and of their responsibility for 
the future of the world realized that peaceful 
applications of atomic energy represented the only 
means by which mankind could avoid an energy 
crisis and satisfy numerous other needs. 
103. For that reason, mention must be made of 
the Agency's special role as an international centre 
responsible for co-ordinating the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. During the. preceding year, the 
Agency had successfully carried on the main 
activities under its programme, and had discharged 
its obligations under NPT. The fact that something 
like 100 countries had signed that important international 
instrument bore testimony to its relevancy. 
As the number of safeguards agreements increased, 
the Agency continued to perfect its safeguards 
system and improve its efficiency. Attention 
should be drawn to the fact that an agreement had 
been reached between the Agency and countries 
supplying fissionable material under which countries 
which had not acceded to NPT would be 
required to place under Agency safeguards nuclear 
material and facilities which had been supplied to 
them. 

104. The Agency had carried out considerable 
activity in connection with nuclear safety, environmental 
protection and supply of information. 
Several years of work in nuclear documentation had 
shown that those efforts were contributing to the 
development of atomic science throughout the world, 
including the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. 
105. As in the preceding years, the Agency 
attached great importance to the provision of 
technical assistance to developing countries. It 
was sufficient to recall that nearly 40% of its 
budget was used for that purpose. His country 
also made its contribution to that activity. Along 
with other socialist countries, it had supplied 
therapeutic equipment to several Asian and African 
countries. During the current session, it would 
pledge a voluntary contribution of 80 000 roubles 
in national currency to the General Fund, which 
could be used for the supply of equipment and 
materials to developing countries. 

106. He wished to draw attention to another 
matter of great importance, that of co-operation 
between the Agency and other regional organizations. 
For example, CMEA accorded an important 
place in its general programme to the application 
of atomic energy in the national economies. 
Collaboration between CMEA and the Agency could 
therefore be very fruitful. 
107. Since the establishment of Soviet power, the 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic had become a 
highly industrialized country. Research efforts 
and achievements in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy had continued to increase. The Academy 
of Sciences of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, with which some 70 scientific institutions 
were affiliated, was the scientific centre of the 
country. The outstanding achievements of those 
establishments included the development of new 
methods of electrical welding, construction of highspeed 
computers and production of artificial diamonds. 
Intensive studies were also being made of 
the atomic nucleus and of phenomena occurring at 
high interacting particle energies. 
108. The research activities referred to involved 
the use of a nuclear reactor, several accelerators, 
including the 2-GeV linear accelerator of the 
Kharkov Physico-Technical Institute, and improved 
radioelectronic equipment for the processing and 
analysis of nuclear data. Ukrainian specialists 
had obtained important results in the study of interactions 
between particles of various types and 
nuclei and in formulating theories to explain those 
phenomena. The main results of their activities 
had been described in papers presented at the four 
conferences on the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
held at Geneva. The Nuclear Research Institute of 
the Academy of Sciences of the Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic at Kiev would shortly complete 
the construction of the U-240 isochronous cyclotron 
- 11 



GC (XVIII)/OR. 172 

which would give high-intensity neutron and chargedparticle 
beams in an energy range of up to 100 MeV. 
That facility would open up fresh possibilities for 
studying nuclear phenomena and applying the 
results obtained. 

109. The studies on high-temperature plasmas at 
the Kharkov Physico-Technical Institute had led 
to the construction of the "Uragan" stellerator, the 
biggest in the world, which had produced a plasma 
of very high parameters. 
110. Radioactive sources were finding a wide 
variety of applications in the study of materials. 
They were being used to obtain metals and alloys of 
high purity, new materials and coatings of high 
strength and corrosion resistance. Several 
radiation-resistant compounds had been developed 
for use in nuclear power plants. 
111. In radiation biology, the studies related to 
radiological protection of animals and plants. 
112. Important activities were in progress in the 
field of radioecology. For example, several studies 
on the radioactivity of water in reservoirs had 
demonstrated that the optimistic forecasts coming 
from certain countries on the rapid self-purification 
of the marine environment contaminated with longlived 
radioactive pollutants were erroneous. 
Contrary to all expectations, it had been found that 
the strontium-90 content of the Mediterranean had 
not diminished since 1968, a fact which confirmed 
once more the need for a complete prohibition of 
the disposal of radioactive waste into seas and 
oceans. 
113. Of the numerous applications of the results 
of theoretical studies in the country, mention 
could be made, for example, of the use of tritium 
to neutralize static electrical charges, a technique 
which helped improve working conditions and 
contributed to savings. Tritium ionizers had been 
found effective in incubators and hot-houses, where 
they accelerated the ripening of vegetables, fruits, 
and so forth. 
114. Radiation had been used to obtain valuable 
mutants of wheat, maize and lupin and also a good 
early variety of potato resistant to fungus diseases. 
115. As regards the use of radioisotopes in medicine, 
studies were being carried out in 12 scientific 
institutions and ten medical establishments on all 
problems of radiodiagnostics and radiation therapy. 
Most scientific research establishments specializing 
in clinical work, medical institutions and large 
hospitals possessed radiodiagnostic laboratories. 
The Ukraine produced several types of radiodiagnostic 
equipment ranking among the best in 
the world. 

116. The rapid growth of Ukrainian industry would 
not have been possible except for a still more rapid 
expansion of infrastructure for power production. 
The average annual increase in electric power 
generation in the Ukraine was of the order of 
8-9%. The country was rich in organic fuel and had 
until recently focused its efforts on the construction 
of thermal power plants. Calculations showed, 
however, that even under those conditions it was 
economically advantageous to make use of nuclear 
power plants, and construction of the first unit of 
a 2000-MW plant near the town of Chernobyl was 
already under way. It was planned to build 
additional units subsequently. By 1980, the Ukraine 
expected to raise its total nuclear power generating 
capacity to 8000 MW, which corresponded to 
37 000-38 000 million kW/h per annum. 

117. The institutions affiliated with the Academy 
of Sciences of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic maintained close relations with various 
scientific centres abroad and with several international 
organizations working on the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. Its experts took an active part 
in international meetings and conferences. 
Measurements made in the Ukraine of numerous 
nuclear constants were regularly communicated to, 
and published by, the Agency. The Academy of 
Sciences also participated actively in INIS. 
118. Numerous visits to the scientific institutions 
of Kiev had been made by experts from various 
countries and Agency officials, and courses had 
been held for trainees from developing countries. 
In 1971-73 the Nuclear Research Institute had 
hosted conferences on neutron physics which had 
been attended by foreign scientists and Agency 
representatives. In 1975, the third conference on 
that subject would be held, and could be expected 
to promote international collaboration in that work 
even further, 
119. It was heartening to note that the Agency's 
membership was increasing every year. That was 
a definite proof of the authority which it enjoyed in 
all countries. The Ukrainian delegation wished to 
welcome the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea and Mauritius, whose admission would 
certainly foster the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in the world. 
120. Mr. MUTUKU (Kenya) paid tribute to the 
achievements of the Agency in relation to matters 
of safety and the use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. From the time it had become a Member, 
Kenya had always supported the Agency morally 
and financially; it intended to be even more 
closely associated with the Agency in the years to 
come and hoped that it could be elected to the 
Board of Governors in the near future. 
121. The oil crisis, inflation and the drought that 
had hit large parts of Africa and other regions of 
the world made it necessary for the Conference to 
think seriously about the energy and food situation 
in the world - particularly in the developing countries 
- and to direct the Agency to embark on 
vigorous technical assistance programmes which 
would help solve those problems through the 
judicious use of nuclear energy resources for the 
generation of electricity and through the application 
of modern nuclear techniques in the improvement 
of agricultural production. Kenya, like many 
other countries, had been severely hit by the steep 
rise in the price of oil and other products on the 
world market; his delegation was therefore 
- 12 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 172 


pleased to note that, in his statement concerning 
the Agency's expanded programme for 1975-80, the 
Director General had said that the Agency had 
already recognized some of those problems and 
planned to tackle them with more vigour than in the 
past. Gratifying, too, was the plan to arrange in 

1977 an international meeting on the long-term 
problems created by the energy situation. 

122. The Kenyan delegation would like the Agency 
to explore the possibility of drawing up joint or 
regional projects for the construction of small 
nuclear power plants of 100 MW(e) upwards, which 
were still too costly for many developing countries, 
particularly when they were experiencing serious 
balance of payments problems. 
123. With regard to food production, Kenya's main 
interest so far had been in the utilization of 
radiation and radioisotopes in research work. The 
use of more effective methods would enable agricultural 
production to be increased. It was the 
role of agricultural research to evaluate those 
methods, and it was for that reason that Kenya's 
1974-78 development plan envisaged an intensification 
of such research. What was planned was an 
improvement of the quality of seeds, livestock and 
the soil, and irradiation had been widely used to 
bring about mutations. Radioisotopes were being 
applied in studies aimed at obtaining better 
utilization of fertilizers and water by plants, and 
were also being used in the study of parasites of 
economic importance in agriculture and animal 
husbandry. 
124. So far, Kenya had drawn on Agency resources 
very little for its studies in applied entomology and 
parasitology, in soil physics and so on. It had 
recently obtained the services of an expert to 
establish a radioisotope laboratory which was 
expected to help in solving some of the problems 
of nutrition and soil science for which traditional 
field agronomic trials were not very suitable. If 
Kenya had not always been able to draw fully on 
the Agency's resources, that was because it did 
not possess the trained manpower which would 
enable it to make use of its services. But it should 
be recognized that the Agency's resources were 
not unlimited. For that reason he thought that the 
Agency should solicit funds and training facilities 
from the more advanced Member States to enable 
it to assist those Member States in need of trained 
manpower and other facilities. 

125. Mr. OVONO MEZU (Gabon) said that Gabon 
was determined to collaborate with the Agency in 
the peaceful uses of the atom and in the search for 
peace in the world. That determination was due 
to the fact that the Gabon Republic was actively 
participating in the establishment of the nuclear 
era, being one of the world's leading uranium 
producers. But his country prided itself on making 
a contribution to basic research as well: it was 
in fact in a Gabon deposit at Oklo that the existence 
of a natural nuclear reactor, an extraordinary 
phenomenon that had not been found anywhere else, 
had been recognized. 

126. He then gave details of that discovery, which 
had been announced to the scientific world in 
September 1972. The existence of such natural 
reactors was, of course, still fraught with a 
multitude of problems that would doubtless intrigue 
scientists for a long time. In any case, study of 
them was likely to provide much interesting information, 
particularly for the earth sciences. 
127. That was why the Gabon Government was 
planning to arrange, jointly with the French Atomic 
Energy Commission, an international conference 
on the Oklo phenomenon, which would take place, 
probably at Franceville, in June 1975. The 
President of the Gabon Republic hoped that the 
conference would be placed under the Agency's 
auspices. Gabon would be extremely honoured if 
that wish was fulfilled, and he thanked the Agency 
in anticipation of any help it might be able to give 
his country in preparing and organizing that conference, 
which was rather a "first" on African 
territory. It would like a large number of participants 
to attend the conference and a large number 
of publications to result from it. Samples of the 
Oklo ore and information which might be useful to 
research workers were at their disposal. He urged 
the international scientific community to make the 
conference a great success. 
• The meeting rose at 6 p. m. 
- 13 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 
173 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
5 March 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 19 September 1974, at 10. 55 a.m. 

President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

9 
General debate and report for 1973-74 1 - 82 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Romania 1 - 20 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 21 - 29 
Hungary 30 - 37 
Australia 38 - 47 
Turkey 48 - 54 
Nigeria 55 - 59 
Ghana 60 - 66 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic 67 - 79 
Uruguay 80 - 82 

10 Closing date of the session 
83 - 85 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 23 September 1974. 
** GC(XVIII)/534. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 
74-9556 


GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1973-74 
(GC(XVIII)/525, 532) (continued) 

1. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania), continuing the 
general debate, said he wished once more to congratulate 
and welcome the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea on its admission to membership 
of the Agency. 
2. At its current session the General Conference 
would have to discuss and take decisions on matters 
of major importance to the present and future work 
of the Agency and of direct concern to all the States 
represented at it. It was obvious that the Agency's 
main activities could not develop effectively and 
satisfactorily unless the international atmosphere 
favoured them. 
3. Despite certain events that had occurred in 
various parts of the world, the period since the 
last General Conference had been marked by 
important international developments, amongst 
which might first of all be mentioned the increasingly 
vigorous affirmation of the will of peoples to 
regain control of their national wealth and to make 
sure of independent economic and social development 
and free access to modern science and technology, 
the efforts relating to security and co-operation 
in Europe, and the new trend towards detente 
and co-operation between all States. 
4. The Romanian Government considered that 
everything should be done to encourage the 
development of that positive trend, so that it would 
become general and irreversible and so that, during 
the current period of history, decisive steps would 
be taken along the path of complete equality in 
relations between all nations, towards achievement 
of a new international economic and political order, 
towards the building of a better and juster world, 
in which all the peoples could fully enjoy the benefits 
of peace, of progress and of modern civilization. 


5. That policy was reflected in the-stirring 
appeal made a few weeks previously by the 
President of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu, at the 
World Population Conference: 
"We appeal to heads of State, Governments 

and to peoples to do their utmost to create a 

world of collaboration and of peace, in which 

each nation can develop freely and benefit 

fully from the conquests made by world 

civilization. " 

6. After the Second World War, his country had 
had to make considerable efforts to put an end to 
the backwardness caused by centuries of foreign 
domination. By its efforts, compared with the prewar 
years, its industrial production had increased 
almost thirtyfold, agricultural production had 
doubled and the national income was eleven times 
as high, which had enabled the per capita income to 
be increased from $80 to $800. 
7 Significant results had also been obtained in 
the many-sided uses of peaceful applications of the 
atom in fundamental and applied research, in the 
protection of nuclear equipment and installations 
and in the solution of different technological problems. 
Particular mention should be made of the 
results concerning the structure of the nucleus, high 
energy physics, plasma and semiconductor physics, 
the properties of nuclear materials in the field of 
radiation, lasers. Likewise, special attention was 
given to nuclear power, to the extension and 
diversification of the applications of radioactive and 
stable isotopes and nuclear techniques in the 
chemical, metallurgical and extractive industries, 
in building, hydrology, agriculture, medicine and 
biology, and in environmental protection. Those 
achievements showed in a practical way the creative 
force of a people that had become craftsmen and 
masters of their own destiny and gave proof of their 
ability to build, during a short span of history, an 
economy in full development, within which the use 
of peaceful applications of the atom constituted an 
important element of rapid progress towards wellbeing. 


8. Bilateral and multilateral co-operation had 
without doubt played a positive role in achieving the 
objectives set by Romania in its programme of 
developing the applications of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes. In that connection, co-operation 
within the framework of the Agency and the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) had been 
of special importance, and his delegation wanted 
once more to express its gratitude to those 
organizations for the support they had given to the 
creation of the Institute of Nuclear Technology in 
Romania. The progress made both in economic 
development and in the application of nuclear energy 
was opening up increasingly wide possibilities for 
intensive participation in international co-operation 
in that field. 
9. At a time when the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy had become an indispensable component in 
the solution of development problems, the right of 
every State, large or small, developed or at 
different levels of development, nuclear Power or 
non-nuclear-weapon State, to make use of that 
component of development under conditions of full 
equality and with no discrimination, was an 
indivisible and inalienable attribute of sovereignty. 
As a reflection of that requirement, the final document 
of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon 
States and, in particular, the provisions of 
Articles IV and V of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[1] 
enshrined the right and duty to co-operate in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and stressed the 
special responsibilities of the nuclear Powers in 
that field. 
10. International co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy had reached a stage at which it 
should be put on a permanent footing by establishing 
a legal framework of standards and basic principles. 
Being convinced of that, the Romanian 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 


Government had proposed at the sixteenth session 
of the General Conference that an international 
legal instrument laying down the principles of international 
co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy and the basic rights and duties of States in 
that field should be drawn up and adopted. [2] It 
noted with satisfaction that in response to increasingly 
felt needs, the idea of preparing such an international 
instrument was gaining wider acceptance. 
His delegation thought that the time had come for 
the question to be studied closely so as to find out 
the views of States on the subject and for concrete 
efforts aimed at the negotiation of such an agreement 
to be made. The Secretariat could help put 
that proposal in concrete form. 

11. It seemed all the more necessary to take 
action without delay in view of the forthcoming 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (the 
Review Conference), which would have to make a 
serious analysis of the way in which the parties had 
fulfilled the obligations they had assumed and of 
the practical results of the operation of NPT during 
the last five years. In view of its special responsibilities, 
the Agency could and should make an 
important contribution to ensuring that there was 
a suitable basis for making an accurate evaluation 
of the existing situation and for identifying what 
measures had to be taken in the future. 
12. His country was particularly interested in the 
enormous prospects the use of nuclear energy was 
opening up in the field of nuclear power generation 
and technology, to which sectors the Agency was 
rightly giving priority. The country's development 
programme foresaw that in 1990 more than 20% of 
the total installed power would come from nuclear 
power stations. For that reason his delegation was 
pleased that the Agency intended to continue 
intensifying its efforts to help increase the contribution 
of nuclear power generation to solving the 
world's energy problems, which were of the 
greatest concern to the large majority of peoples. 
13. His delegation considered that the Agency, 
which already had extensive experience, should, 
as a matter of priority, concentrate on the special 
needs of the developing countries, which had hardly 
begun to take steps towards installing nuclear power 
plants on their soil, so that they could be provided 
with multilateral and effective help. 
14. Under present circumstances, when a good 
proportion of the planet's population was faced with 
dramatic problems of under-development and 
disease, the Agency's efforts to extend the application 
of isotopes and irradiation in industry, agriculture, 
hydrology, medicine, biology and in other 
related sectors of economic and social life were 
particularly useful, satisfying immediate practical 
needs. 
15. He also wanted to mention the achievements 
of the Agency in the preparation of radiation 
[2] See documents GC(XVI)/OR. 155, para. 41 
and GC(XVII)/OR. 164, para. 21. 
protection standards, in some aspects of safety 
in nuclear installations and the protection of the 
environment, a field to which his delegation 
considered the Agency should give special attention. 

16. Since the economic and social progress of 
each country required the training of qualified 
national personnel, his Government had always 
attached great importance to the Agency's programme 
for training staff. In Romania, teaching, 
research and production in the field of physics had 
been practically integrated, which tended to contribute 
to the considerable increase of scientific 
and economic efficiency, as a result of a better use 
of staff and plant. It had also contributed to raising 
the level of research and to reducing substantially 
the duration of the research/development/application 
cycle. 
17. His delegation was in favour of the more 
specific orientation of the Agency's revised programme 
for 1975-80 towards nuclear power and 
technology, the extension of the use of isotopes, 
irradiation and nuclear techniques in the most 
varied economic and social sectors, and towards 
an increase in the emphasis to be put on applied 
research. 
18. Under the provisions of NPT, an important 
place in matters of concern to the Agency should, 
in the coming period, be given to nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes (PNE), a sector in which it 
seemed desirable to go more thoroughly into 
concrete economic and scientific aspects and to 
proceed to practical work. 
19. The transformation of the objectives of that 
programme into facts would require ensuring that 
there was an equitable relationship between the 
Agency's safeguards activities and those devoted 
to fulfilling its primary function, namely the introduction 
and development of applications of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, the encouragement 
of international co-operation in that field and the 
increase of technical assistance to the developing 
countries. 
20. So that all people could fully benefit from the 
peaceful uses of the atom, it was, above all, 
necessary that atomic energy should no longer be 
used for destructive purposes and for the production 
and improvement of nuclear arsenals. The 
Romanian Government was categorically in favour 
of putting an end to the armaments race, of the 
reduction of military expenditure, of achieving 
nuclear disarmament. It was absolutely essential 
to obtain a ban on nuclear weapons and to achieve 
their destruction. The resources thus saved could 
then be used for the purposes of peaceful development 
and for economic and social progress. 
21. Mr. FEDOROV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) welcomed the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea and Mauritius to membership of 
the Agency. The General Conference's decision 
was in accordance with the principle of universality, 
a fundamental principle of the United Nations and 
its specialized agencies for which the Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic had always stood up. His 
-3 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 

delegation was sure that the new Members would 
make a useful contribution to the Agency's work. 
His delegation also shared the views of the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea concerning 
the peaceful unification of Korea and a single 
representation of the Korean people in the United 
Nations. 

22. The eighteenth regular session of the Agency's 
General Conference was taking place at a time when 
the "cold war" atmosphere was giving way to 
normal, reasonable forms of international contact 
based on peaceful coexistence, when the need to 
strengthen and expand collaboration between countries 
in all fields - including science and technology 
- was becoming generally recognized and when 
the ideas of collaboration were beginning to assume 
concrete forms. 
23. The consistent implementation of the peace 
programme adopted by the 24th Congress of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the major 
foreign-policy actions taken by the Soviet Union in 
recent years - including the signing of important 
agreements with the Federal Republic of Germany, 
France, the United States of America, and a number 
of other countries - had had a beneficial influence 
on the entire international climate. The agreements 
between the Soviet Union and the United 
States of America on the prevention of nuclear war 
and the limitation of strategic arms were of great 
importance for the further improvement of the 
world situation, as was the Treaty on the Limitation 
of Underground Nuclear Weapons Tests, [3] which 
had a bearing on the Agency's work. Mr. Brezhnev, 
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, had 
recently said that the Soviet Union regarded the 
Treaty as a step towards a complete ban on the 
testing of nuclear weapons and was ready to conclude 
an agreement to that end. It was to be hoped 
that the day was not far away when such an agreement 
would become a reality. 
24. The steady improvement in the world situation 
was having a positive effect on the work of international 
organizations, including the Agency, whose 
authority was growing with the expanding utilization 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The 
Agency was on the whole coping well with the tasks 
entrusted to it and was exerting a great influence on 
the development of nuclear science and technology, 
especially in the developing countries. Its activities 
in connection with safeguards, nuclear safety, 
environmental protection, nuclear power generation, 
reactors and the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) were, in his delegation's 
opinion, being conducted quite efficiently and 
deserved wide support. Moreover, his delegation 
had no objections to the programme for 1975-80[4], 
which took into account present needs and the 
wishes of Member States. 
25. Noting the useful and important work being 
done by the Agency in connection with NPT, he 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/208. 
[4] See documents GC(XVIII)/526 and Mod. 1. 
emphasized that much remained to be done. A 
further increase in the number of States party to 
NPT, and hence in the number of States concluding 
safeguards agreements with the Agency, would 
contribute to peace and international security and 
to the development of international collaboration in 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. Accordingly, 
still greater efforts by the Agency were 
called for in achieving the adherence of the vast 
majority of countries to NPT. In the opinion of his 
delegation, the Agency would be assisted in those 
efforts by the initiative taken by the Governments 
of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the 
United States of America concerning the provision 
to the Agency of information about the export and 
import of nuclear materials destined for use in any 
non-nuclear-weapon State[5]. 

26. Nuclear energy was being used in the 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic in a variety 
of fields, including science and medicine. Theoretical 
and experimental work was continuing on power 
reactors with a dissociating coolant, and the 
prospects of gas-cooled fast reactors with a 
dissociating coolant had again been confirmed. 
Specialists from Member States of the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) were taking 
part in the programme in question. 
27. The Institute of Nuclear Power Generation 
of the Academy of Sciences of the Byelorussian 
Soviet Socialist Republic was also doing a great 
deal of work relating to the evaluation of nuclear 
constants, the uptake of uranium by the organism 
and the fissile material concentration in the fuel 
elements of critical assemblies. Considerable 
success in developing a theory of radiation damage 
in solids and seeking practical ways of reducing 
the harmful influence of radiation on the properties 
of solids had been achieved by scientists at the 
Institute of Solid State Physics of the Academy of 
Sciences of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, who were working with a research 
reactor, a gamma facility and electron accelerators. 
Work was also being done at the Institute on the 
physics of the atomic nucleus, with extensive use 
of nuclear spectroscopy, and on the theory of 
nuclear particles. 

28. Radioisotope techniques were being used in 
process control, science and many other fields 
virtually throughout the economy of the Republic. 
Significant success had been achieved in the use of 
radiation for sterilizing and modifying various 
materials. 
29. The Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
had considerable understanding for the problems of 
the developing countries and their desire to liquidate 
the legacy of colonialism. It was rendering 
assistance to such countries both on a bilateral 
basis and through international bodies such as 
UNDP, to which it was making available 
135 000 roubles each year. In response to the 
appeal of the General Conference, it was also going 
to make available to the Agency's General Fund 

[5] See document INFCIRC/207. 
-4 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 


20 000 roubles in national currency, to be used in 
supplying equipment, instruments and other items 
to developing countries (primarily to those which 
had adhered to NPT) under the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. 

30. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary) said that the 
past year had seen further advances in mutual 
understanding and co-operation in international 
political life. He was convinced that all countries, 
even those with different social structures, were 
interested in strengthening peace and international 
security, settling international conflicts peaceably 
and reducing the tension existing in various parts 
of the world. The Hungarian Government was 
striving sincerely to help reduce that tension and 
to make the process irreversible. Hungary had 
participated actively in the second phase of the 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe 
and hoped that the third phase of that conference 
would take place at the highest level in the near 
future. 
31. CMEA had recently celebrated its 25th anniversary. 
Hungary continued to attach great 
importance to the multilateral collaboration 
organized within the framework of CMEA and considered 
it important for close ties to be established 
between the Agency and CMEA. 
32. His Government firmly believed that the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, the maintenance 
of peace in the world and the objectives of 
the Agency were inextricably bound together. The 
Agency, under the excellent leadership of 
Mr. Eklund, should take advantage of the positive 
developments occurring on the international scene. 
One result of those developments was that the 
principle of universality was being more fully 
applied within the Agency, and his delegation was 
pleased to welcome the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea and Mauritius as new Members 
of the Agency. 
33. The Hungarian delegation noted with regret 
that there were still countries which had not signed 
or not ratified NPT and were not doing anything to 
increase the effectiveness of safeguards. 
34. He had been gratified to note the Treaty 
between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and 
the United States of America, signed in July 1974, 
on the Limitation of Underground Nuclear Weapons 
Tests. That was the spirit in which the Agency 
should operate and it should do everything in its 
power to bring a complete end to the application 
of nuclear technology for military purposes and to 
promote the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. He also wished to express satisfaction at 
the action being taken by certain suppliers of 
nuclear materials to ensure that countries which 
had not signed and ratified NPT but which were 
receiving fissionable materials and nuclear equipment 
would be obliged to submit those materials 
and equipment to Agency control. [6] 
[6] See document INFCIRC/209 and Addenda 
1 and 2. 
35. Expressing his delegation's approval of the 
Agency's annual report for 1973-1974[7] and its 
programme for 1975-80 and budget for 1975, he 
said that his delegation attached great importance 
to activities in the field of nuclear safety and 
environmental protection, nuclear power and 
economics and nuclear safety codes. The distribution 
of funds between the various programmes 
seemed to be correct and an increase in the budget 
was justified to cover a rational and expanding 
programme. Bearing in mind the Agency's 
financial difficulties, it was pleasing to note that 
other United Nations organizations were making 
contributions to programmes of common interest. 
In that connection he was pleased to announce that 
Hungary's voluntary contribution to the General 
Fund was being increased by 50%. 
36. In the past year considerable progress had 
been achieved in the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy in Hungary. Work was proceeding on the 
design and construction of Hungary's first nuclear 
power station. Research organizations in Hungary, 
notably the Central Physical Research Institute of 
the Hungarian Academy of Sciences had contributed 
greatly to solving various problems concerning the 
operation of nuclear power stations with watercooled, 
water-moderated reactors. An international 
team working in that Institute was carrying 
out reactor physics research on a critical assembly 
of the water-cooled,, water-moderated type and 
important results had already been obtained. 
37. Radioisotope techniques were being applied 
on an ever increasing scale in agriculture, industry 
and medicine and work would commence soon on the 
construction of a plant for the radiation sterilization 
of medical products under a programme sponsored 
by UNDP and the Agency. Research workers in the 
food industry were participating in an international 
programme for the irradiation of food products 
which was being co-ordinated by the Agency. In 
addition many Hungarian institutes had research 
contract agreements with the Agency. 
38. Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) said that the 
events of the past year had given Members cause to 
reflect upon the Agency's objective, as expressed 
in its Statute, which was "to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world". 
39. As the Director General had pointed out in 
his statement to the Conference[8], nuclear energy 
could be expected to make an increasing contribution 
to the growth of the world economy. Nuclear 
power was becoming attractive on economic grounds 
for reactor sizes as low as 100 to 200 MW, and its 
rapid expansion could be anticipated in developing 
as well as developed countries. One of the Agency's 
tasks would be to help ensure that such expansion 
took place, as the Director General had said, under 
comprehensive, internationally accepted safety and 
reliability criteria, and under safeguards which 
[7] GC(XVIII)/525. 
[8] GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, paras 45-79. 
-5 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 


prevented the misuse of fissionable material for 
purposes which could endanger peace and security. 

40. The development of proper standards for 
reactor safety, siting, and quality control was 
already receiving greater attention. The procedures 
by which such standards were arrived at 
would themselves have educational value, and for 
that reason his delegation hoped that the deliberations 
of the expert committees concerned in 
preparing the necessary codes and guidelines would 
be accessible to all interested parties. It was of 
great importance for the future development of 
nuclear power that all concerned, experts and 
general public alike, should know and have confidence 
in the safety arrangements of the nuclear 
industry in their country. 
41. Australia believed that the Agency had done 
well in adapting its programme to the new demands 
for the wider development of nuclear power. 
Nevertheless, the limited resources available to 
the Agency had always to be borne in mind, as had 
the need for a continuous process of reappraisal 
of priorities, coupled with vigilance to ensure that 
the Agency's programmes did not duplicate others. 
42. Apart from problems of safety and waste 
disposal, nuclear energy involved the further danger 
that fuel could be diverted to make nuclear explosive 
devices. The spread of nuclear technology 
implied dissemination of the ability to fabricate 
such devices, and that ability could of course be 
used for military no less than for peaceful purposes. 
Australia had always believed that the benefits of 
nuclear energy could be widely disseminated 
without unacceptable dangers only if the spread of 
nuclear technology were accompanied by corresponding 
safeguards. The two had to go together, 
and an effective Agency safeguards system was in 
the interests of all countries. 
43. In that connection both suppliers and recipients 
of nuclear materials and equipment bore 
serious responsibilities. Recognition of those 
responsibilities, and of its obligations under 
Article III. 2 of NPT, had just led Australia, in 
common with a number of other actual or potential 
nuclear exporting countries, to notifythe Director 
General that it would not provide nuclear materials 
or equipment except under appropriate safeguards. 
44. He approved of the start that had been made, 
by the decisions adopted at the Board meetings 
immediately preceding the present session, on 
tackling the problem of PNEs, That problem now 
appeared to call for greater international attention, 
with a view to creating an international framework 
which would provide the necessary guarantees that 
PNEs would not be misused. His delegation 
believed that NPT played a key role there also. 
Article V of NPT provided an assurance that 
States which had contributed to world peace and 
security by undertaking not to engage in the manufacture 
of nuclear explosives for any purpose would 
be able to obtain the benefits of PNEs under the 
most favourable terms. 
45. In the light of the request by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations that the Agency 
work towards the establishment of an international 
service for PNEs[9] as envisaged under NPT, he 
believed that the decisions just adopted by the 
Board would enable the Agency to progress towards 
the establishment of a credible international service 
for PNEs. 

46. His delegation shared the Director General's 
disappointment that only two more States had 
become parties to NPT during the past year. NPT 
was a vital safeguard against proliferation and in 
that respect he wished to emphasize that Australia 
regarded as proliferation the further extension of 
any nuclear explosive capability. A lead was 
needed to give new life to NPT, and he earnestly 
hoped that all those States which had not yet 
become parties thereto would now do so. 
47. Finally, he wished to express his delegation's 
continued support for the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. Australia accepted the 
need for an increase in the target level of voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund, and had indeed 
already pledged an amount representing its full 
assessment at the new level of US $4.5 million 
recommended by the Board of Governors. 
48. Mr. TUNALIGIL (Turkey) remarked that the 
idea of an energy crisis, which had already engaged 
the attention of some delegates to the preceding 
session of the General Conference, had now become 
grim reality. A shortage of conventional energy 
was now menacing developing countries striving for 
industrialization, and was likewise threatening the 
accustomed way of life in already industrialized 
States. Against that bleak and depressing background 
the tasks of the Agency had become more 
arduous and more important than ever. 
49. Indeed, his delegation believed that the 
Agency would have to tackle still more complex 
problems in the years ahead, and the degree of 
success achieved in solving them would largely 
govern the organization's future reputation and 
credibility. Success on the Agency's part would 
help to justify the faith of those countries which 
were putting their trust in nuclear energy. Turkey 
hoped and expected that the Agency would overcome 
those newly-emerging difficulties and live up to the 
expectations of all its Members, particularly those 
drawn from the ranks of the developing countries. 
50. That being so, he wished to stress the 
importance of the prospecting work for uranium 
ores that was going on in many parts of the world, 
including Turkey. Turkey had also been one of the 
14 countries covered by the 1972 market survey of 
the potential demand for nuclear power in developing 
countries. [10] His Government believed - as 
had been mentioned by the Turkish delegate at the 
preceding session - that a periodic revision of the 
results of the market survey would be extremely 
valuable. [11] 
[9] See General Assembly Resolution 
GA. 2829 (XXVI). 
[10] See document GC(XVII)/506. 
[11] GC(XVII)/OR. 164, paras 101 and 102. 
-6 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 


51. Since uranium appeared for the time being to 
be the only alternative to fossil fuel sources, 
further uranium prospecting was of crucial 
importance. It was common knowledge that the 
world's proven uranium reserves would not suffice 
to meet the demand expected by the end of the 
century, and enrichment facilities would also be 
inadequate in another two or three decades' time. 
On the other hand, it was virtually certain that 
fresh reserves of uranium ore would be discovered, 
especially thanks to the development of new 
prospecting methods and techniques. 
52. The Agency had indeed launched jointly with 
UNDP a large-scale uranium exploration project 
in south-west Anatolia, scheduled for a duration of 
three years. While thanking both the Agency and 
UNDP for making their funds and expertise 
available, Turkey considered that the Agency should 
prosecute the search for uranium and thorium raw 
materials even more energetically. Larger 
financial appropriations would, of course, be 
required for that purpose. 
53. It was obvious that uranium prospecting was 
only a preliminary: in order to meet their energy 
needs, the developing countries would also require 
advice, specialized personnel training and the 
provision of nuclear power station equipment. 
In that connection he wished to thank the Government 
of the United States of America for the costfree 
transfer of title to a certain amount of nuclear 
material. 
54. Problems of safety, environmental protection 
and safeguards were inevitable accompaniments of 
the possession of nuclear reactors, and were part 
of the multifaceted challenge - hence the hard 
work - which lay before the Agency. Turkey was, 
however, convinced that with goodwill, understanding, 
determination and an enhanced co-operative 
spirit the Agency would be able successfully to 
take up that challenge, and the Turkish Government 
would not fail to assist the Agency in achieving its 
objectives. 
55. Mr. OGUNLANA (Nigeria) said it was now 
universally realized that the shortage of energy was 
a problem with which every country would have to 
come to grips. The industrialized countries 
needed energy to maintain and improve upon their 
present standard of living while the developing 
countries needed energy to raise their peoples 
from subsistence levels. Ironically, it was the 
developing countries which needed energy the most 
but were the least equipped to provide it. The 
equipment he had in mind had less to do with 
physical gadgetry than with mental attitudes and 
the discipline needed to achieve goals. 
56. The only known solution to the energy crisis 
was nuclear energy, the development of which 
entailed a firm grasp of what was still one of the 
most difficult areas of human knowledge. The 
problem for developing countries was one of 
channelling their efforts in nuclear work towards 
activities that would lead to self-reliance in the 
harnessing of nuclear energy. 
57. The importance of nuclear energy was further 
underlined by the fact that electricity generated 
from nuclear power stations would in most cases 
now be cheaper than that generated from stations 
using coal or oil. Until recently, it had been 
thought that nuclear power was not competitive with 
power from fossil-fuelled plants when output was 
below 500 MW. That threshold had been steadily 
lowered and was now between 100 and 200 MW. The 
result had been a spate of orders for nuclear power 
plants in the industrialized countries. In fact, one 
such country was reportedly planning to decommission 
some of its fossil-fuelled plants. It was to be 
hoped that developing countries, too, would be able 
to avail themselves of the opportunity of solving the 
energy problem through nuclear technology. 
58. It was well known that a crucially important 
factor in the cost of a nuclear generating plant was 
the radiation shield facility. To help bring down 
those costs intensive research should be carried 
out on interactions between radiation and matter. 
One approach would be to consider such interactions 
as field-particle phenomena. The notion of 
fields was one which was permeating all aspects 
of the physical sciences. 
59. Once the fact was accepted that nuclear 
energy would play an ever-increasing role in 
economic development, the exchange of ideas and 
opinions on the subject needed to be encouraged. 
Co-operation between the Agency and Nigeria would 
be made easier as a result of the recent establishment 
of a Nigerian Embassy in Vienna. The 
Nigerian delegation looked forward to closer joint 
efforts between the Agency and Nigeria. 
60. Mr. DANSO (Ghana) said his delegation 
warmly welcomed the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea and Mauritius as Members of 
the Agency. 
61. It wished to commend the concise but 
comprehensive report of the Director General on 
the main problems facing the Agency. Of particular 
interest to Ghana, as a developing nation, were the 
question of technical assistance and the problem of 
safeguards. In that connection it welcomed the 
decision by the Board to recommend to the General 
Conference an increase in the target for voluntary 
contributions to $4 500 000. It strongly hoped that 
further contributions in kind would be forthcoming 
from the developed countries to make up the 
expected $6 million in technical assistance for the 
year 1975. His delegation appreciated the efforts 
of the Agency to meet technical assistance requirements 
to the extent permitted by the resources 
available. Ghana would continue to support the 
Agency in those efforts. 
62. The delegation of Ghana regretted to learn 
of the impending retirement of Mr. Goswami, the 
Deputy Director General for Technical Assistance 
and Publications. It wished him every success. 
63. As regards the programme of the Ghana 
Atomic Energy Commission, early in 1974 the 
Government of Ghana had decided to reactivate the 
reactor project, which had been suspended for 
_ 7 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 


some time. The Commission was therefore 
working actively towards completion of the 
reactor. Ghana hoped that the Agency would be 
able to offer generous assistance in the development 
of its reactor programme. The Commission 
was also expanding and diversifying its programme 
in relation to other peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy with a view to contributing to the solution of 
some of the country's economic, agricultural, 
technological and health problems. 

64. His delegation considered the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste an 
important and necessary institution of the Agency. 
Its ample facilities for research and consultation 
among theoretical physicists had been very useful 
to scientists from Ghana. 
65. Ghana considered training to be a vital aspect 
of any country's scientific and technological programme 
and was therefore happy that UNDP had, 
for the second time, provided funds enabling it to 
hold a regional training course for radioisotope 
laboratory technicians in collaboration with the 
Agency. Plans for training at higher levels were 
also being prepared. In conjunction with the 
expansion of its nuclear app]ications programme, 
Ghana would very shortly build new laboratories 
which would include adequate facilities for the 
training not only of technicians but also of 
scientists, medical officers and engineers. All 
those training facilities would be at the disposal of 
the Agency for holding future courses. It was also 
hoped that scientists from other parts of the world, 
particularly from Africa, would find it useful to 
come to those laboratories to carry out special 
research assignments. 
66. In all those endeavours, Ghana was guided by 
the conviction that co-operation among nations in 
the peaceful applications of nuclear science and 
technology was one of the concrete ways by which 
mankind could justifiably be led to believe that 
nuclear science and technology would not be used 
for destructive purposes. 
67. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) said that, 
in view of the favourable international atmosphere, 
the Agency had an important part to play in fostering 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and that Czechoslovakia considered 
it an important task to take an active part in 
assisting the Agency in carrying out the tasks 
entrusted to it in that respect, particularly in 
connection with the implementation of NPT and 
related safeguards agreements. 
68. It had to be stated, however, that the present 
situation with regard to safeguards was not entirely 
satisfactory. Despite the fact that more than four 
years had passed since NPT had come into force, 
a number of States active in the nuclear field had 
not signed safeguards agreements, or had not 
taken the requisite steps to ensure that the agreements 
were put into effect. It was to be hoped that 
all States Members of the United Nations would 
become parties to NPT or conclude safeguards 
agreements by the time of the Review Conference 
in Geneva in 1975. 
69. The Czechoslovak Government was constantly 
seeking to improve its system for national control 
of nuclear materials, and had requested the 
Agency's assistance in carrying out effective and 
economical inspections in Czechoslovakia; in 
addition, it was planning further collaboration with 
the Agency in improving safeguards techniques and 
analysing samples taken during Agency inspections. 
70. Czechoslovakia attributed considerable 
importance to the Agency's long-term programme 
of activities for the years 1975-80. The trend in 
the long-term programme largely coincided with 
Czechoslovakia's own development plans and therefore 
earned its full support. Apart from the safeguards 
activities, his delegation welcomed the 
developments in nuclear power production, which 
was the only energy source that could meet the 
needs of mankind, both at the present time and in 
the future. A further matter of considerable 
interest to Czechoslovakia at the present juncture 
was the combined use of nuclear energy sources, 
first and foremost for purposes of heating. 
71. It was clear, however, that the development 
of nuclear power was closely associated with the 
problem of nuclear safety, and the Agency's 
initiative in that field was therefore greatly welcomed. 
Although nuclear energy was in a sense 
one of the safest and cleanest sources of power in 
terms of environmental effect, it was equally 
important to give due attention to the management 
of nuclear waste. His country was consequently 
following the Agency's programme in that field 
with interest. 
72. The subject of information acquired ever 
greater importance as the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy progressed, hence the Agency's establishment 
of INIS was highly commendable. The 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic was taking full 
advantage of the system in order to set up a 
national information service of a similar kind. 
73. The admission of the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea was of great importance and 
would have a positive effect on the Agency's 
activities; along with the admission of Mauritius, 
it duly reflected the Agency's principle of universality. 
74. Among the salient events in the implementation 
of Czechoslovakia's nuclear energy programme 
over the past year, the development of nuclear 
power had been paramount; with the collaboration 
of the Soviet Union and other members of CMEA, 
a programme for the development of water-moderated, 
water-cooled and fast reactors had been got 
under way and work was also in progress for the 
construction of the technological equipment required 
for nuclear power production. The focus of 
attention was district heating based on nuclear 
power generation, and problems relating to the 
physics and safety of power plants. 
75. In the field of nuclear safety, experts were 
working on the establishment of operational, 
technological and legal standards. Their main aim 
was to ensure that the principles of nuclear safety 
-8 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 173 


were observed in the operation of the A-l nuclear 
power station, and in the pre-operational documentation 
for the power stations B-l and B-2. Efforts 
were also being concentrated on drafting the framework 
of the atomic energy act, with particular 

stress on safety techniques and protection of the 

environment. 

76. With regard to the use of radionuclides, 
renewed attention had been given to the development, 
within the framework of CMEA, of equipment 
for sterilizing biomedical preparations, as 
well as to broadening the range of labelled compounds. 
77. In view of the higher standards required in 
personnel dosimetry, following the development 
and application of nuclear techniques for peaceful 
purposes, Czechoslovakia was devoting considerable 
attention to new personnel dosimetry methods 
by which the number of monitored workers could 
be increased. The gradual introduction of thermoluminescence 
dosimetry was under way and it was 
eventually expected to replace the film dosimetry 
technique. 
78. With regard to the provision of technical 
assistance by the Agency, the Czechoslovak 
Socialist Republic fully supported the Agency's 
programme in that field, and had increased its 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund by 25%; 
at the same time, the Agency would do well to 
consider the provision of technical assistance 
primarily to those countries which had signed 
NPT and concluded safeguards agreements. 
79. In conclusion, the Government of the 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic would like to 
propose that two Agency meetings should be held in 
Czechoslovakia in 1975, and that organizational 
work for a symposium in 1976 should be begun; it 
also wished to offer States Members of the Agency, 
under the Agency's fellowship programme, five 
long-term fellowships for study in Czechoslovak 
higher educational establishments, four one-year 
fellowships for work in the nuclear field at research 
institutes, as well as the provision of additional 
funds for three one-year fellowships financed under 
UNDP. 
80. Mr. MERINO (Uruguay) said he wanted to 
thank the Agency and the scientists and administrators 
in its employ for the work which had been 
carried out in the past. Although it was closely 
watching the nuclear programmes which other 
States were developing in the face of the world 
energy shortage, Uruguay would have to proceed 
in stages before embarking on nuclear power 
projects, familiarizing itself first with such nuclear 
applications as irradiation, radioisotopes in nuclear 
medicine, etc. 

81. Since Uruguay was both a producer and an 
exporter of foodstuffs, it was keenly interested in 
the techniques of food preservation. Steps had been 
taken to install an industrial plant for food preservation 
and, in an investigation carried out in 
collaboration with the Republic of Argentina 
regarding the public demand for irradiated potatoes, 
use had been made of the recommendations and 
publications of the Agency. 
82. Progress was also being made in prospecting 
for uranium, in nuclear medicine, the agricultural 
applications of radioisotopes, and the preparation 
of radiopharmaceuticals. His delegation believed 
that the Agency, in pursuing its essential objective 
of disseminating nuclear technology, should pay 
increased attention to areas of economic and social 
significance. Countries like Uruguay, where 
nuclear programmes were not far advanced, had to 
budget very carefully and they should be helped to 
determine the most useful areas of nuclear 
applications and given the necessary assistance to 
enable them to achieve significant results. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

83. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to 
fix the closing date of the session, on the recommendation 
of the General Committee. 
84. In the light of that Committee's consideration 
of the matter, he wished to recommend on its 
behalf that 20 September be fixed as the closing 
date. 
• 85. The Committee's recommendation was 
accepted. 
• The meeting rose at 12. 45 p. m. 
-9 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 
174 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
10 March 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 20 September 1974, at 10. 50 a.m. 

President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

9 
General debate and report for 1973-74 1 - 60 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Mongolia 
1 - 10 

Sudan 11 - 21 
Finland 22 - 31 
Costa Rica 32 - 40 
Malaysia 41 - 50 
Austria 51 - 60 

3 Credentials of delegates to the eighteenth (1974) 61 - 77 

regular session 

(b) Report of the Credentials Committee 61 - 77 
17 
Election of Members to the Board of 78-8 3 
Governors 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1974. 
** GC(XVIII)/534. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 
74-9560 


GC(XVIII)/OR. 174 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1973-74 
(GC(XVIII)/525, 532) (continued) 

1. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia), continuing the 
general debate, said that the further reduction in 
international tension and the practical application 
of the principle of peaceful coexistence would 
undoubtedly contribute to increased international 
co-operation in many fields, including the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy. 
2. The use of nuclear energy as a serious 
alternative in meeting the world's growing energy 
demands raised the question of the safeguarding of 
nuclear facilities. The Agency's activities in that 
connection were important, for they were directly 
related to the strengthening of world peace and 
security. The safeguards question was attracting 
more and more attention, particularly in view of 
the forthcoming Review Conference of the Parties 
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (the Review Conference), which would 
afford an opportunity for reconfirming the fundamental 
aims of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[1]. His delegation 
attached great importance to the adherence to NPT 
by all countries, especially the militarily more 
powerful ones, 
3. His country had been among the first to sign 
and ratify NPT, and had concluded a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency in connection with 
NPT[2] even before becoming a Member of the 
Agency. It called upon all non-nuclear-weapon 
States to conclude such agreements with the Agency 
before the start of the Review Conference and 
noted with satisfaction the interesting and detailed 
reports which the Agency had prepared for the 
Preparatory Committee. 
4. With regard to the implementation of the 
provisions of NPT, he emphasized that the Treaty 
on the Limitation of Underground Nuclear Weapons 
Tests[3] and other important agreements concluded 
between the Soviet Union and the United States of 
America represented a major contribution towards 
limitation of the arms race and the prevention of a 
nuclear catastrophe. In that connection, his 
delegation welcomed the initiative of the Soviet 
Union, taken in agreement with the United States of 
America and the United Kingdom, concerning the 
provision of technical assistance mainly to countries 
which had ratified NPT and concluded a 
corresponding safeguards agreement with the 
Agency. It also considered that the provision to 
the Agency by exporting countries of information 
about the supply of nuclear materials and equipment 
to other States[4] would considerably help the 
Agency in carrying out its safeguards functions. 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/188. 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/208. 
[4] See document INFCIRC/207. 
5. His delegation welcomed the Agency's nuclear 
safety and environmental protection programmes 
and was conscious of the need for collaboration 
with organizations such as the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) in environmental 
protection matters. 
6. Like many other delegations, his had noted 
the increase in several areas of technical assistance, 
the provision of which was one of the 
Agency's principal tasks. It was gratifying that 
many developing countries were already receiving 
Agency assistance in connection with the construction 
of nuclear power plants, and his delegation 
wished to commend the Agency's efforts in that 
area. 
7. It should be borne in mind, however, that for 
many Members the rendering of assistance in 
connection with the application of nuclear techniques 
in industry, agriculture, medicine and scientific 
research was the Agency's primary task. In the 
opinion of his delegation, technical training was 
also an important part of the Agency's technical 
assistance activities. 
8. Turning to the question of voluntary contributions, 
he welcomed the raising of the target 
to $4. 5 million and said that Mongolia would make 
its modest contribution to the General Fund. It 
had been interesting to note declarations by the 
delegates of a number of advanced countries to the 
effect that a significant part of their countries' 
voluntary contributions would be in the form of 
materials and equipment. 
9. His delegation hoped that the incipient collaboration 
between Mongolia and the Agency would 
contribute to the implementation of his country's 
atomic energy programme. Mongolia was a 
founder-member of the Joint Institute for Nuclear 
Research at Dubna, Soviet Union, and Mongolian 
scientists had for 18 years been taking part in a 
variety of work at the Institute, ranging from 
fundamental research to the practical application 
of research results. 
10. In conclusion, he wished to welcome the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and 
Mauritius to membership of the Agency. He was 
sure that the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea, which had achieved considerable successes 
in nuclear science and its practical applications, 
would make a valuable contribution to the Agency's 
activities. 
11. Mr. HABASHI (Sudan) said he would first 
like to congratulate the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea and Mauritius on their admission 
to membership of the Agency; their joining would 
enrich the Agency's experience and deliberations 
and would bring added support in the discharge of 
its great mission. His delegation also looked 
forward to welcoming ere long other independent 
sister States not as yet in the Agency, as well as 
African States emerging or still struggling to 
emerge in the face of iniquitous racial discrimination. 
In that regard, the recently changed attitude 
of Portugal was to be welcomed and it was to be 
-2 



hoped that other countries would follow its example. 
For, until all nations had joined forces to present a 
united front in working for the good of mankind, the 
countries of the world could not truly claim to be a 
United Nations community. And, in atomic energy 
perhaps more than in any other field, where the 

concern was about the appropriate use or misuse of 
that powerful force and universal acceptance of 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and other 
safety measures, there was need to work towards 
becoming a truly united community of nations. 

12. The Director General's indications regarding 
the enhanced economic prospects for nuclear 
energy in the developing world were greatly 
encouraging. His delegation had noted with interest 
the Director General's idea that, in the current 
critical energy situation, nuclear power offered 
the only alternative whereby the world's growing 
energy demand might be met. While nuclear power 
was a possible alternative to oil and other fossil 
fuel sources in the context of power only, the byproduct 
benefits of fossil fuels in the manufacture 
of, e. g. fertilizers, insecticides, plastics and 
other petrochemical products should be borne in 
mind. His delegation was not so pessimistic as to 
believe that all the fossil fuel resources of the 
world had been explored and found to fall short of 
long-term demands; tremendous unexplored deposits 
of such fuels were, he believed, yet to be 
brought to light and exploited and, for the developing 
countries, the by-products he had mentioned 
were just as important to their economies as mere 
power generation, if not more so. 
13. It was well known that the new high-yield 
varieties of a number of grain and oil crops, which 
constituted the basis for the Green Revolution, [5] 
gave their best yield through larger intakes of 
fertilizers and through adequate disease, pest and 
weed control obtained through a variety of preparations 
derived from fossil fuels. In a world already 
suffering from hunger and the threat of famine in 
the face of the population explosion, no one could 
afford to ignore those facts. The Agency should 
therefore intensify its efforts towards promoting 
the use of nuclear energy, not only to meet the 
direct needs in power, but also towards exploration 
for fuel deposits in hitherto uninvestigated areas, 
better use of fertilizers and insecticides and 
assessment of residue effects on human and animal 
health, and prevention of waste in the use of food 
and other agricultural produce. 
14. Spectacular results had been achieved by 
some Member States in applying radiation biology 
to produce high-yielding superior-quality varieties 
of a number of crops through gene mutation. The 
results of research in those areas had been found 
in many cases to apply only in the particular ecological 
setting of the work. That would suggest 
the need for co-ordination of research on an ecological 
zone basis, since it was the accepted concept 
that the answer to a problem faced by a country 
in any ecological zone usually applied through[
5] See document INFCIRC/146/Add, 1. 
GC(XVIII)/OR. 174 


out the zone. The Joint FAO/IAEA Division of 
Atomic Energy in Food and Agriculture might bear 
that idea in mind. 

15. In his statement, the Director General had 
said that, even if there was some decline in oil 
prices, electricity from nuclear power would still 
be cheaper in nearly all cases than that derived 
from coal, oil or other thermal sources and that 
the threshold point at which electricity from 
nuclear power became cheaper than that from oilfired 
plants now lay between 100 and 200 MW. [6] 
Considering the high cost of reactors of even that 
limited size and the fact that most developing 
countries could not for some time ahead aspire to 
have more than one such reactor, and also the high 
cost of transmission of power from one focal point 
to other parts of large countries (his own country 
was 1000 miles long by 1000 miles wide), research 
should be intensified towards the production of even 
smaller, less costly and more economical reactor 
units. In the meantime, however, the possibilities 
of regional co-operation in the utilization of smaller 
reactor units, as suggested by the delegate of 
Kenya, [7] should not be excluded; that idea might 
appropriately be investigated further. 
16. In view of his country's desire to acquire a 
nuclear reactor either of its own or on a regional 
basis, and in line with its obligation towards 
Member States that had already installed such units, 
his delegation associated itself with those that had 
expressed concern about the assurance of adequate 
fuel supplies, and with the suggestion that the 
Agency might appropriately serve as a channel for 
ensuring uninterrupted fuel supplies for reactors 
and other nuclear energy services in Member 
States. 
17. It would be some time before many developing 
countries could hope to attain the standards reached 
by the advanced countries in research on and application 
of nuclear energy. Until such time was 
reached, the least those countries could expect was 
to be able to benefit from the fruits of the research 
done and to utilize the results obtained in such 
areas as plant and animal production, mineral and 
hydrological surveys and diagnostic and therapeutic 
medical work. That would demand the intensification 
of information and training services to acquaint 
technicians and professionals in the various fields 
with the advances made in research and development 
of the application of nuclear energy to different 
uses and in the safety measures to be adopted 
in each case. His delegation associated itself with 
the suggestion made by the delegate of Indonesia 
that countries should be assisted to develop national 
training programmes in atomic energy research 
and technology for the application of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. [8] 

18. As had been rightly observed during the 
general debate, the wide application of nuclear 
[6] GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para, 48. 
[7] GC(XVIII)/OR. 172, para. 122, 
[8] GC(XVIII)/OR. 169, para. 51. 
-3 



GC (XVIII)/OR. 174 

energy called for intensified safety measures to 
guard against heightened radiation hazards, both 
within and outside national boundaries. Admittedly, 
safety measures were a matter for the country 
concerned and most countries respected the interests 
of the international community; nevertheless, 
his delegation felt that national action might 
appropriately be reinforced by the establishment of 

some regional or international supervisory control 
machinery. 

19. His country fully supported NPT, to which it 
was a party, and earnestly urged universal adherence 
and commitment to its terms. 
20. In conclusion, he wished to express his country's 
admiration of the excellent work done by the 
Agency over the past year, as well as appreciation 
of the services given by the Director General and 
his colleagues in carrying out their tasks. It was 
in recognition of that greatly appreciated work that 
his country had decided to increase its voluntary 
contribution to the Agency by over 100% of its 
assessed contribution. His delegation fully 
endorsed the Agency's programme for 1975-80 and 
the budget for 1975, [9] although sharing the view of 
Pakistan that the meagre share allocated to the 
Joint FAO/IAEA Division was not consonant with 
the great responsibilities it was called upon to bear 
in the present situation of world-wide food shortage 
and rapidly growing world population! 10], 
21. Lastly, he would thank the Government of 
Austria for its hospitality and for the excellent 
facilities placed at the disposal of the General 
Conference. 
22. Mr. MAKINEN (Finland) said that in the 
general debate there had been discussion of the 
more important aspects of the Agency's work. 
One such question was the scope of the Agency's 
activities with regard to the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy for the benefit of the developing 
countries. Generally speaking, such technical 
assistance, whether intended to provide those 
countries with additional resources for industrial 
power, or for other purposes, should be 
approached, not as an independent or limited 
activity, but rather in terms of their overall needs 
and the long-term planning of their entire development 
process. 
23. The events of the past two years had - perhaps 
with a force and an urgency hitherto unequalled 
- created a multiplicity of global problems, 
the consequences of which could not be accurately 
defined at the present time. They ranged from the 
impact of the incipient international energy crisis 
and the interdependence of problems connected with 
the world raw material resources, to the laws 
governing the use of the seas and the ocean floor 
and the world population and associated food problems. 
[9] See document GC(XVIII)/526 and Mod. 1. 
[10] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 170, para. 86. 
24. In the introduction to his annual report, the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, 
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, had stated that although the 
United Nations family of organizations had begun 
to play an increasingly central role in concentrating 
available information and expertise on those 
global problems, which were the result of the 
accelerating technological change, the question 
remained whether sufficient progress could be made 
in time in the practical pursuit of both short-term 
and long-term goals before such problems became 
completely unmanageable. 
25. Within that broader context, the Agency 
would do well to examine its policies, programmes 
and activities - not as an international organization 
with a predefined, limited goal of its own, but as an 
essential part of a broader United Nations system, 
which was constantly seeking to review the ways in 
which its performance and capabilities could be 
improved in the quest to find a solution to the global 
problems of today. The question should be raised, 
moreover, whether the time had not come for the 
Agency to review the need to shoulder a bigger 
responsibility than hitherto, both with regard to the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the 
further development and utilization of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
26. The Director General had drawn attention to 
the numerous problems connected with the growing 
interest in nuclear power production in all parts of 
the world. The problems involved in the use of 
nuclear power for the generation of energy had, no 
doubt, been ever-present. The impact of the 
international energy crisis had, however, brought 
out the urgency of identifying and studying those 
questions, as well as finding effective and acceptable 
solutions to them. The existence of widespread 
nuclear technological capability, and the 
increasing number of nuclear reactors in which 
plutonium was a by-product, presented serious 
risks for the international community. 
27. NPT provided a framework within which to 
develop and utilize nuclear technology in an orderly 
manner, while safeguarding against the exploitation 
of that technology for military purposes. Yet there 
still remained a number of States which had chosen 
to stay outside NPT; that fact, coupled with the 
increased demand for the use of nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes (PNE), constituted a most 
precarious balance. Serious and urgent consideration 
should therefore be given to intensifying the 
study of the use of PNEs and their broadest possible 
utilization in the interests of progress in different 
parts of the world. 
28. While much broader consideration than before 
of the problem was definitely called for in view of 
recent events, the importance of NPT itself, which 
was to come up at the Review Conference of the 
Parties to NPT in Geneva in May 1975, should be 
borne constantly in mind. As had been stated by 
the delegation of the Holy See the whole system of 
nuclear non-proliferation would remain unworkable 
as long as any great atomic Power remained 
-4 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 174 


outside it. [11] It was in the best interest of the 
world community, that NPT, one of the most important 
international agreements ever concluded in the 
field of disarmament, should command universal 
support. It was important to realize that NPT 
provided an international instrument for dealing 
with the serious matter of the exploitation of 
nuclear power for military purposes, as opposed to 
its peaceful application for economic and social 
development. It was to be hoped that the States 
party to NPT would reaffirm the importance they 
attached to it, and that it would be ratified by all 
States that had signed it before the convening of the 
Review Conference. 

29. It was in that spirit that Finland, together 
with a number of other States, had reached agreement 
on a uniform interpretation of Article III. 2 
of NPT. [12] The purpose of that agreement had 
been to initiate the safeguards required by NPT on 
exports of source or special fissionable material 
and equipment and material especially designed or 
prepared for the processing, use or production of 
such material. The Government of Finland hoped 
that other States party to NPT would embark upon 
similar commitments with regard to Article III. 2 
in the near future. 
30. The entire question of safeguards, as dealt 
with by the Director General in his statement, was 
a highly relevant one, not least from the point of 
view of making NPT more effective. Its significance, 
however, went further, since universally 
accepted and effectively applied safeguards were 
the only means by which the international 
community could envisage the responsible use of 
nuclear power and technology. It was therefore 
tempting to assume the time had come to move on 
towards a unified and single safeguards philosophy. 
The need for defining more precisely the technical 
scope and procedures for the non-NPT system of 
safeguards, as envisaged by the Director 
General, [13] was an indication of the timeliness for 
initiating those ideas. 
31. The Director General had, furthermore, 
called for increased attention to the various problems 
related to safety in the use of nuclear energy 
for industrial and other purposes. His views on 
greater international co-operation in such matters, 
more particularly, a more central role and greater 
responsibility for the Agency itself, were to be 
welcomed. Such matters certainly merited the 
attention of a major international conference, and it 
would benefit from as thorough and careful a preparation 
as possible, for which it might be necessary 
to set up a preparatory body of some sort with the 
active co-operation of the Board of Governors, 
32. Mr. ORTIZ-LOPEZ (Costa Rica) said his 
delegation was very gratified at the work being done 
[11] GC(XVin)/OR. 169, para. 101. 
[12] See document INFCIRC/209 and Addenda 1 
and 2. 
[13] GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para. 65. 
by the General Conference, which constituted an 
important occasion for the exchange of opinions 
between States from all parts of the world in regard 
to the promotion of peace, energy production, the 
development of agriculture, medicine, physics, 
chemistry and other peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. 

33. Costa Rica, as a pure democracy, was concerned 
with peaceful coexistence and in that light 
it valued any assistance it could obtain from the 
Agency to enable it to further its programmes in 
all branches of science. A number of important 
programmes were at present being implemented in 
agriculture by the Centre for Agronomic Research 
of the University of Costa Rica with Agency assistance 
in the form of experts, equipment and fellowships 
for nationals of his country to train in 
technically advanced States such as the Netherlands 
and the Federal Republic of Germany. The Centre 
for Agronomic Research was being encouraged to 
establish a regional centre in Costa Rica for the 
maintenance and repair of special electronic equipment 
required in laboratories using radioisotopes. 
An institute was being established to study environmental 
contamination with special reference to 
foodstuffs, both for home consumption and for 
export. A joint project on the use of radiations in 
food preservation would also be submitted to the 
Agency. 
34. In nuclear physics, an applied physics project 
would be implemented in his country and staff 
was being trained in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy; the School of Physics had established a 
programme of analysis using activation, X-ray 
fluorescence and neutron radiography with the 
assistance of an Agency expert. The Agency had 
approved Costa Rica's request for technical 
assistance in the form of equipment for that programme 
and also agreed to providing the services 
of an expert for one year and granting fellowships 
for the teachers at the School. The next step in the 
programme would be to train technicians in the use 
of isotopes required by Costa Rica. His country's 
most ambitious programme was on nuclear medicine 
and it had been under way since 1966 with considerable 
support from the Agency. The programme 
embraced such activities as the setting up 
of a radioisotopes laboratory, a cobalt therapy unit, 
training, the establishment of a national service for 
protection against ionizing radiations, and a filmbadge 
dosimetry service. 
35. His delegation was pleased to announce that, 
as part of the 1974 programme, nineteen Costa 
Rican scientists and technicians were training with 
Agency technical assistance in highly developed 
countries. 
36. His country felt deep concern over the repeated 
detonation of nuclear weapons in view of their 
environmental effects. The number of fish in the 
ocean was decreasing, climatic conditions were 
being affected and the stability of the human race 
was in danger. A scientific report issued in one of 
the main nuclear countries stated that through such 
explosions all forms of life might disappear. 
According to Dr. Harold Johnston of the University 
- 5 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 174 

of California the ozone protecting the earth from 
ultra-violet radiations could be damaged by nuclear 
explosions: ozone was found mainly in the lower 
stratosphere where practically all the sun's lethal 
ultra-violet rays were absorbed. The layer of 
ozone could be destroyed by chemical substances 

such as the oxides of nitrogen and Dr, Johnston 

reported that such oxides were formed by the 
enormous heat from nuclear explosions and that 
they could react with the ozone molecules. 

37. As on many previous occasions, Costa Rica 
wanted to urge nuclear Powers to accede to the 
second Protocol of the Treaty for the Prohibition of 
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Tlatelolco 
Treaty)[14]. Unfortunately, some nuclear Powers 
had so far been reluctant to sign that important 
instrument for peace, but his delegation hoped they 
would before too long identify themselves with the 
letter and spirit of the TlateLolco Treaty. 
38. His delegation supported the Agency's programme 
for 1975-80 and budget for 1975 and considered 
that the Director General and Secretariat 
were to be complimented on the clear presentation 
of the document. However, his delegation considered 
that although the level of voluntary contributions 
had been increased for the provision of 
technical assistance to developing countries, it was 
still not high enough to enable the Agency to implement 
its fundamental objective of bringing the benefits 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to developing 
countries. It was to be hoped, therefore, 
that the major Powers would accelerate their assistance 
and contributions. 
39. Whilst his delegation welcomed the increase 
in contributions in kind, it was convinced that 
additional voluntary contributions were indispensable 
for the provision of technical assistance to 
developing countries. 
40. Although the Agency's safeguards programme 
was a vital necessity, his delegation considered 
that its cost was increasing too rapidly and was 
completely out of proportion with the voluntary contributions 
for technical assistance. His delegation 
considered that the safeguards programme should 
be restructured so that additional funds could be 
made available for technical assistance, 
41. Miss LIM (Malaysia) said that, following the 
visit of an Agency mission to Malaysia in 
October 1972, a National Advisory Committee had 
been set up, with the basic responsibility of drawing 
up immediate and long-term nuclear energy 
programmes in Malaysia, as well as to exercise 
all necessary controls for the safe handling and 
disposal of radioactive substances and the related 
health and safety measures. 
42. As a result of the deliberations of the 
National Advisory Committee, there were now two 
main projects under way. The first related to the 
[14] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
establishment of an atomic research centre to 
undertake both training and research in applications 
of nuclear techniques, for which the relevant 
research reactor was to be commissioned in 1977. 
The second project was for the commissioning of 
the first Malaysian nuclear power reactor in 
1986-87, and would be based on a long-term plan to 
meet power requirements and to fully utilize existing 
viable hydro power sources within the coming 
five-year development plans, 

43. In addition to those two main projects, 
Malaysia was also considering proposals to establish 
an Atomic Energy Commission to ensure, 
among other things, the safety of nuclear power 
systems, safe management of radioactive wastes, 
and the prevention of unauthorized use of fissionable 
materials. Another plan was to carry out a 
survey for radioactive minerals under the Third 
Malaysian Development Plan. 
44. Within the context of those developments in 
Malaysia, and in other developing countries, her 
delegation fully endorsed the following activities, 
either begun or planned by the Agency in the coming 
years: the Agency's expanded role in providing 
Member States with advisory services in power 
planning and project implementation; the introduction 
of a broader nuclear power training programme 
for key project engineers and on-the-job training in 
construction and safety techniques; and the added 
responsibilities of the Agency in its intermediary 
role of ensuring nuclear fuel supplies on reasonable 
terms for Member States. 
45. There were two points to be made in that 
connection. The Director General had referred to 
the fact that the threshold point at which electricity 
from nuclear power became cheaper than from oilpowered 
plants now lay between 100 and 200 MW, 
and that nuclear plants of below 440 MW were not 
at present available on the market. Since the 
nuclear power plant requirements of the majority of 
developing countries would continue for a long time 
to be for plants below 440 MW, by reason of their 
small system capacities, the Agency was urged to 
further intensify its efforts to make such reactor 
plants available. 
46. Secondly, although the Director General's 
intention to expand the Agency's nuclear power 
training programme was very welcome, a much 
larger expansion of the programme directly by the 
Agency itself, or through appropriate arrangements 
with outside bodies possessing the necessary expertise 
was essential, in view of the fact that by the 
decade 1980-1990 half of the capacity increment of 
40 developing countries alone would be accounted 
for by nuclear power. 
47. The Malaysian delegation also welcomed the 
following measures that would benefit not only the 
developing countries, but also the more industrialized 
States: the formulation of comprehensive and 
internationally acceptable safety and reliability 
criteria; the proposal to convene a major international 
conference on the long-term prospects for 
nuclear energy and its attendant problems; and the 
expansion of Agency activities both in the field of 
-6 



GC (XV III)/OR. 174 


safeguards and in further research into environmental 
problems, such as control of nonradioactive 
pollution of soil, water and air. 

48. Grave concern had been expressed by a number 
of delegates at the dismal prospects facing 
NPT. Malaysia, which was party to NPT and had 
signed the relevant safeguards agreement, [15] 
urged States party to NPT to back up their obligations 
under the Treaty with action. It was also 
hoped that more non-nuclear-weapon States would 
become parties to NPT and carry out their obligations 
under Article III of the Treaty. For those 
reasons Malaysia attached great importance to the 
Review Conference, scheduled for May 1975. 
Furthermore, as one of the architects of the Kuala 
Lumpur Declaration expressing the determination 
of the Five States of the Association of South East 
Asia to make every effort for the recognition of 
South East Asia as a zone of peace, freedom and 
neutrality, Malaysia fully endorsed the view of the 
Director General that the experience of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty could be of benefit to other 
regions. 
49. The work of the Agency in encouraging and 
assisting the application of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes throughout the world was generally 
recognized and appreciated. Malaysia, for its 
part, would do everything it could, along with other 
States, to strengthen the role of the Agency in the 
fulfilment of its objectives. 
50 . In conclusion, her delegation wished to 
announce Malaysia's decision to join the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training in order to collaborate with 
Member States of the region in projects that would 
be of definite benefit to all States taking part in 
them. 
51. Mr. MANZ (Austria) said that the problems 
of the ever increasing need for energy in its different 
forms and of producing that energy in sufficient 
and economically feasible amounts had faced the 
world for a long time, but had gained a new actuality 
during the past year. Nuclear energy had 
become an economic reality, the importance of 
which should not be underestimated. But in order 
to define its place correctly in the overall energy 
supply, additional activities by the Agency were 
useful and necessary. 
52. His delegation, therefore, endorsed the 
Director General's call for a concentration of 
responsibilities in overall energy studies, and 
additional authority for the Agency in the area of 
economic analyses and environmental studies. It 
further welcomed the Agency's activities in the 
matter of the fuel supply for nuclear power plants, 
and especially the. co-operation with the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development in 
that field. 
53. As pointed out by the former Austrian 
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Kirchschlager, 
[15] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/182. 
before the special session of the General Assembly 
of the United Nations in May 1974, the Agency's 
programme under discussion contained many opportunities 
for increasing and intensifying its activities 
in the energy field within the framework of its 
statutory and regulatory functions, for example, 
in the area of economic analysis and environment 
studies. In that connection the co-operation of the 
Agency with the International Institute for Applied 
Systems Analysis at Laxenburg was of special 
importance, and it was hoped that the results of the 
co-operation would be published for the information 
of Member States. 

54. With regard to NPT, the Austrian delegation 
shared the feeling of regret that there was lack of 
progress in that area as shown by the fact that 
since the General Conference of the previous year 
no new country had signed NPT, and only two of 
those which had already signed had ratified it. 
55. In the safeguards field, however, certain 
headway had been made, an example of which was 
the successful discussions leading to agreement by 
a number of major exporting countries to apply a 
minimum standard of conduct in the implementation 
of Article III. 2 of NPT. For Austria's own safeguards 
system the guide on international standards 
for safeguards systems published by the Agency 
had proved particularly useful. It should also be 
mentioned, in that connection, that the safeguards 
laboratory for the use of the Agency at Seibersdorf 
would be completed by 1975. 
56. The work done by the Agency in publishing a 
guide on the physical protection of nuclear material 
was also commendable, but it would be useful if 
the standards contained in the guide could be 
further elaborated to help Member States in developing 
their own regulations. 
57. The Agency's intention to give more attention 
to questions relating to public acceptance was to be 
welcomed. The exchange of information and experience 
on a broader international basis would make 
it possible to convince the general public of the 
need for nuclear power development to meet an 
important part of the overall energy demand in 
many countries. 
58. With regard to the Agency's budget for 1975, 
it was regrettable that the cost increases for 
personnel and administration due to inflation and 
fluctuations in exchange rates only permitted limited 
expansion of the Agency's activities. Austria 
had pledged a voluntary contribution to the General 
Fund of $26 100 and had offered to make the same 
number of Type II fellowships available as in previous 
years. 
59. As far as progress in the construction of the 
Agency's permanent headquarters was concerned, 
it could be seen that the work on the office towers 
was progressing according to schedule. The construction 
of the single floors to be suspended 
between the towers, and the fitting of the facade 
were due to be started quite soon. Provided no 
unexpected incidents occurred and work could con-
7 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 174 

tinue at the present rate, the buildings would be 
ready for occupancy by 1978, as planned. 

60. In conclusion, the Austrian delegation took 
the opportunity of welcoming the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and Mauritius to 
membership of the Agency. 
CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATES TO THE 
EIGHTEENTH (1974) REGULAR SESSION 

(b) REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS 
COMMITTEE (GC(XVI]I)/538) 
61. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the draft 
resolution contained in the last paragraph of the 
report of the Credentials Committee 
(GC(XVIII)/538), the adoption of which was recommended 
by the Committee. 
62. Mr. NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia) said that 
according to the Agreement on ending the war and 
restoring the peace in Viet-Nam, concluded in 
Paris on 27 January 1973, there were two zones 
and two Governments in South Viet-Nam, the 
Provisional Revolutionary Government and the 
Saigon Administration. The latter could not 
represent South Viet-Nam at the General Conference, 
as he had already said at the meeting of the 
Credentials Committee. 
63. Mr. ANINOIU (Romania) said that, under the 
Paris Agreement, the Saigon Administration had 
not the right to represent all the South Viet-Namese 
people, thus violating the legal rights of the 
Provisional Revolutionary Government of South 
Viet-Nam. The delegation of the Saigon Administration 
had, therefore, neither the right nor the 
capacity to speak for South Viet-Nam; nor had it 
the right to assume international responsibility in 
the name of South Viet-Nam. Consequently, his 
delegation challenged the credentials provided by 
the Saigon Administration. 
64. Mr. DENES (Yugoslavia) reminded the 
Conference that the Conference of Heads of State 
or Government in Algeria had, in paragraph 35 of 
the political declaration, invited member countries 
to give their diplomatic support to the Provisional 
Revolutionary Government of South Viet-Nam as 
the sole authentic representative of the population 
of South Viet-Nam. The Government of the 
Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia strongly 
supported that stand. 
65. Mr. PLAKA (Albania) said that recognition in 
the Credentials Committee's report of the credentials 
of the representatives of the Saigon regime as 
representing South Viet-Nam was in contradiction 
with the real situation. The sole legitimate representative 
of the people of South Viet-Nam, of its 
will and aspirations, was the Provisional Revolutionary 
Government, which alone was properly 
qualified to represent that people in international 
relations, including relations with the international 
organizations. 
66. The Provisional Revolutionary Government 
had obtained wide international recognition, and its 
authority and prestige in the world was continually 
increasing, especially since it was considered as 
the authentic representative of the South Viet-
Namese people, 
67. The Saigon regime on the other hand could 
not speak on behalf of the South Viet-Namese 
people because everyone knew that it had been put 
in power to serve the neocolonialist aims of the 
United States of America in Viet-Nam and throughout 
the whole of Indochina. 
68. For those reasons the Albanian delegation did 
not recognize the credentials of the puppet Saigon 
regime, considering them to be invalid. Accordingly, 
it did not approve the relevant part of the 
Credentials Committee's report. 
69. With regard to the credentials issued by the 
minority regime of Pretoria, his delegation 
reaffirmed its well-known support for the position 
of the African countries that those credentials 
could not be recognized as valid. The racist 
regime conducted a policy of oppression based on 
racial hatred against the indigenous population, a 
policy which had been condemned by progressives 
throughout the world. The regime could not represent 
South Africa. 
70. Mr. DO HUU LONG (Viet-Nam) rejected the 
tendentious allegations of the preceding speakers. 
No article of the Paris Agreement mentioned the 
Viet Cong or qualified it as a Government or 
administration. On the contrary, the Agreement 
referred to the Government of the Republic of 
Viet-Nam as being the sole legitimate Government 
of the State of South Viet-Nam. Representing 
the main signatory of that Agreement, his delegation 
denounced all communist attempts to distort 
it to give a semblance of any kind of status 
to the Viet Cong. Under the Agreement the Viet 
Cong was considered as an opposition group that 
was to be integrated with the country's electorate 
for purposes of general elections. 

71. It was universally recognized that the Viet 
Cong was just an organization created and directed 
by the communist regime of North Viet-Nam to 
give a South Viet-Namese facade to the .communist 
armies of Hanoi which had been invading the 
Republic of Viet-Nam during the past few years. 
72. Set up by the North Viet-Namese communist 
party in Hanoi in 1970, the so-called National 
Liberation Front of South Viet-Nam survived only 
thanks to the presence of more than 500 000 North 
Viet-Namese communist troops, equipped with 
tanks, artillery and war materials, supplied by the 
communist block. In reality there was no second 
Government in Viet-Nam, but numerous expeditionary 
groups fraudulently introduced by the North 
Viet-Namese communists. 
73. Lastly, he drew attention to the fact that the 
Conference was called upon to verify the validity of 
the credentials themselves, namely that the letters 
were signed by the Head of State or the Minister of 
-8 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 174 

Foreign Affairs of the Member concerned, in 
accordance with Rule 27 of the Conference's Rules 
of Procedure. There was no question of deciding 
on the representativeness of the States themselves. 
Were that to be done, international life would 
become impossible. 

74. So as to waste no more time, he proposed 
that the report of the Credentials Committee 
should be accepted as the Committee had recommended. 
75. Mr. SIBOUEKAZ (Algeria) said that his 
delegation considered that neither the Saigon 
Government in South Viet-Nam nor the Government 
of South Africa could assume the right to 
represent the peoples of those countries. 
76. The PRESIDENT said that he assumed that 
the Conference was prepared to adopt the draft 
resolution recommended by the Credentials 
Committee at the end of document GC(XVIII)/538. 
• 77. It was so decided. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XVIII)/524, 533) 

78. The PRESDIENT drew attention to his memorandum 
in document GC(XVIII)/533 on the election 
of Members to the Board, in paragraph 3 of which 
he notified the Conference that 11 Members had to 
be elected to the Board, specifying the geographical 
areas in respect of which elections were 
required and the number of Members to be elected 
in each case. 

79. As he had just been informed that some delegations 
wished to hold further consultations before 
the elections were held, he would suspend the 
meeting for five minutes before proceeding further. 
• The meeting was suspended at 12. 30 p. m. 
and resumed at 12. 35 p. m. 
80. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to 
proceed with the election of Members to the Board. 
• 81. At the invitation of the President, a 
member of the Danish delegation and a member of 
the New Zealand delegation acted as tellers. 
• 82. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 
11 Members to the Board. 
83. The PRESIDENT announced that in view of 
the lateness of the hour and the time it would take 
to count the votes, he would adjourn the meeting. 
• The meeting rose at 1 p. m. 
-9 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
12 March 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

EIGHTEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 16-20 SEPTEMBER 1974 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 20 September 1974, at 3. 20 p. m. 

President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

17 
Election of Members to the Board of 1-17 

Governors (cont.) 

General debate and report for 1973-74 (cont. ) 18-5 6 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Spain 
18 • • 24 

Chile 
25 • • 31 

Thailand 
32 • - 35 

Portugal 
36 -- 42 

Canada 
43 -- 56 

- 
Statement by the Director General 57 • - 64 

11 
Opening date of the nineteenth (1975) 65 • - 66 
regular session 

15 The Agency's accounts for 1973 1 
67 -- 69 

16 
Amendment of the Rules of Procedure J 

18 
Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 70 -- 71 

19 
Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 72 • - 75 
for 1975 

12 
The Agency's programme for 1975-80 and " 
budget for 1975 

13 
Scale of assessment of Members' 76 - 79 
contributions for 1975 

14 

Financing of technical assistance 

20 
Closing of the session 80 - 92 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 7 October 1974. 

** GC(XVIII)/534. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XVIII)/INF/151/Rev. 2. 

74-9564 


GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 

THE RECORD 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (continued) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the General 
Conference of the results of the voting at the preceding 
meeting to elect Members to the Board of 
Governors[l]. 
• 2. The result of the election of three 
Members from the area of Latin America was as 
follows: 
Invalid votes: 3 
Abstentions: 11 
Valid votes: 208 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Brazil 70 
Venezuela 68 
Uruguay 67 
Colombia 1 
Ecuador 1 
Panama 1 

• 3. Having obtained the required majority, 
Brazil, Venezuela and Uruguay were elected to 
the Board. 
• 4. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Western Europe was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 

Abstentions: 

Valid votes: 135 

Required majority: 34 

Votes obtained: 

Spain 
Turkey 67 
Belgium 1 

• 5. Having obtained the required majority, 
Spain and Turkey were elected to the Board. 
• 6. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of Eastern Europe was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 67 
Required majority: 34 
Votes obtained: 

German Democratic 65 

Republic 

Poland 1 

Yugoslavia 1 

• 7. Having obtained the required majority, 
the German Democratic Republic was elected to 
the Board. 
• 8. The result of the election of two 
Members from the area of Africa was as follows: 
Abstentions: 7 
Valid votes: 141 
Required majority: 36 

Votes obtained: 
Zaire, Republic of 72 
Zambia 69 

• 9. Having obtained the required majority, 
the Republic of Zaire and Zambia were elected to 
the Board. 
• 10. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia 
was as follows: 
Valid votes: 74 

Required majority: 38 

Votes obtained: 

Iran 72 
Iraq 2 

• 11. Having obtained the required majority, 
Iran was elected to the Board. 
• 12. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of South East Asia and the Pacific 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 68 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Thailand 

• 13. Having obtained the required majority, 
Thailand was elected to the Board. 
• 14. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of Africa, the Middle East and South 
Asia, or South East Asia and the Pacific was as 
follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 71 
Required majority: 36 
Votes obtained: 

Iraq 53 
Arab Republic of Egypt 15 
Israel 2 
Iran 1 

• 15. Having obtained the required majority, 
Iraq was elected to the Board. 
16. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 
11 Members so elected, recalled that under 
Article VI. D of the Statute they would hold office 
from the end of the current session until the end 
of the second regular annual session of the Conference 
thereafter, in other words for a period of two 
years. 
17. He thanked the Danish and New Zealand 
delegations which had provided tellers, the two 
tellers themselves and their Secretariat assistants. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1973-74 
(GC(XVIII)/525, 532) (continued[2]) 


18. Mr. OLIVARES BAQUE (Spain), continuing 
the general debate, stressed the importance 
[1] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 174, 
paras 80-82. [2] Ibid., paras 1-60. 

GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 


nuclear energy now had as a result of the crisis 
situation which had arisen in 1973. 

19. A big effort was to be undertaken by Spain; 
industry had requested authorization to build 25 new 
reactors with a total capacity of 25 000 MW. The 
country's total installed nuclear capacity would 
therefore reach 9650 MW by 1980, 37 500 by 1990 
and 96 500 by the year 2000, A comparison of 
those figures with forecasts made prior to the 
onset of the crisis showed an increase of 20%. 
20. The use of nuclear energy for electricity 
generation raised a number of problems, such as 
the present inadequacy of known uranium reserves 
and the limited enrichment capacity, which required 
concerted action by all States. Other problems 
arose in connection with nuclear safety; safety 
standards and codes needed to be adopted and 
updated to keep pace with technological advances; 
likewise, a watchful eye had to be kept on environmental 
protection and radioactive waste disposal 
in order to win popular acceptance for applications 
of nuclear energy. In all those areas, international 
action was essential; no State could dream of 
finding partial solutions to problems of that kind. 
The Agency should devote a significant part of its 
activities to those problems in addition to technical 
assistance. 

21. His delegation had been surprised at the 
comments made by the Director General concerning 
several international treaties and the attitude 
adopted by States towards those treaties. Such 
comments, however deserving of respect, were 
open to interpretation as criticism of the policy 
adopted by Member States in exercising their 
sovereign rights; it was not for the Secretariat to 
express in public any opinion on that question, 
which was one outside its competence. 
22. Advances in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy throughout the world, together with technical 
assistance to the developing countries in those 
activities, meant for the Agency a steady expansion 
and growing complexity in its work; accordingly, 
if a vastly inflated budget or general paralysis was 
to be avoided, there was need for efficient administration, 
fair assessment of objectives and 
judicious balance as between the various Agency 
programmes. 
23. The Agency had an excellent staff which had 
given proof of its devotion and competence. The 
needs and aspirations of staff members and their 
relations with the organization itself had to be 
given full attention if that enthusiasm, so essential 
for the Agency's smooth operation, was not to be 
quenched. In any case, it would be regrettable if 
the impression were given that those problems 
were not being adequately considered or were 
being settled unilaterally. 
24. At the seventeenth regular session of the 
General Conference, his delegation had drawn 
attention to the importance it attached to the 
membership of the Board of Governors. [3] It 
[3] See document GC(XVII)/OR. 164, para. 66. 
urged that the Statute should be strictly observed, 

i. e., that the outgoing Board of Governors should 
designate the Member States most advanced in 
nuclear technology; in its opinion, automatic 
reappointment of Members to the Board with no 
account being taken of their state of nuclear 
development, would be tantamount simply to converting 
"designated members" into "permanent 
members", and manifestly that would be contrary 
to the Statute. 
25. Mr. VALDES (Chile) said that his country, in 
the preliminary phase, had installed a research 
reactor and related laboratories on the basis of 
which it would be able to move on to the second 
phase of its activities in the nuclear field. In order 
to attain its set objectives, Chile was making provision 
for the training of its own key scientific and 
technical staff, was building up a technological 
infrastructure and was evaluating its resources 
and reserves in nuclear minerals. 
2 6. The reactor at the La Reina Research Centre 
would come into operation during the current year 
and the work programmes to be carried out had 
been drawn up with a view to using those installations 
for the development of the country's scientific 
and technical activities; in that regard, his delegation 
wished to stress the importance to his country 
of the assistance given by the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Agency. 
27. Priority had been given by the Government of 
Chile to a nuclear minerals prospection plan for 
the implementation of which it had established a 
programme of work to be carried out by the specialist 
personnel of various public bodies, under a 
co-ordinated administration. 
28. Chile understood fully the nature of its power 
situation. It would be recalled that in 1972 the 
Agency had made a study in 14 developing Member 
States on the introduction of nuclear power stations 
for the purpose of supplementing electricity generation 
by conventional means. [4] The conclusions 
of the Agency report confirmed those reached in 
the preliminary studies made in Chile and indicated 
the conditions in which nuclear power stations 
might come into operation as from 1984. 
29. The Chilean Atomic Energy Commission was 
paying particular attention to the drafting of nuclear 
legislation to constitute the basic text on which 
nuclear safety and the national nuclear safeguards 
system would be based, with due account taken of 
international agreements in force. The Commission 
was also concerning itself with the application of 
nuclear techniques in such sectors as hydrology 
and agriculture, particularly in arid zones; it was 
also taking a particular interest in food preservation 
by radiation. In that work, it had the benefit of 
UNDP and Agency assistance in the form of expert 
services, fellowships and material and equipment. 
30. As a result of the effort it was making in the 
nuclear field, his country should be able within the 
[4] See document GC(XVII)/506. 
-3 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 

next 25 years to pass through the difficult stages in 
its economic development, and the Agency's technical 
programme should help towards easier 
achievement of its objectives. His delegation therefore 
shared the views expressed by the French delegation 
concerning the priority that should be given 
by the Agency to assistance to developing countries 
in their use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 


31. Lastly, he was glad to be able to announce 
that his Government had decided to ratify the 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America (the Tlatelolco Treaty}[5], 
32. Mr. TALABHAT (Thailand) said that he 
unreservedly endorsed the Agency's annual report. 
He also welcomed the unremitting efforts of the 
Agency in the matter of technical assistance to the 
developing countries, despite its financial difficulties 
and the monetary crisis affecting every country 
in the world. Thailand was particularly affected 
by the monetary crisis in that the latter was aggravated 
by the rise in petrol prices. In face of that 
critical situation, his Government, with help and 
technical assistance from the Agency and the 
United States of America, had decided as a first 
step to build a nuclear power station and, in the 
longer term, more installations of the kind. He 
would like to express his Government's full appreciation 
of that help and assistance. 
33. The uranium-235 and enriched uranium to be 
supplied by the United States under the Thailand 
project would of course be used only for purely 
peaceful and humanitarian purposes. It was his 
Government's intention to observe the agreements 
concluded with the Agency on every point, in 
particular the safeguards agreement in connection 
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT)[6], 
34. His Government had always scrupulously 
fulfilled its financial obligations towards the Agency 
and was making voluntary contributions in accordance 
with its means. 
35. Lastly, his delegation wished to pay a tribute 
to Mr. Goswami, Deputy Director General for 
Technical Assistance and Publications, both on 
personal grounds and for the work he had done, 
prior to his leaving the Agency at the end of the 
year. 
36. Mr. de CASTILHO (Portugal) said that, after 
many years of withdrawal of the country from the 
international scene, the new Portuguese Government 
was firmly resolved to restore Portugal to 
its place in the concert of nations. 
37. The change of political regime that had taken 
place on 25 April 1974, in sanctioning the return of 
the Portuguese people to a public life founded on 
[5] Reproduced in the United Nations Treaty 
Series, Vol. 634, No. 9068. 
[6] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
democratic principles, had likewise marked its 
return to international life. The Portuguese 
Government wished to enter into diplomatic relations 
with all countries. As to the former 
Portuguese dependencies, on 2 September last it 
had signed the Lusaka agreements with representatives 
of FRELIMO, making provision for the 
progressive transfer of powers in Mozambique, 
and, on 10 September, it had officially recognized 
the independence of Guinea-Bissau, whose representatives 
were taking part at that very moment in 
the discussions of the twenty-ninth session of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations. 

38. The Portuguese Government, with the firm 
intention of lending its most active support to the 
cause of peace and international security and of 
co-operating to that end with all international 
organizations, intended to contribute to the important 
and fruitful activities of the Agency to the full 
extent of its possibilities. 
39. The Portuguese Government, aware of the 
possible implications of the non-military uses of 
nuclear energy, looked with favour on the work 
undertaken by the Agency to harmonize and 
strengthen international legislation on safety and on 
the defining of civil responsibility for damage 
resulting from the use of nuclear energy. 
40. Its willingness to adhere to the Agency's 
safeguards system was reaffirmed by the fact 
that it had placed its research reactor under the 
control of the Agency's inspectors. 
41. The Portuguese Government was ready to 
carry out its nuclear power programme, which 
provided for the construction of a first nuclear 
station towards the beginning of the 1980s. A 
capacity of more than 7000 MW should be installed 
between now and the end of the century. 
42. In conclusion, his delegation unreservedly 
endorsed the annual report and the Agency's 
accounts for 1973, as well as the proposed programme 
for 1975-80 and budget for 1975. [71 It 
would like, however, to see the Agency give a 
larger share than in previous years to its basic 
technical assistance activities. 
43. Mr. BEESLEY (Canada) congratulated 
Mauritius on having become a Member of the 
Agency and welcomed the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea, whose admission would certainly 
contribute to strengthening the principle of universality 
with which the Agency and the organs of the 
United Nations were imbued, and promote peaceful 
relations between North Korea and South Korea. 
44. He then paid tribute to the Director General 
for the ability with which he had accomplished his 
task and for the constructive initiatives he had 
taken during the past 12 months and pledged the 
Canadian Government's full support to him. 
[7] See documents GC(XVIII)/5'25, 527 and 526 
and Mod. 1 respectively. 
-4 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 


45. During those 12 months, the prospect of a 
shortage of fossil fuels had suddenly made the 
economics of nuclear energy more attractive for 
many countries. However, the optimism which the 
demand for that form of energy might arouse must 
not cloud a number of concerns, some of which the 
Director General had highlighted in his statement 
and about which he himself wished to make some 
observations. 
46. First of all, with regard to power reactor 
safety and environmental protection, the Canadian 
Government had already made it clear that it 
welcomed the Secretariat's initiatives in that 
field, but a great deal remained to be done to 
prepare an adequate set of international standards 
and guidelines quickly for all countries using or 
planning to construct nuclear power plants. The 
'Canadian Government would provide cost-free 
experts for the working groups and advisory 
committees. It was important that the documents 
produced should take into account contributions 
from all States which had already made detailed 
studies of those matters. 
47. On the question of waste management, which 
was closely related to the preceding question, his 
Government welcomed the fact that the Agency had 
already begun to discharge its responsibilities 
under the Convention on the Prevention of Marine 
Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 
(the London Convention) [8] by preparing, albeit 
still only in provisional form, the definition of 
wastes whose dumping was prohibited and the initial 
recommendations applicable to authorized dumping. 
A great deal had still to be done before those 
definitions and recommendations were given their 
final form, but his delegation was confident that 
the Agency would work on them with the greatest 
care. Such intensified efforts would in fact be 
essential in view of the rapid expansion of nuclear 
power that could be expected in the coming years. 
48. The Canadian delegation, like the Japanese 
delegation, considered that the drawing up of 
standards for the disposal of radioactive wastes 
should not be left exclusively to individual countries, 
but should be dealt with at the international 
level to ensure the protection of man and the 
environment. At present, new waste management 
sites in Canada were required to be designed so 
that containers of radioactive substances could be 
retrieved if desired. Permanent sites for them 
were not at present contemplated, nor was the 
authorization of the dumping of radioactive wastes 
into the sea. Many years of study were still 
necessary before the permanent disposal of significant 
amounts of radioactivity could be safely 
permitted. 
49. The multiplication of nuclear facilities also 
entailed the risk of abuse of fissionable material. 
The Canadian delegation accordingly agreed with 
the Director General that the time had come to 
examine the possibility of preparing an international 
[8] Reproduced in document INFCTRC/205. 
agreement on the implementation of standards for 
the physical protection of nuclear material. [9] It 
associated itself with those delegations, such as 
those of the Federal Republic of Germany, the 
Netherlands and the United States of America, 
which had called for a careful study of that question. 
That was a problem which, like those which had 
been discussed, required co-ordinated action both 
at the national and international levels. The most 
useful course might be for the Agency to convene 
a panel of experts which would be instructed to 
examine how the international implementation of 
recommendations concerning the physical protection 
of nuclear matter, prepared by the Agency, could 
be achieved. 

50. He then spoke of the concern he felt about the 
current situation in respect of the measures for 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
As the delegate of France had said, there were no 
grounds for drawing undue satisfaction from the 
Agency's statistics on safeguards agreements that 
had been concluded and on the amount of material 
subject to safeguards. The Canadian Government 
was one of many gravely concerned by the explosion 
of a nuclear device in May 1974 in India. The 
delegate of India had affirmed that the explosion 
had been for peaceful purposes and that India had 
not violated any treaty in conducting it. In the 
Canadian Government's opinion, it was impossible 
from a technical point of view to distinguish between 
explosions for peaceful and for military purposes. 
It was opposed to any proliferation of nuclear 
explosive capability, regardless of the purpose 
intended. The prevention of proliferation must be 
a first priority of the world community. 

51. Like many others, the Canadian delegation 
considered that the most widespread possible 
ratification of NPT was the best means of attaining 
that vital objective. However, it also agreed with 
the Director General that a more widespread 
acceptance of the Treaty would depend in the first 
place on the determination of depositary Governments. 
Those depositaries must continue their 
efforts to get Article VI implemented. Although 
the nuclear Powers must not remain inactive, it 
was no less necessary for the other countries to 
contribute to a peaceful world by preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Canadian 
Government had set an example by resolutely 
refusing to enter the nuclear weapons production 
field, by ratifying NPT and supporting the Agency's 
safeguards system. It was encouraging to note 
that while views might differ concerning the 
Treaty's merits or demerits, no one had come out 
in support of nuclear weapons proliferation. It was 
to be hoped that all the countries which had acceded 
to NPT, and perhaps others, would make the most 
of the opportunity which would be provided by the 
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (the 
Review Conference) to be held in Geneva in 
May 1975, to strengthen the system set up to 
prevent proliferation. 

[9] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 168, para. 63. 
-5 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 

52. As regards the positive measures that had 
been taken during the past year either by the Board 
of Governors or by the major supplier States with 
regard to the application of international safeguards, 
particularly under NPT, it had to be 
accepted that a great deal of work remained to be 
done to guarantee that nuclear materials, equipment 
and technology supplied under international 
co-operation agreements would be used exclusively 
for peaceful purposes. For its part, the Canadian 
Government considered that the obligations it had 
assumed by acceding to NPT precluded it from 
making nuclear material, equipment and engineering 
services available to countries non-party to NPT 
unless those countries undertook that such material, 
equipment or services would not be used to 
produce a device which could be used for nuclear 
explosions. 
53. In the opinion of the Canadian delegation, the 
question of safeguards was related to that of 
technical assistance. Nothing was more dangerous 
than to claim, as was sometimes done in the 
discussions of the Agency's organs, that there was 
some kind of incompatibility between technical 
assistance and safeguards activities. Of course, 
the costs of implementing safeguards were growing 
and would continue to grow. But technical assistance 
and activities for the benefit of the developing 
countries were also growing and must continue to 
do so. It was encouraging to note that thanks to 
the preferential system of financing safeguards 
expenditures, those costs did not constitute an 
undue burden for developing countries. His delegation 
considered that the safeguards system, far 
from being a rival of technical assistance, was a 
necessary condition for facilitating international 
co-operation in the nuclear field, since there was 
not a responsible nation in the world which did not 
wish to ensure that the assistance it provided in the 
field of nuclear energy would be used for peaceful 
purposes. 
54. The Canadian delegation welcomed the fact 
that the Agency was pursuing its discussions with 
the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (IBRD) for financing projects 
concerning nuclear power and that IBRD was 
adopting a more positive attitude in that connection. 
The dimension of the capital requirements of 
projects of that kind was such that the financing 
institutions like IBRD were required to play an 
increasing role in the developing countries, whose 
balance of payments was seriously affected by the 
increase in the price of oil. The Canadian 
Government also hoped, as a major contributor to 
UNDP, that in coming years the developing countries 
themselves would give a much higher priority 
to nuclear energy projects in the country programming 
system, and that UNDP would make greater 
resources available to the Agency for projects of 
that kind. 
55. The Canadian delegation thought that the 
Agency had an important role to play in assisting 
developing countries to obtain access to the major 
financing sources. The Agency should also provide 
them with increasing assistance under the many 
programmes financed from the Regular Budget and 
through technical assistance financed by voluntary 
contributions. That was why the Canadian Government 
intended substantially to increase its contribution 
to the General Fund the following year and 
why it had approved the 50% increase in the target 
proposed by the Board of Governors. 

56. The accelerated development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in both the developed and 
developing countries would not fail to give rise to 
complex and urgent problems. That was precisely 
why an organization such as the Agency was needed, 
providing both a forum for seeking solutions and a 
mechanism for implementing those solutions internationally. 
He believed that an organization which 
had produced the international safeguards system a 
system of control and inspection which was 
unique in the history of international co-operation = 
was in a good position to solve the major problems 
that currently confronted it. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

57. The DIRECTOR GENERAL thanked delegates 
who had participated in the general debate for their 
positive and constructive comments on the Agency's 
recent work and its programme for 1975-80. The 
Secretariat had taken careful note of the many 
concrete suggestions made by Member States and 
would do its best to take them into account as the 
programme was carried out. Several delegates had 
suggested that in future the annual report should 
cover a period that coincided with the calendar 
(and budgetary) year. That possibility would be 
studied in the light of the advantages and disadvantages 
entailed. 
58. Members had confirmed the Secretariat's 
choice of four main programme priorities, namely 
nuclear power, nuclear safety, waste management 
and safeguards. The general debate had shown that 
an impressive number of developing countries had 
ambitious plans for nuclear power plants and that 
the Member States which were most advanced in 
the nuclear field were willing to offer their assistance, 
particularly in the training of specialists. 
Many States would be turning to the Agency for 
assistance as they introduced or expanded their 
nuclear power programmes. The Agency would 
have to carry out market surveys and, in addition, 
it would need to be represented at international 
meetings dealing with energy questions. 
59. It had become obvious that much remained to 
be done to implement an integrated fuel cycle; the 
Agency's role in that respect would be studied in 
greater detail and the major conference on nuclear 
power planned for 1977 would provide an excellent 
opportunity for reviewing that situation. The 
Agency was ready to assist Members to work out 
the legal and safety regulations that would be 
required when nuclear energy was used for the 
propulsion of merchant ships. 
60. The general debate had shown that Members 
wanted to develop nuclear power without harming 
the environment. For its part, the Agency would 
continue to follow the advice of the best experts on 
-6 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 

the subject, for example the International Commission 
on Radiological Protection (ICRP) and the 
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects 
of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR). In that regard, 
he was grateful for the support given to the 
expanded nuclear safety programme. 

61. The effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards 
and the future of the regime of the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons had been commented on 
extensively, and it was encouraging to note that, 
on the whole, delegations were in favour of taking 
steps to strengthen NPT. The Review Conference 
in 1975 would enable the situation to be assessed. 
62. It had emerged from the general debate that 
the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions could not 
be treated as an ordinary application of nuclear 
energy. If that technology came into practical use, 
international arrangements would be required 
according to NPT and they should be made within 
the framework of the Agency. 
63. The special interest shown by developing 
countries in the food and agricultural programme 
would encourage the Agency to try to find additional 
resources for financing it, in particular from the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations and individual Member States. 
64. The Agency had a very special mandate and 
only limited resources with which to carry it out. 
The current session of the Conference had helped 
to determine what activities it was capable of 
carrying out with the greatest effect. 
OPENING DATE OF THE NINETEENTH (1975) 
REGULAR SESSION 

65. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that 
the General Committee had asked him to put forward 
its recommendation that the opening date of the 
nineteenth regular session should be Monday, 
22 September 1975. 
• 66. That recommendation was accepted. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1973 
(GC(XVIII)/536) 

AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE 
(GC(XVIII)/537) 

67. Mr. RAMIREZ del RIO (Peru), Rapporteur 
of the Administrative and Legal Committee, 
introduced the Committee's reports on the Agency's 
accounts for 1973 (GC(XVIII)/536) and on amendment 
of the Rules of Procedure (GC(XVIII)/537). 
• 68. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XVIII)/536 was adopted. 
• 69. The draft resolution annexed to document 
GC(XVIII)/537 was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 

70. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members and 
two alternates elected by the Conference. The 
members were at present Mr. Belacik 
(Czechoslovakia) and Mr. Bittencourt (Brazil), 
the alternates being Mr. Clancy (Australia) and 
Mr. Taliani (Italy). Since Mr. Bela'cik alone was 
in a position to continue to serve on the Committee, 
the Conference had to elect one new member and 
two new alternate members. He suggested that 
Mr. von Schenck (Switzerland) be elected as a 
member of the Committee and Mr. Ad£n (Argentina) 
and Mr. Fell (United Kingdom) as alternate 
members. 
• 71. Mr. von Schenck (Switzerland) was 
elected a member of the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee; Mr. Ad<§n (Argentina) and Mr. Fell 
(United Kingdom) were elected alternate members. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL 
FUND FOR 1975 (GC(XVIII)/53l/Rev. 4) 


72. The PRESIDENT referred the Conference to 
document GC(XVIII)/53l/Rev. 4, in which the 
Director General stated that, by 6 p. m. on 
19 September, pledges of voluntary contributions to 
the General Fund for 1975 had been made by 
54 Members in an amount equivalent to about 
$ 2 684 000. In the meantime, one more Member, 
Albania, had informed the Director General of its 
undertaking to make a contribution of $1950. [10] 
Fifty-five Member States were therefore pledged to 
contribute a total amount of around $2 686 000, 
which was well short of the target of $4. 5 million 
recommended to the Conference by the Board[ll]. 
Nevertheless, it was noteworthy that several 
Members which had made generous contributions to 
the General Fund in previous years were not yet in 
a position to make known their contributions for 
next year, so there was good reason to believe that 
the amount pledged would soon be significantly 
increased. 
73. It was also to be noted that a number of 
Members had pledged sums representing percentages 
of the target well above their expected base 
rates of assessment for the Regular Budget for 
1975. In addition, some other Members had 
pledged contributions for the first time. 
74. The situation seemed to indicate, however, 
that not more than 70% of the Agency's membership 
intended to make a voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund for 1975. It was therefore necessary 
to make a special appeal to the remaining Members, 
for only if all collaborated would the target of 
$4.5 million be reached and the Agency then be 
able to respond to a reasonable extent to the 
requests for technical assistance that would 
[10] See also para. 88 below. 
[11] See document GC(XVIII)/526, para. 30. 
-7 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 

undoubtedly be made by the developing countries 
in 1975. 

75. Once the further pledges already expected 
had been communicated to him, the Director 
General would be in a position to send a letter to 
all Member States, stating the exact position and 
earnestly requesting them to make the contributions 
required to reach or, if possible, exceed the 
target. 
THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME FOR 1975-80 AND 
BUDGET FOR 1975 (GC(XVIII)/539) 

SCALE OF ASSESSMENT OF MEMBERS' 
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1975 (GC(XVIII)/540) 

FINANCING OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
(GC(XVIII)/541) 

76. Mr. POPESCU (Romania), Rapporteur of 
the Programme, Technical and Budget Committee, 
introduced the Committee's reports on the Agency's 
programme for 1975-80 and budget for 1975 
(GC(XVIII)/539), the scale of assessment of 
Members' contributions for 1975 (GC(XVIII)/540) 
and the financing of technical assistance 
(GC(XVIII)/541). 
• 77. Draft Resolution A (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1975), draft resolution B 
(Operational Budget allocations for 1975) and draft 
resolution C (The Working Capital Fund in 1975), 
all referred to in the Annex to document 
GC(XVIII)/539, were adopted. 
• 78. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XVIII)/540 was adopted. 
• 79. The draft resolution annexed to document 
GC(XVIII)/541 was adopted. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

80. Mr. SETHNA (India) paid tribute to the 
President for the admirable manner in which he had 
guided the discussions. Coming from an Asian 
country himself, he was particularly pleased with 
the results of the session, the work of which had 
been brought to a successful conclusion under the 
expert direction of its President, who was also from 
an Asian country. 
81. Mr. FELICKI (Poland) congratulated the 
President on behalf of Bulgaria, the Byelorussian 
SSR, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic 
Republic, Hungary, Mongolia, the Ukrainian SSR, 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and his own 
delegation on the manner in which he had discharged 
his duties. The results achieved marked a step 
forward in the history of the Agency and would 
always be associated with the distinguished personage 
of the President. 
82. He also wished to thank all the members of 
the Secretariat for their assistance during the 
session, which had contributed to its success. 
83. Mr. FERNANDINI (Peru), acting as spokesman 
for the Latin American countries, thanked the 
President, whose country was spiritually linked by 
its history of Spanish culture with the Latin 
American countries. Because of the high degree of 
competence of its President the Conference had 
been able to carry out the tasks entrusted to it. 
He also wished to thank the Director General and 
his staff. 
84. Mr. de LA ROCHEFORDIERE (France), 
speaking on behalf of France, the States Members 
of the European Communities and other Members 
in Western Europe, thanked the President warmly 
for the courtesy and firmness with which he had 
guided the work of the Conference. The Conference 
had for the first time been able to complete its 
session in a very short period of time, while still 
giving consideration to the many problems on its 
agenda. Thanks to the diligence of the President, 
the results achieved by the Conference marked a 
step towards greater fulfilment of the Agency's 
responsibilities. 
85. Mr. DENES (Yugoslavia) noted that the 
delegate of Poland had spoken on behalf of the 
countries of Eastern Europe and the socialist 
countries, but had omitted to mention the Federative 
Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia. To make good 
that omission, he wished to associate his delegation 
with the words of gratitude already addressed 
to the President, the Director General and the 
Secretariat. 
86. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) was pleased 
to thank the President on behalf of the States 
belonging to the Organization of African Unity for 
the manner in which he had discharged his duties 
as President of the Conference. He also wished to 
express his warm congratulations to the Director 
General and to the Secretariat. 
87. The PRESIDENT thanked all the delegates who 
had spoken on behalf of their States or their regions 
for the complimentary words they had addressed 
to him. He also thanked the Director General, the 
Secretary of the Conference and other members of 
the Secretariat for the manner in which they had 
performed their duties. The success of the session 
was not due to the President alone, and he thanked 
the delegates for their spirit of co-operation and 
the wise advice they had offered. 
88. He noted that Members had promised generous 
contributions to the General Fund, even though it 
had not been possible as yet to reach the target of 
$4. 5 million. To what he had said earlier on that 
subject[12] he wished to add that Algeria would be 
making a voluntary contribution of $3600 for 1975. 
89. He had been particularly pleased to welcome 
two new Members of the Agency, the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea and Mauritius. 
90. Tribute was due to Mr. Goswami for the zeal 
and devotion he had displayed in carrying out his 
[12] See para. 72 above. 
-8 



GC(XVIII)/OR. 175 


duties as Deputy Director General for Technical 
Assistance and Publications. Finally, he wished 
to thank all delegates once more for their unflaggi 
attention and their spirit of comprehension. 

91. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he then invited delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for one 
minute. 
92. The PRESIDENT declared the eighteenth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
• The meeting rose at 5. 40 p. m. 
-9 



