GC 


GC(XIX)/OR. 176 

International Atomic Energy Agency 30 December 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Monday, 22 September 1975, at 3. 15 p.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) 
President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
Opening of the session 1-4 
Election of officers and appointmentof the General Committee 
5-1 3 
Applications for membership of the Agency 14-2 0 
Statement by the Director General 21-5 9 
Statement by the Representative of theSecretary-General of the United Nations 
60 68 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1975. 
** GC(XIX)/542. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC{XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 
75-9518 


GC(XIX)/OH. 176 

THE RECORD 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the 
nineteenth regular session of the General 
Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure he invited the delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
. All present rose and stood in silence for one 
minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
those present, particularly Mr. Veselsky, 
Secretary of State in the Federal Chancellery of 
the Republic of Austria, who was honouring the 
opening meeting of the session with his presence. 
4. He, (the Temporary President), was very 
happy to return to Vienna, where he had spent a 
number of years as a member of the Agency's 
staff. During that time he had participated in the 
Secretariat's work of providing technical assistance 
to the developing Members of the Agency; 
now, as a retiring President of the Conference 
who happened to be the delegate of such a Member, 
he was in a position to put on record how greatly 
those Members appreciated the technical assistance 
they received from the Agency. In view of 
the current economic situation it was understandably 
difficult for the Agency to provide all 
the help that was so badly needed. It was nevertheless 
doing its best, as could be seen from the 
fact that to meet the developing countries' need for 
training in the installation and use of nuclear 
power equipment it had, within the space of six 
months, established and started to implement a 
detailed programme of courses on the planning and 
implementation of nuclear power projects. In the 
critical period through which the world was at 
present passing the Agency was thus succeeding 
fairly well in carrying out its statutory functions. 

ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT 

OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

5. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President of the 
Conference. 
6. Mr. PETRI (Sweden) nominated Mr. Felicki, 
the delegate of Poland. Mr. Felicki had been 
Chairman of the Polish Atomic Energy Commission 
since 1973. Graduating from the Technical 
University of Warsaw in 1952, he had since then 
been a member of the teaching staff of that 
establishment. For some years he had been 
Counsellor to the Secretariat of the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) in Moscow 
and, as such, had participated in the co-ordination 
of research and study programmes. In addition, 
Mr. Felicki was the author of many scientific 
publications, relating in particular to the theory 
of information and its applications, the technology 
of automatic control and the organization of research. 

7. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary) and 
Mr. SIRRY (Egypt) supported the nomination. 
. 8, Mr. Felicki (Poland) was elected 
President of the General Conference for its 
nineteenth regular session by acclamation. 

. Mr. Felicki (Poland) took the Chair. 

9. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for 
the confidence they had shown in him in unanimously 
electing him to that important office. He 
saw his election as a tribute to his country which, 
in co-operation with the socialist States and all 
peace-loving countries, was trying to develop the 
use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. He 
appealed to all delegates to lend him their support 
in striving for the success of the session which 
had just opened, 
10. He recalled that, under Rule 34 of the Rules 
of Procedure, he had to propose to the General 
Conference for election, the names of eight Vice-
Presidents and the name of a Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole, In accordance with 
Rule 40, he had also to propose for election five 
additional members of the General Committee. 
All those elected would hold office until the close 
of the session, 
11. He accordingly proposed that the delegates 
of the following States should be elected as the 
eight Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: 
Brazil, the Federal Republic of Germany, Iran, 
Japan, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, the United States of America and Zambia. 
He proposed Miss P.G. Lim (Malaysia) as 
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole. Lastly, 
as additional members of the General Committee, 
he proposed Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, 
India and Venezuela. 
. 12. The General Conference accepted the 
President's proposals. 

. 13. The PRESIDENT declared the General 
Committee duly appointed in compliance with 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure. 

APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY (GC(XIX)/543, 552 and 553) 

. 14. The Conference adopted the draft 
resolution in document GC(XIX)/543 approving 
the United Republic of Tanzania for membership 
of the Agency. 

. 15. The Conference adopted the draft 
resolution in document GC(XDC)/552 approving 
the United Arab Emirates for membership of the 
Agency. 

. 16. The Conference adopted the draft 
resolution in document GC(XIX)/553 approving 
Qatar for membership of the Agency. 

-2 



GC(XDC)/OR. 176 


17. Mr. AL KHATER (Qatar) thanked the delegates 
for unanimously supporting his country's 
application for membership of the Agency. Qatar 
would do everything in its power to discharge its 
obligations under the Agency's Statute. 
18. Mr. VITTA (United Republic of Tanzania) 
expressed his gratitude to the delegates who had 
unanimously approved his country's membership 
of the Agency. In solemnly undertaking to discharge 
its functions as a Member of the Agency to 
the best of its ability, his country was not without 
hope of gaining benefits from membership. Since 
its economy was basically rural, Tanzania placed 
stress on the development of its agriculture and 
was therefore particularly interested in the agricultural 
applications of nuclear science and technology. 
Furthermore, it also hoped to receive 
assistance from the Agency in geological prospecting 
and in the study of its water resources. 
Lastly, Tanzania took a keen interest in the medical 
applications of nuclear science and the university 
medical department had already embarked on 
research in the applications of radioisotopes for 
diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. 
19. Tanzania had no plans for the construction 
of nuclear power stations in the near future, but it 
intended to keep abreast of the progress made in 
that field in countries with socio-economic conditions 
comparable with its own. 
20. Mr. ALMAZROI (United Arab Emirates) 
thanked the delegates for having approved his 
country's membership of the Agency, together 
with that of Qatar and Tanzania. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

21. The DIRECTOR GENERAL recalled that 
nuclear energy was coming of age, with the present 
year marking the twentieth anniversary of the first 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
which opened at Geneva on 8 August 1955. That 
Conference had led to the fulfilment of the desire 
of President Eisenhower that all countries of the 
world should be able to benefit from the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy through the medium of an 
international organization - the organization subsequently 
to become the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. 
22. For some years the attitude of the'public to 
nuclear power has been marked by a great deal of 
controversy, and the problem now had to be seen 
in the light of the more general debate that had 
grown up about the quality of life. The Agency had 
sought to provide all those involved in the debate 
with a forum and to supply them with factual 
information. 
23. With regard to the availability of and demand 
for energy, the intensive surveys that were being 
conducted in many industrialized countries had 
still not led to any definite conclusions. There 
was a consensus, however, that the demand for 
energy would continue to increase. All countries 
would need energy in increasing quantity in order 
to preserve or improve their standard of living 
and would be compelled to resort more and more 
to raw materials of poorer quality or recycled 
scrap material. Not even the savings achieved by 
using procedures that consumed less energy, or 
the increased efficiency of the thermodynamic 
cycle and the use of low-grade heat, would avail 
to maintain supply at the same level as demand. 

24. As far as energy resources were concerned, 
estimates remained inconclusive. It was clear 
that the optimistic statements made regarding the 
future use of fusion, solar, geothermal or wind 
power would have to be thoroughly revised both 
because of the extensive development work still 
needed and because of inaccurate estimates of the 
potential energy available, especially in the case 
of wind power. Fossil fuel was still by far the 
most important source of energy for immediate 
use. But it was still not known for sure to what 
extent the combustion products from fossil fuels 
influenced the environment and a great deal more 
research in that area would need to be done before 
the permissible limits could be established. 
25. The surveys to which he had referred all 
concluded that nuclear energy was the only 
alternative to fossil fuel in the immediate future. 
At the present time it was thought that, within ten 
years, it would account for 20% of the total 
electrical energy produced in the world. Installed 
nuclear capacity was now about 85 000 MW(e), 
distributed among 19 countries. The requirements 
of most of the developing countries had now 
emerged fairly clearly and gave an idea of the 
demands that would be placed upon the Agency over 
the next few years. 
26. Uranium reserves available at less than 
$30/lb were limited to some 3. 5 million tons, and 
since a 1000 MW(e) thermal reactor used up about 
5000 tons of uranium during a lifetime of 30 years, 
it could easily be seen that the present known 
resources would supply only 700 reactors. It 
was clearly necessary, therefore, to introduce the 
use of breeder reactors on a large scale if the era 
of fission energy was not to end fairly soon. Considerations 
of that kind had in fact led the Agency 
to support uranium prospecting operations in 20 countries, 
including five large United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) projects. 
27. The public debate on broad utilization of 
nuclear power was focused on three main issues: 
the risks associated with reactor accidents and 
the reliability of nuclear reactors; the disposal 
of radioactive waste; and the safeguarding of 
nuclear materials, mainly plutonium, to prevent 
their diversion for military or terrorist 
activities. 
28. During the past year the Agency had intensified 
its efforts in those three areas. The risks 
of potential accidents had been examined by 
Professor Rasmussen in a well-known report, and 
the Agency was at present engaged, in collaboration 
with the International Institute of Applied Systems 
Analysis (IIASA), in analysing public reaction to 
the various technological risks to which modern 
3 



GC(XIX)/OR. 176 

society was exposed. Furthermore, IIASA was 
planning to undertake a methodological comparison, 
with the assistance of the Agency and the 
World Health Organization (WHO), of all available 
and future energy options. That study, for which 
IIASA was hoping to receive assistance from the 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 
would make possible a quantitative evaluation of 
the effects of the production and use of energy on 
the environment. The Agency, in turn, was 
working with UNEP on a more general comparison 
of the detrimental effects on the environment of 
various systems of energy production. Finally, 
the Agency had been invited by UNEP to take part, 
next February or March, in a panel specifically 
devoted to the impact of nuclear energy on the 
environment. It intended to bring to UNEP's 
attention the projects to which he had referred, 
and would stress that the consequences of nuclear 
energy for the environment must not be considered 
in isolation but compared with those of other 
energy options, so that Member States could more 
easily select the strategy best suited to them. 

29. Within that context he recalled the conclusions 
of the Symposium on Reliability of Nuclear 
Power Plants, held by the Agency at Innsbruck 
early in the spring. Impressive progress had 
been made in eliminating the "teething troubles" of 
nuclear power stations in the 400-600 MW(e) and 
1000 MW(e) range, and very good results had been 
obtained even with very large units. It was no 
longer true to say that nuclear power stations were 
not safe. Under the programme approved in 1974 
for the publication of a comprehensive system of 
internationally acceptable safety codes and guides 
for nuclear power plants, the Agency was in the 
process of preparing five codes dealing with the 
structure of governmental organizations and the 
siting, design, operation and quality assurance of 
nuclear plants, as well as 20 safety guides. That 
documentation would be of special value to Member 
States just embarking on nuclear power programmes. 
30. Whereas most aspects of nuclear power 
production had now reached the normal industrial 
stage, certain parts of the nuclear fuel cycle, 
such as fuel reprocessing and radioactive waste 
management had not. The Agency thus had work 
to do in that area, and had accordingly undertaken 
a thorough study of regional fuel cycle centres. 
Assistance from Member States was essential for 
that purpose, and the Agency had furthermore 
requested financial aid from UNEP. 
31. The production of nucLear power, and the 
process of securing public acceptance of it, were 
bound up with the major problem of waste management. 
Releases of radioactive material into the 
environment, on land or at sea, required careful 
international planning and co-operation. The 
Agency had organized meetings of experts and 
secured their assistance in defining priorities and 
objectives, and immediate attention was being 
given to questions such as dumping at sea, wastes 
from uranium milling, and the handling of 
irradiated fuel at nuclear power plants - a growing 
problem because of inadequate reprocessing 
capacity. The Agency was also considering how 
to design nuclear power plants for easy decommissioning, 
and planned later to study ways of 
separating and storing the radionuclides now being 
released into the atmosphere. 

32. In addition, the Agency was establishing an 
advisory group to study the disposal, after 
solidification, of highly radioactive and alphaemitting 
wastes in stable geological formations, 
an operation which in principle was being more 
and more widely accepted. It was worth recalling 
in that connection that the Agency symposium held 
in Gabon in June had reached the conclusion that 
the plutonium formed and deposited in the Oklo 
natural reactor, approximately 1700 million years 
before, had never moved from the site of formation, 
having disintegrated on the spot. 
33. Turning to the question of safeguards and the 
physical protection of nuclear materials, he said 
that the Agency's safeguards were currently being 
applied to about six tons of plutonium, a quantity 
which was expected to increase to some 200 tons 
by the beginning of the 1980s. The application of 
safeguards depended to a large extent on the full 
co-operation of the countries concerned. The 
physical protection of nuclear facilities and 
materials had recently attracted considerable 
public attention. The question had been reviewed 
by a group of experts which had met in Vienna in 
May and which had revised the book of recommendations 
to Member States on the subject. A 
suggestion had been made that an international 
convention should be elaborated covering in 
particular the physical protection of international 
transfers of nuclear materials. The Agency was 
ready to co-ordinate that work if Member States 
accepted the suggestion. 
34. A major international conference on nuclear 
power and its fuel cycle would be held in Salzburg 
from 2 to 13 May 1977. At the present stage of 
introduction of nuclear power into electric grids 
the Agency considered it desirable for that conference 
to concentrate on the nuclear fuel cycle 
and the need for integration of its individual 
stages, the safety of nuclear facilities and the 
management of radioactivity, and constraints on 
the development of nuclear power in developing 
countries. 
35. The Agency would exclude from its programme 
of scientific meetings for 1976 all subjects 
which would be covered by that conference. 
Measures were also being taken to avoid duplication 
of subject matter between the Agency's conference 
and the 10th World Energy Conference to 
be held in Istanbul in September 1977. Relations 
between the Agency and the World Energy 
Conference had been strengthened since one of the 
latter's Commissions had been located at the 
Agency's headquarters. 
36. In its final declaration the Review Conference 
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
-4 

of Nuclear Weapons (NPT Review Conference)[l] 
had approved the measures taken by the Agency to 
carry out its tasks under NPT, and had expressed 
its strong support for the Agency's application of 
effective safeguards. 

37. As far as "internal" measures were concerned 
he said he had requested a group of experts 
to study the organization of the Department of 
Safeguards and Inspection. The group had made 
recommendations, some of which had already been 
implemented; in particular, a task force had been 
set up to accelerate the automatic data-processing 
system. The improvements achieved had already 
made it possible to bring into operation the 
computerized system of processing, storage and 
retrieval of data submitted by the national safeguards 
systems of several States party to NPT. 
By January 1976 all States party to NPT would be 
included in the operation. The documents 
describing the inspection procedures to be applied 
to various facilities had been completed. The 
part dealing with methods and techniques had 
already been published. A group was preparing 
the first edition of the other five volumes of the 
Safeguards Technical Manual which should be 
completed within six months. 
38. The Safeguards Analytical Laboratory at 
Seibersdorf should be able to commence operations 
in the near future. It would enable the Agency to 
analyse much more rapidly the samples requested 
by inspectors. A standing advisory group on 
safeguards implementation had been set up to 
answer any requests for technical advice submitted 
by Member States, the Board of Governors or the 
Director General. 
3 9. Further rationalization of the activities of 
the Department of Safeguards and Inspection would 
follow as a result of interdepartmental collaboration. 
For instance, automatic processing of 
safeguards data was performed in the Division of 
Scientific and Technical Information, the Safeguards 
Analytical Laboratory was becoming the 
responsibility of the Division of Research and 
Laboratories and physical protection work was 
being undertaken by the Legal Division and the 
Division of Nuclear Safety and Environmental 
Protection. In order to satisfy repeated requests 
from delegates, a training seminar would be held 
in Vienna at the beginning of December to train 
staff from national systems of accountancy and 
control of nuclear materials in the preparation of 
the Agency's input data. 
40. The external group of problems included the 
incongruity between the application of safeguards 
under the Agency's Safeguards System (1965, as 
Provisionally Extended in 1966 and 1968)[2] and 
[1] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. The 
text of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is reproduced in document 
INFCIRC/140. 
[2] INFCIRC/66/Rev.2. 
GC(XIX)/OR. 176 

the material recommended by the Board for use as 
a basis for negotiating safeguards agreements 
which was reproduced in the booklet entitled The 
Structure and Content of Agreements between the 
Agency and States Required in Connection with the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons[3], i.e. the documents prescribing the 
old kind of safeguards and those exercised in 
connection with NPT. As he had said before, 
there could never be a satisfactory safeguards 
system until the suppliers of nuclear equipment 
and materials made it a condition of delivery that 
all nuclear activities in the recipient countries 
should be placed under Agency safeguards. The 
recommendations of the NPT Review Conference 
were a move in that direction and were to be welcomed 
as they recognized the existence of a 
problem which had to be solved for NPT to succeed. 
Unfortunately those recommendations did not go 
far enough and the NPT Review Conference might 
have aggravated a situation where commercial 
interests might prevail over long-term political 
goals. 

41, It was essential that the Agency's safeguards 
should be applied to all nuclear activities in the 
non-nuclear-weapon States. In the past the spread 
of nuclear explosive capacity had perhaps been 
correlated too exclusively with the growth of the 
use of nuclear power. If that capacity spread 
still further, it would almost certainly be as a 
result of nuclear materials, plants or know-how 
being imported without full fuel cycle safeguards. 

A lot of ground had been covered since safeguards 
had first been applied by the Agency to a small 
research reactor in Japan in 1961 but the gaps 
which still existed could only be closed by further 
acceptances of NPT or by commitments to accept 
full fuel cycle safeguards. In other words, the 
aim must be to achieve the universal application 
of effective safeguards in all the non-nuclearweapon 
States. A step in the right direction had 
been taken recently when safeguards had been 
extended to cover the consequences of the transfer 
of technological information and know-how. 

42. It was anticipated that regional fuelprocessing 
facilities, operated by the States concerned 
or on an international basis, could make a 
major contribution to international security. 
Indeed, such an approach would minimize the 
number of plants at which plutonium became 
available, ensure that effective international safeguards 
were applied to plutonium separation and 
storage facilities and reduce the risk of dangerous 
nuclear material falling into unauthorized hands. 
The NPT Review Conference had recognized the 
soundness of that concept and had urged all 
parties to NPT to co-operate in the study being 
undertaken by the Agency. Means should be 
explored of placing existing fuel cycle facilities 
and those being ordered under regional or international 
control. After all, the first significant 
civil reprocessing facility in Europe was the result 
of a regional initiative. 
[3] INFCIRC/153/(Corrected). 
-5 



GC(XIX)/OR. 176 

43. The nuclear-weapon States had a particularly 
important part to play in preventing proliferation. 
They were the major exporters. They could help 
to prove that international safeguards did not 
hamper industry. Further progress towards a 
complete ban on nuclear tests would be an 
encouragement for all who supported the cause of 
non-proliferation and would weaken the arguments 
of those who insisted that nuclear weapons were 
imperative for national security. 
44. In view of the current political situation, the 
NPT Review Conference had achieved what could 
realistically be expected, and the next such conference 
would probably be able to present a more 
reassuring image to the world. It was to be hoped 
that in the meantime the concept of a universal 
solution to the problems of preventing proliferation 
and the practical steps required for that purpose 
would have been adopted by all concerned, 
especially the nuclear-weapon States; a precedent 
would thereby be set for the more important discussions 
relating to nuclear and conventional disarmament. 
45. The NPT Review Conference had shown that 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy had made considerable progress 
and it had thus given the Agency's programmes 
additional impetus. But the problem of limiting 
and controlling nuclear weapons still remained. 
To ask non-nuclear-weapon States to refrain from 
manufacturing them assumed a degree of confidence 
in international order and security that had 
by no means been achieved as yet. Some of them 
had left the conference with a feeling of frustration, 
wondering whether giving up the nuclear option 
made any sense in the present state of affairs. In 
those circumstances it was to be hoped that the 
discussions on a total nuclear test ban would 
produce specific results. 
46. Nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
(PNE) had become a symbol of the dilemma created 
by the atom. All countries should be able to benefit 
from any future benefits of that technology. 
One solution would be to place all explosions under 
an international regime; that could be one of the 
provisions of a complete test ban applying to all 
countries. At present the international community 
was looking to the Agency both for an objective 
international evaluation of PNE technology and for 
services connected with its international transfer 
and control. The Ad Hoc Advisory Group on 
Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes, set up 
by the Board of Governors and due to meet for 
the first time during the following week, would 
provide a framework for detailed consideration 
of those issues. 
47. In its technical assistance programmes the 
Agency continued to place increasing emphasis on 
the introduction of nuclear power and the application 
of nuclear technology, as was reflected by 
the series of courses on nuclear power project 
planning and implementation that it was organizing, 
the first of which had started at Karlsruhe in the 
Federal Republic of Germany earlier in September.' 
Other courses would follow in 1976 at Argonne in 
the United States, and at Saclay in France. There 
could be no doubt that the courses would contribute 
to the development of legal and institutional infrastructures 
bearing responsibility, in the developing 
countries, for the planning and implementation of 
nuclear power programmes. 

48. The target for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund, which was used to provide technical 
assistance, had been $2 million for 1966[4] and 
some Member States were proposing that it should 
be $ 5. 5 million for 1976. UNDP funds had 
tripled in five years, and 19 large-scale UNDP 
projects were under way, as against 15 a year 
before. Assuming that that rate of expansion 
continued, it might be advisable to review the 
present management of technical assistance. The 
"Guiding Principles and General Operating Rules 
to Govern the Provision of Technical Assistance by 
the Agency"[5] should be brought up to date in the 
light of the realities of today and probable future 
developments, 
49. Important developments were taking place in 
the Agency's International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS), which had now been in operation for 
six years. They would turn INIS into the main 
international abstracting service for the nuclear 
sciences, enabling it to replace, in due course, 
Nuclear Science Abstracts, which, since its first 
publication by the United States Atomic Energy 
Commission in July 1947, had rendered such 
indispensable services to the nuclear community. 
It was noteworthy that 32 of the 46 participating 
States, including developing countries, were now 
receiving INIS output on magnetic tape. 
50. It had to be recognized that for a large 
number of Member States the chief interest of 
nuclear energy still lay in its applications in medicine, 
agricultural research and the development of 
water resources. In that area, regional cooperation, 
particularly in Asia, had mainly related 
to the use of irradiation for food preservation. He 
therefore urged Member States and sister agencies 
of the United Nations system, in particular WHO 
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO), to take the action needed to 
obtain a final decision on the international clearance 
for irradiation of certain major foodstuffs. 
That matter had been pending since 1970 and 
needed to be settled, given the world food shortage. 
51. He went on to mention some of the activities 
under the programme of the Department of 
Research and Isotopes, in particular those relating 
to fusion reactors, actinides and pollution. The 
International Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity in 
Monaco was undertaking complementary research 
on non-radioactive pollutants, for example heavy 
metals and chlorinated organic compounds such as 
DDT. 
52. The International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste, operated jointly since 1970 by 
[4] See Resolution GC(IX)/RES/193, para. 1. 
[5] Annexed to Resolution GC(IV)/RES/65. 
6 



GC{XIX)/OR. 176 


the Agency and "UNESCO, had been the object of a on the fact that the Conference had unanimously 
review in November 1974 by a group of scientists. approved them for membership of the Agency. 
The conclusions which the two organizations drew 

from the group's report would be included in the 
Agency's next six-year programme. It might 
therefore suffice simply to mention that the 
group had strongly advocated stabilization of the 
Centre's budget, which was at present largely made 
up of contributions from UNDP, the Swedish International 
Development Authority (SIDA), the Ford 
Foundation, etc. 

53. An International Civil Service Commission 
had been appointed by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations in 1974. The Commission would 
meet at least once a year in Europe and he had 
invited it to hold an early meeting in Vienna. He 
would stress that the remuneration conditions of 
international civil servants required to be revised. 
That was necessary in order to make them commensurate 
with what was now considered appropriate, 
for example, in commercial undertakings 
for a large number of personnel serving outside 
their home countries. The many recent instances 
of unrest among international civil servants 
clearly showed that urgent action was needed. 
54. It should also be noted that, following the 
United Nations Conference on the International 
Women's Year, the Agency had revised its staff 
rules and regulations so as to eliminate any discrimination 
vis-a-vis female staff members. 
55. The Conference was now conducting its work 
in accordance with the Rules of Procedure as they 
had been amended in 1974[6]. That would contribute 
to a simpler and more efficient dispatch of 
its business and would enable it to concentrate 
more on matters of substance. 
56. In response to suggestions by several delegations, 
the Agency's annual report would in 
future cover the calendar year, thus simplifying 
the task of Member States wishing to see how far 
the programme for the year in question had been 
carried out. 
57. Before concluding, he wished to announce 
that the Agency's permanent headquarters would 
be ready by the end of June 1 978 and that full 
arrangements had been made for the most rational 
use of the office space and facilities which the 
Austrian Government was building. Plans were 
being drawn up concerning the financial commitments 
that the move would entail, and they would 
be circulated to the Board before the end of the 
year. 
58. He wished to pay tribute to the host city and 
country for their unique generosity in relation to 
the Agency's permanent headquarters and many 
other matters, including the Safeguards Analytical 
Laboratory. 
59. Finally, he congratulated Qatar, the United 
Arab Emirates and the United Republic of Tanzania 
[6] By Resolution GC(XVIII)/RES/313, para. 2. 
60. Mr. WINSPEARE GUICCIARDI (UnderSecretary-
General, Director-General of the United 
Nations Office at Geneva) said he would like to 
congratulate the President on his election and to 
convey to the Conference the best wishes of the 
Secretary-General for a constructive session. He 
also stressed the important role the international 
community had entrusted to the Agency in prevention 
of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
61. In the course of the NPT Review Conference, 
held at Geneva in May 1975, the participants, 
despite divergences of views on a number of points, 
had fully agreed that the activities of the Agency in 
applying safeguards and providing assistance to 
Member States in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy should be considerably expanded and 
strengthened. The Review Conference had considered 
all the aspects involved in the new and 
highly important functions devolving upon the 
Agency in relation to nuclear explosions for peaceful 
purposes, including their economic and legal 
implications and the need for environmental 
protection. 
62. The Review Conference had specifically 
affirmed that it considered the Agency to be the 
appropriate international body through which nonnuclear-
weapon States could obtain the benefits of 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes under 
Article V of NPT, and it had urged the Agency to 
expedite consideration of a draft international 
agreement to that end and to undertake technical 
studies as requested by the General Assembly in 
1974, 
63. Further, the Review Conference had recommended 
that the Agency should study the potential 
advantages of establishing regional or multinational 
nuclear fuel cycle centres, to be operated 
under Agency safeguards. It had also invited 
those States exporting nuclear materials and 
equipment to adopt standard requirements for safeguards 
on such exports and, moreover, to extend 
the application of safeguards to importing States 
which were not parties to NPT. Finally, it had 
advocated the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free 
zones in different areas of the world, in which field 
the role to be played by the Agency was evident. 
64. The world energy crisis and the rise in oil 
prices had improved the competitiveness of other 
energy sources, and nuclear power stations could 
henceforth acquire serious economic interest for 
a number of developing countries. In those circumstances, 
careful appraisal should be made of 
the industrial infrastructure of interested countries 
and of the availability to them of trained scientists 
and technicians able to operate and maintain the 
nuclear power plants. 
65. The decision taken by the Agency to hold an 
international conference on nuclear power and its 
fuel cycle in 1977 was one of particular interest 
to the developing countries. 
-7 



GC(XK)/OR. 176 

66. The accelerated development of nuclear 
power should naturally be given full attention by 
the Agency, with the possible hazards to the 
environment from radioactive wastes being taken 
into account. Another matter requiring serious 
study was safety in the operation and maintenance 
of nuclear plants. 
67. While it was recognized that nuclear power 
might meet many of the energy requirements of 
developing countries, alternative sources of 
energy should not consequently be neglected. It 
was with that consideration in mind that the General 
Assembly at its seventh special session had 
proposed that an energy institute be established. 

68. Those vital substantive issues emphasized 
the important role of the Agency as it approached 
its twentieth anniversary. The results of the 
Conference's deliberations would be received with 
the greatest interest. 
. The meeting rose at 4. 55 p. m. 

-8 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 

International Atomic Energy Agency 30 December 1975* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 23 September 1975, at 10. 45 a. m. 

President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

Adoption of the agenda and allocation 1 -2 
of items for initial discussion 

General debate and report for 1974-75 3 -118 

Statements by the delegates of: 

United States of America 3 -28 
South Africa 29 -40 
France 41 -48 
Germany, Federal Republic of 49 -65 
Australia . 66-75 
United Kingdom 76-88 
Romania 89 -103 
Iran 104-118 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1975. 
** GC(XIX)/559. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 
75-9522 


GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


THE RECORD 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION 
OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XIX)/542) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee recommended it to 
approve an agenda for the session consisting of 
all the items on the provisional agenda in 
document GC(XIX)/542, and also to allocate those 
items for initial discussion as indicated in that 
document. 
. 2. The Committee's recommendations 
were accepted. 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1974-75 
(GC(XIX)/544, 544/Corr. 1, 554) 

3. Mr. SEAMANS (United States of America), 
after congratulating the Director General and the 
Secretariat on their continued outstanding service 
to the Agency, read out the following message 
from the President of the United States of 
America: 
(a) "I welcome this opportunity to greet 
once again the delegates to the General 
Conference of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. The United States has 
supported the Agency through all its years 
of eventful existence. The policy of the 
United States will continue to be one of 
strong support for the Agency. 
(b) "Many countries, including the United 
States, are faced with the critical need to 
maintain and expand their supplies of 
energy. The work of the Agency is of 
great importance in reaching goals in three 
of the most crucial problem areas: meeting 
worldwide energy requirements, preventing 
the proliferation of nuclear explosive 
devices for whatever uses, and guarding 
against the theft of nuclear material for 
terrorist purposes. The United States will 
continue to make a major effort to meet 
these challenges. We are convinced that 
the collective response of the Agency's 
membership will have a most important 
influence on the outcome. 
(c) "I reaffirm the United States' policy of 
continuing to make available to other 
countries nuclear materials and uranium 
enrichment services for peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy under careful controls and 
safeguards to ensure they do not contribute 
to the proliferation of nuclear explosive 
devices. Proposals I have made recently 
for the expansion of uranium enrichment 
capacity have as one of their principal 
objectives the strengthening of our ability 
to contribute to the worldwide development 
of nuclear energy. The United States will 
continue to join with others in a comprehensive 
effort to develop further an 
effective system of international safeguards 
against the diversion of nuclear materials 
to the manufacture of nuclear explosives and 
against the theft of nuclear materials and 
the sabotage of nuclear facilities. 

(d) "On behalf of the people of the United 
States, congratulations on the past 
achievements of this Conference and the 
Agency and best wishes for success in 
your deliberations'. " 
4. President Ford had reaffirmed the 
important position occupied by the Agency in 
United States foreign policy and the strong 
support which his country would continue to give 
to the Agency's programme and to the policy of 
non-proliferation. 
5. Since the previous General Conference, 
organizational changes had taken place in the 
United States in the fields of energy research 
and development and of nuclear energy regulation. 
The Energy Research and Development Administration 
(ERDA) had been established to provide 
unified leadership and direction in United States 
Government programmes concerned with the 
development of energy technologies. ERDA's 
energy research and development mission was to 
provide the United States with the energy 
technology options necessary if the country's 
future energy requirements were to be met. 
ERDA's research and development efforts would 
be focused both on the development of alternative 
technologies for example, fossil, solar, geothermal, 
fission and fusion, for the production of 
energy and on the conservation of energy through 
greater efficiency in its utilization (for example, 
in power generation, in automotive transportation 
and in the heating and cooling of buildings). 
6. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which 
had assumed the licensing and regulatory functions 
of the former Atomic Energy Commission, had 
the mandate for ensuring that civilian nuclear 
activities were conducted in a manner consistent 
with the public health and with safety and 
environmental quality standards. The Commission 
was also responsible for licensing commercial 
exports of nuclear facilities and materials. 
7. The future energy research and development 
programme of the United States would continue to 
give a prominent position to nuclear energy 
development. In the short term, ERDA's research 
and development emphasis was being placed on 
improving the operational reliability and reducing 
the environmental impact of light-water reactors 
and on uranium enrichment for civilian reactors. 
The fast breeder reactor programme would 
receive continued emphasis, and together with 
nuclear fusion and other technologies, acquire 
higher priority in the long term. 
8. As technologies developed, they would take 
full account of health and environmental issues. 
Furthermore, the environmental and safety 
programmes were recognized as high-priority 
components of the country's national energy 
2 



GC(XIX)/OR 177 


policy, and the United States was ready to share 
its research and development findings with all 
nations. 

9. The application of conservation methods in 
the various energy use sectors would reduce the 
amount of energy generation required. In the 
nuclear field, for example, energy could be 
saved all along the line, from the mining of the 
ore to the fabrication of the reactor. 
10. ERDA was prepared to make available its 
energy conservation capabilities and talents and 
to co-operate with organizations in other countries, 
since it strongly believed that conservation 
was essential to the more efficient utilization of 
nuclear energy. 
11. The President's proposals for expanding 
the United States' enrichment capacity included 
support for one private effort to establish a 
gaseous diffusion plant and/or, it was hoped, at 
least three private projects connected with the 
construction of centrifuge enrichment plants. 
The plants in question would be producing 
12-18 million separative work units (SWU) per 
year by the mid-1980Sj for sale to domestic and 
foreign customers. 
12. The report on the provision of technical 
assistance by the Agency during 1974 [1] was 
impressive and indicated that the technical 
assistance programme was one which specifically 
benefited the developing countries and in which 
those countries had shown particular interest. 
Agency technical assistance, which had made 
significant contributions in agriculture, health 
and education, also contributed significantly to 
the overall technological development which was 
a prerequisite for a country's introducing nuclear 
power. 
13. As regards nuclear safety, radiological 
safety and waste management, the Agency's work 
in those areas and in training the manpower needed 
for the economical and safe production of 
electricity through the use of nuclear reactors 
had increased greatly in importance. 
14. During the past year, the United States had 
made important contributions to the Agency's 
intensified programme for the preparation of a 
comprehensive system of internationally 
acceptable codes and guides on the siting, safety 
and reliability of nuclear power plants. The 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, in particular, 
had contributed the services of its technically 
best qualified experts without cost to the Agency. 
15. Another facet of the Agency's expanded 
effort to meet the needs of Member States 
anticipating the introduction of nuclear power 
was the training of technical and administrative 
manpower. During the past year, the United 
States had provided experts for a series of 
[1] GC(XIX)/INF/154. 
Agency regional seminars and training courses, 
co-sponsored a course on the principles and 
techniques of regulating nuclear power, and 
participated in preparations for a 15-week course 
on nuclear power project planning and implementation 
to be held at Argonne National 
Laboratory twice during 1976. The United States 
was also supporting the development by the Agency 
of an advanced training course covering plant 
design, construction and operation. 

16. An Agency project of great urgency and 
highly important for Member States was the study 
of the concept of regional nuclear fuel cycle 
centres to providethe means of meeting 
economically and in compliance with nonproliferation 
and safeguards requirements, the 
reprocessing and waste management needs of 
groups of countries. The United States would 
strongly support the project with the services of 
experts and in other ways. 
17. The International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) had in a short time progressed to 
the point where many nations depended on it for 
prompt and effective coverage of the developments 
in nuclear research, development and regulation. 
The United States was looking forward to 
"Atomindex" becoming the basic nuclear abstract 
journal for its own needs and those of other 
Member States. 
18. Trade in nuclear equipment, materials and 
technology was growing and contributing to 
industrial and technical development in the world; 
but such growth brought with it the danger of 
misuse or diversion. It was clearly in the 
interest of the world community to support 
measures and take steps to minimize that danger. 
The United States Government believed that 
supplier and user nations had a common responsibility 
to ensure that nuclear materials and 
equipment were used only for their intended 
peaceful purposes; all would suffer unless that 
responsibility was fulfilled. 
19. A central element of United States policy 
continued to be strong support for the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT). The Review Conference of the Parties 
to NPT [2] had stressed the need to strengthen 
nuclear export controls, to promote international 
arrangements for ensuring the physical 
protection of nuclear material, to increase 
nuclear assistance to developing countries party 
to NPT, and to accelerate examination of the 
utility of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres. 
20. It was in the interest of the world community 
that the transfer of nuclear equipment, materials 
and technologies to non-nuclear-weapon States, 
whether they were parties to NPT or not, should 
be subject to effective safeguards. The Agency 
[2] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. The 
text of NPT is reproduced in document 
INFCIRC/140. 
-3 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


was the proper international body for ensuring 
that such equipment, materials and technologies 
were not used for non-peaceful purposes and for 
preventing safeguards from becoming an element 
in commercial competition. Great caution should 
also be exercised in the export of certain 
sensitive technologies, even under safeguards. 

21. In his message to the Conference at its 
previous session, President Ford had reaffirmed 
the offer by the United States to permit the 
application of Agency safeguards to all its nuclear 
activities, except those of direct national security 
significance, when safeguards were being 
generally applied in accordance with Article III, 
paragraph 1 of NPT. [3] Discussions with the 
Secretariat on the text of an agreement pursuant 
to that offer were in an advanced stage. 
22. The Agency's safeguards practices were in 
a period of intensive development and evolution. 
Hitherto, Agency safeguards had been associated 
primarily with research reactors, power reactors 
burning uranium of low enrichment, fuel 
fabrication plants and research facilities. However, 
large processing facilities handling 
Plutonium or highly enriched uranium already 
existed or were being built in countries where 
Agency safeguards were being applied or were 
expected to be applied within a few years. The 
procedures being developed by the Agency's 
safeguards staff on the basis of its somewhat 
limited experience would have to be tested and 
revised in the light of further experience. 
23. The Agency's safeguards efforts would need 
to receive the support of Member States if there 
was to be a truly effective and reliable safeguards 
system. The success of the Agency's programme 
would depend to a large extent on the manner in 
which the Agency and its Member States dealt 
with a number of problems: the development of 
efficient logistics for carrying out world-wide 
safeguards operations; the achievement of 
realistic manpower levels; the development and 
implementation (with the co-operation of safeguarded 
States) of an effective computer-based 
safeguards information system; the ensuring, 
under the Agency's arrangements with safeguarded 
States, of adequate Agency rights of 
access to facilities and information; and the 
further elaboration, both technical and political, 
of Agency safeguards as new types of facility, such 
as enrichment plants, became subject to international 
safeguards. 

24. The United States Congress had, in the 
previous year, authorized a special grant to the 
Agency for the strengthening of its safeguards 
procedures; US $200 000 had been made available 
for special studies, consultants on information 
processing, equipment for safeguards research 
and development activities, and the special 
training of Agency safeguards inspectors. His 
country hoped that other Member States would 
[3] GC(XVIII)/OR. 169, para. 4(c). 
find ways of providing additional support, through 
the contribution of funds or technical expertise, 
to the safeguards programme. 

25. Increased study and co-operation at the 
international level were necessary in the light 
of the risk which every nation (not just nuclear 
suppliers or users) faced owing to the possible 
theft of nuclear materials or sabotage of nuclear 
facilities by sub-national groups. The growth of 
the nuclear industry and of terrorist activity had 
made the matter more pressing. 
26. Physical security needed to be strengthened 
world-wide so that the world community could 
deal effectively with the full range of threats. 
Physical security was a national responsibility, 
but failure to work together had international 
implications, for the theft of nuclear materials 
or the sabotage of nuclear facilities in one country 
might mean catastrophe in another. The United 
States strongly favoured the creation of an international 
mechanism to establish and maintain 
close co-operation in the area of physical 
security. The Agency should continue to take 
the lead in formulating international standards 
and guidelines. 
27. For the seventeenth consecutive time, the 
United States pledged to donate special nuclear 
materials to a value of up to US $50 000 for use 
in Agency projects involving research or medical 
therapy. His country continued to favour the 
financing of the Agency's technical assistance 
programme through voluntary contributions rather 
than assessments and, subject to governmental 
appropriations, his Government intended to 
contribute generously to the cash target and to 
make additional in-kind grants - in the form of 
fellowships, training courses, equipment and 
experts' services The cash and in-kind 
assistance provided by the United States in 1975 
would amount to about US $2. 5 million. The 
United States would continue to give preference 
in the allocation of in-kind grants, including 
special nuclear materials, to developing countries 
which were parties to NPT. 

28. As President Ford had indicated in his 
message, the United States Government had 
great confidence in the Agency and looked forward 
to increased support for it by all Member States. 
Much of benefit to all peoples could be achieved 
through serious international co-operation under 
the aegis of the Agency, aimed at progress 
toward the goals of more abundant energy, an 
improved environment and further relaxation of 
world tensions. 
29. Mr. ROUX (South Africa) remarked that 
each year's session of the General Conference 
provided the opportunity for Member States to 
review and assess the progress made by the 
Agency in the preceding 12 months and, if 
necessary, to adjust its course for the future. 
One of the main objectives of the Agency's 
programme was to assist developing States in 
realizing the potential benefits of peaceful 
nuclear technology.- In the past such assistance 
4 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


had been directed - with admirable results largely 
to providing know-how and training in the 
application of radioisotope ana radiation techniques 
in agriculture, medicine, industry and 
research generally. As his delegation had 
frequently stressed, however, if the Agency was 
to maintain its momentum and efficacy in the 
field of providing meaningful technical assistance 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, it had to 
be flexible enough to adapt itself to changing 
needs, particularly in the developing countries. 
The Agency had shown that it was fully capable 
of meeting its formidable challenges in that 
connection and, looking ahead, it was gratifying 
to note that in formulating its future programmes 
the Agency had taken fully into account the rapid 
developments characterizing the integration of 
nuclear technology and nuclear power into national 
economies. 

30. Those programmes now placed emphasis on 
assisting developing countries to apply nuclear 
technology, to search for, develop and exploit 
uranium resources, and of course, to introduce 
nuclear power plants, smaller versions of which 
had now become more attractive owing to the 
increase in the price of oil. Closely linked to 
those activities was the need to establish training 
and planning programmes which would meet the 
specialized-manpower needs of the developing 
countries. 
31 As regards the growing international concern 
over the impact of nuclear power on the environment, 
the Agency could help to assuage such 
anxieties, first and foremost by providing 
guidance on all aspects of safety planning, not 
least on the management of nuclear wastes. 
Indeed the Agency had already correctly recognized 
the need to train project supervisors and 
regulatory staff and to promote the compilation 
of standards and guides for plant design, location, 
construction and operation. He welcomed the 
fact that the evolution of that important sphere 
of nuclear development had not remained static, 
but continued to be reviewed and improved. 

32. Another area in which the Agency could 
play a leading role in the years ahead was that 
of rationalizing the industrial evolution of the 
fuel cycle in order to prevent unbalanced 
development. It might be desirable, for example, 
to consider concentrating reprocessing and waste 
disposal facilities in large regional complexes 
serving the needs of groups of countries. It was 
therefore appropriate that the Agency was planning 
to hold in 1977 an International Conference on 
Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle, in order to 
assess the role which nuclear power would play 
in relation to alternative energy sources and the 
need to integrate the fuel cycle. The convening 
of that conference was an indication of the Agency's 
awareness that, in the years immediately ahead, 
one of its main preoccupations would be to 
provide guidance in solving the many difficult 
problems which went hand in hand with a rapid 
growth in nuclear capacity. 

33. Turning to the Agency's programme for 
1976, his delegation was gratified to note that 
the Agency continued to implement the important 
principle of concentrating on those nuclear techniques, 
particularly in agriculture, medicine and 
industry, which had proved to be viable but which 
still required further development, while transferring 
to other bodies and organizations those 
tasks which over the years had become routine. 
It also welcomed the Agency's activities in cooperation 
with the International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), in projects 
concerning public acceptance of nuclear power 
and the quantification and qualified comparison 
of the environmental impact of various energy 
options. 

34. The Agency's active review of the existing 
recommendations relating to the physical 
protection of nuclear materials was a task with 
which South Africa was in the fullest agreement. 
In an insecure world in which acts of terrorism 
and anarchy had become almost a daily occurrence, 
it was vital that priority should be given 
to the physical protection of nuclear materials. 
35. The tasks to which he had referred were all 
onerous, but they were all tasks which the Agency 
was eminently qualified to perform. Naturally 
they cost money, .and his Government recognized 
fully that the continuing inflationary spiral made 
budgeting a hazardous undertaking and one which 
played havoc with even the most diligently compiled 
financial estimates. Nevertheless, it was 
alarming to observe that the budget estimates 
for 1976 showed an increase of almost 30% over 
those for 1975, nearly 25% of which resulted 
from higher prices and other inflationary factors. 
That left a 5% increase in programme activities which 
was hardly excessive and indeed seemed 
barely adequate as a means of sustaining real 
progress. All the same, his delegation felt it 
necessary to stress that every effort should be 
made to cut unnecessary costs and that a continuing 
effort should be made to streamline the 
activities of the Agency. The Director General's 
recent decision to eliminate a number of unfilled 
posts in the Secretariat was a welcome step in the 
right direction. 
36. He wished to reiterate South Africa's 
strong support for the Agency's technical 
assistance programmes and its continued willingness 
to give consideration to the financing of 
technologically sound projects which the Agency 
was itself unable to finance. For example. 
South Africa possessed experience and know-how 
in certain specific areas - especially that of lowgrade 
uranium ore treatment - which could be of 
particular assistance to Member States embarking 
on such activities. 
37. South Africa had, moreover, participated 
for more than a year past as a full member in the 
International Project in the Field of Food 
Irradiation, and was thus promoting international 
co-operation in that particular application of 
nuclear energy. The specific food concerned was 
the mango, a fruit that was probably still regarded 
as exotic in Europe and outside the tropics and 
sub-tropics generally, but which might well 
-5 

GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


become a more familiar commodity in those areas 43. The preparations for a conference as large, 
should the present work be crowned with success. in scope of subject and number of participants, 
as the one the Agency had decided to hold in 

38. He scarcely considered it necessary to refer 
to the satisfactory progress which South Africa 
had made in the field of uranium enrichment. 
The forecasts of inadequate supplies of enriched 
nuclear fuel, which might well be fulfilled in the 
course of the next decade, only strengthened the 
case for the creation of very substantial additional 
enrichment facilities throughout the world, and it 
was South Africa's hope ~ qualified only by 
economic considerations - that through its 
development work in that field it would contribute 
to meeting the world's demand for energy -a 
demand which made the widespread use of nuclear 
power virtually essential. 
39. Apart from developing its enrichment 
capability, South Africa was constantly intensifying 
its prospecting activities, well aware of 
the time-lag between the discovery of a deposit 
and the proving of its economic viability. Here 
indeed was an area in which, so his delegation 
was convinced, the Agency could do a great deal. 
His Government lent its full support to any action 
which the Agency might implement or expand 
aimed at the discovery and evaluation of additional 
reserves of uranium. 
40. In conclusion he wished to confirm his 
Government's interest in and support for an 
effective safeguards system, and for the rationalization 
and harmonization of safeguards as well 
as for the development of instrumentation and of 
techniques for increasing cost effectiveness. It 
was, however, in the interests of the whole of 
mankind that those safeguards be refined to the 
stage where their application was virtually 
imperceptible and in no way constituted a brake 
on the industrial development of any country. 
41. Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT (France), noting that 
the changes in the Rules of Procedure designed to 
expedite the business of the Conference were being 
applied for the first time, said that the statement 
of his delegation would adhere to the spirit of 
those changes: it would be brief and concentrate 
on a few subjects of special interest. 
42. The European Conference convened in Paris 
in April 1975 to consider what was termed "the 
maturity of nuclear energy" had reviewed nuclear 
development throughout the world and confirmed 
a number of points: the absolute necessity of 
exploiting nuclear energy, the future importance 
of steam and high-temperature heat as vectors 
apart from electricity, the necessity of recourse 
to breeder reactors (a line of endeavour for 
which the success of the French prototype 
PhSnix augured well), the enhanced importance 
of the fuel cycle, the necessity of expanding the 
uranium and uranium enrichment industry, the 
risk of a shortage of reprocessing capacity owing 
to technical problems as yet unsolved, the renewed 
interest in nuclear propulsion, and finally, the 
importance of studies of nuclear safety. 
Salzburg in 1977 would mean hard work for the 
international nuclear community. It should cater 
mainly for those who were responsible for nuclear 
planning on the national level. A considerable 
part of its deliberations should concern the 
introduction of nuclear energy in developing 
countries, for which small- or medium-sized 
pressurized-water reactors, from 50 to 
500 MW(e), would be particularly suitable. Such 
plants were now being perfected, and might also 
produce utilizable steam where required. They 
were compact and easy to assemble, and thus 
suitable for installation in remote areas or even 
on floating barges. 

44. If the conference in Paris had looked to the 
future, the remote past had been the subject of 
the Agency's Symposium on the Oklo Phenomenon, 
efficiently organized with the help of the 
Government of Gabon. It had revealed the 
astonishing harvest of information already 
gathered, with the help of the French Atomic 
Energy Commission, on that phenomenon of 
nearly 2000 million years ago. The fact that the 
fission products had not migrated from the reaction 
sites had important practical consequences, for it 
proved that storage of wastes in suitable geological 
formations was a satisfactory solution to 
one of the problems of nuclear development. 
45. The elimination of the public's misgivings 
about nuclear development was an important task, 
and one to which the Agency was already contributing 
significantly, although its efforts in that 
direction would have to be further increased. 
Man, in the guise of the general public, was less 
mature than his technology; characteristic 
evidence of that was the distrust of experts. The 
experts were admittedly not infallible, but it 
surely was wrong to suppose that the quality of 
not being an expert automatically put one in the 
right. The world' s nuclear development was 
occasionally represented as an eogtistic plot into 
which Governments were enticed by the experts, 
who were imagined to derive from it some unknown 
satisfaction at the expense of the health 
and happiness of the population, although in fact 
it was they who bore the heaviest duties and 
r esponsibilitie s. 

46. Within the United Nations family itself there 
had in 1975 been a regrettable attempt to deprive 
the Agency of its responsibility for safety standards 
and codes, which were essentially its own field, 
and to give that responsibility to another organization 
possessing neither the mandate nor the 
competence to discharge it. The pretext was 
that the Agency, being responsible for matters 
connected with the development of applications of 
fission throughout the world, could not be 
sufficiently impartial to prepare recommendations 
on the safety of installations, recommendations 
which, according to the Agency's detractors, 
would carry far more weight if they were prepared 
by - of all things - specialists on the environment! 
6 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


47. The Government of France continued to be 
deeply interested in the work of the Agency, 
whether it was aimed at facilitating the developing 
countries' access to the new technology, or was 
concerned with the conditions under which 
installations were used in the industrialized 
countries where the nuclear industry was being 
developed on a large scale. 
48. Everywhere in the world nuclear development 
conjured up the delicate problem of nonproliferation, 
a problem to which all countries 
concerned would have to devote close attention for 
many years to come. France had always sought 
to ensure that its co-operation with other countries 
would not lead to their achieving an atomic 
explosion, and therefore it intended to draw more 
and more on the Agency's services to provide the 
assurance of peaceful utilization, which constituted 
the condition under which France supplied 
nuclear materials. Such safeguards should be 
adapted to the substance of the exchanges, and 
therefore extend, in certain cases such as 
isotope separation or reprocessing installations, 
to transfers of technology. That much said, 
France would continue to act with due respect for 
the national sovereignty of the importing countries, 
without exerting pressure upon them, and would 
in the Agency oppose anything that might be 
interpreted as discrimination among its Members. 
The Agency required the help of all if it was to 
succeed in its difficult tasks. It could in any 
event call upon the good team of specialists and 
true experts gathered in the Secretariat under the 
firm and continuous guidance of the Director 
General. 

49. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) said that there were three important 
aspects to the work of the current session of the 
Conference: the role of nuclear energy in energy 
policies; the effect of that role on the Agency's 
programme; and the Agency's tasks pursuant to 
the NPT Review Conference. He proposed to 
examine, those issues as seen by the Federal 
Republic of Germany. 
50. The subject of future energy policies had 
been widely discussed since the previous regular 
session of the General Conference, when his 
Government had considered that dependence on 
oil could not be palliated solely by the use of 
other conventional sources of energy, such as 
coal, gas and hydroelectric power. Although 
measures could be taken to conserve energy, 
their effect was limited. Other sources of energy, 
apart from nuclear fission, were nuclear fusion 
and solar energy, both of which had considerable 
development potential justifying extensive research 
and development. His country was therefore 
continuing its work on fusion and solar energy, 
although it realized that large-scale economic 
exploitation of those two sources of energy was 
still a long way off. Nuclear-fission energy was 
thus assuming a central role in energy strategies, 
being the only new source which was capable of 
large-scale utilization. According to present 
estimates, moreover, the cost of nuclear energy 
was less than that of other sources. Estimated 
nuclear power requirements in his country remained 
unchanged at 20 000 megawatts in 1980, 
and 45 000 megawatts in 1985; that would account 
for 45% of the electric power production. 

51. The large-scale use of nuclear energy 
depended not only on scientific and technical 
achievements, but also on industrial capacity 
and performance, and the nuclear industry of the 
Federal Republic had become a key industry 
embracing numerous electrical, engineering and 
chemical enterprises, with a work force of 
25 000, most of them highly qualified. Its 
present annual production capacity comprised 
eight large nuclear power stations plus some 
small ones. In his country's opinion, light-water 
reactors had the best economic prospects for the 
time being, and the commissioning of the 
Biblis A nuclear power station in 1974, with an 
installed capacity of 1200 MW(e), indicated the 
high level of light-water reactor technology. Ten 
nuclear stations with a capacity of 3500 MW were 
in operation in the Federal Republic, and another 
ten with a capacity of more than 10 000 MW were 
under construction. Further standardization was 
aimed at because of the economic advantages and 
because the multiple use of a proven type 
facilitated licensing procedures. The Federal 
Republic's development activities were still 
concentrated on two advanced reactor lines, 
namely the high-temperature reactors and the 
sodium-cooled fast breeder reactors, and one 
300-MW prototype of each line was under construction. 
52. An industrial-scale enrichment capacity 
being built up on the basis of the BritishNetherlands-
German centrifuge technique, 
aiming at 2000 tons of separative work per year 
by 1982, was proceeding according to schedule. 
53. A reliable industrial-scale reprocessing 
capacity was essential to the economic production 
of nuclear energy, and in the Federal Republic of 
Germany a plant for reprocessing 1500 tons of 
fuel per year was planned. In that connection 
facilities for temporary storage would be built, 
and final disposal of the waste would take place in 
underground salt layers at the same site. That 
concept of a nuclear fuel cycle park was in line 
with Agency studies on the advantages of geographic 
concentration of nuclear installations. 
54. In the Federal Republic of Germany, as in 
other countries, nuclear energy was viewed with 
reserve by a part of the population: a site for a 
nuclear power plant in south-west Germany, for 
instance, had been occupied by demonstrators 
since the beginning of the year. The motives for 
such actions differed, but one of them was the 
understandable concern for health, safety and the 
environment. His Government thought such 
matters should be discussed openly with the public, 
and greater efforts would have to be made to 
inform the latter of the need for and the safety of 
nuclear energy. His Government was confident, 
however, that the strong arguments in favour of 
nuclear energy would prevail, and it was convinced 
that nuclear energy technology could safely 
-7 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 

be applied. The risks were not as great as other 
accepted risks, but manufacturers and operators 
of nuclear installations would have to strive for 
uncompromising safety. 

55. His Government would ensure that measures 
to protect the public received absolute priority. 
A broad reactor-safety research programme for 
light-water reactors was being carried out and 
much attention was being devoted to the safety of 
new reactor types 
56. More and more nuclear energy would be 
needed, not only by industrialized countries but 
also by developing countries. The availability of 
nuclear industrial capacity in the Federal Republic 
of Germany had resulted in co-operation with 
other countries. An agreement on co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had been 
concluded in June with Brazil, providing for longterm 
co-operation in the construction of up to 
eight nuclear power stations and in the whole 
range of nuclear fuel-cycle operations. Such cooperation 
would make for a rapidly increasing 
involvement of Brazilian industry, and several 
joint enterprises were envisaged; it would also 
help to meet the growing demand for energy in 
Brazil, and would ensure adequate supplies of 
natural uranium for the Federal Republic of 
Germany. The whole undertaking was a rare 
example of modern and sophisticated technologies 
being transferred from one country to another. 

57. In the agreement both partners committed 
themselves anew to the principle of the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. A tripartite 
safeguards agreement with the Agency was 
envisaged, and the two countries hoped to submit 
a first draft before the end of the year. The 
purpose of the safeguards agreement would be to 
ensure that not only the nuclear materials supplied 
or manufactured but also the equipment or relevant 
technological information exported or transferred 
were not used for the production of nuclear 
weapons or any other nuclear explosive devices. 
The application of safeguards would be a prerequisite 
for any transfers to third countries. 
The two partners had also agreed on strict 
measures for the physical protection of nuclear 
materials and equipment. Those arrangements 
went beyond the obligations of the Federal 
Republic of Germany under NPT. 

58. In the light of the situation he had just 
described, there were obvious tasks for the 
Agency: 
(a) 
It should draw up world-wide recommendations 
on all aspects of nuclear 
safety, ranging from reactor safety to 
the public acceptance of nuclear energy; 
(b) 
It should assist countries, especially 
developing countries, in the introduction 
of nuclear energy; 
(c) 
It should support the introduction of 
other nuclear techniques, for example 
in agriculture, food production and medicine; 
(d) 
Finally, it was the Agency's duty to 
apply safeguards to prevent the misuse 
of nuclear energy and to elaborate 
recommendations for the physical 
protection of nuclear material. 
59. In regard to the programme, and in the 
light of the forthcoming programme review in 
1976, he thought the Agency should determine 
the less important areas and try to be more 
selective in its activities, for it could not cover 
the whole field. That request also resulted from 
the economic and budgetary problems of many 
Member States. 
60. The effects of price increases and currency 
fluctuations on the Agency's budget for 1976 had 
been drastic. Although the draft budget provided 
for contributions of approximately $34 million, 
which was about 28% more than in 1975, the 
programme as such would show a real growth of 
only 3. 8%. In the past the Agency had done 
remarkably well in its efforts to economize. 
However, price and currency developments had 
placed national governments in an exceptionally 
difficult situation, forcing them in many cases to 
abstain entirely from real increases in national 
budgets; international organizations should 
support governments in their struggle and he 
therefore welcomed the Director General's 
decision to cut his initial budgetary and staff 
estimates for 1976. 
61. Turning to the financing of technical 
assistance, he noted that Agency resources of 
immediate interest to developing countries had 
risen by some 40% from 1974 to 1975. That was 
clearly a more than proportionate rate of growth, 
and more moderate rates of increase would seem 
possible for the future. 
62. In 1976, the voluntary contributions of the 
Federal Republic of Germany would again exceed 
$1 million. His Government intended to raise 
anew its contribution to the General Fund. It 
would also provide 30 fellowships and was prepared 
to send at least 20 experts at its own 
expense on Agency missions to developing 
countries. About $600 000 would be contributed 
by the Federal Republic to three special projects 
sponsored by the Agency, the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) 
and numerous institutes in developing countries: 
the protein project, the nitrogen fertilizer 
project, and the tsetse fly project. The Agency's 
second training course for key managerial and 
technical staff from developing countries would 
be conducted at the Karlsruhe Nuclear Research 
Centre from September to December 1976, 
following the first course just opened by the 
Director General at Karlsruhe on 8 September. 
63. The General Conference had to consider 
two co-operation agreements, one between the 
Agency and the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA) [4] and one between the 
[4] The draft agreement is set out in document 
GC(XIX)/545, Annex. 
-8 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


Agency and the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) [5]. His delegation 
was in favour of both agreements. 

64. The Federal Republic of Germany had 
ratified NPT on 2 May 1975, together with 
Belgium, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, 
which were also members of the European 
Communities. The NPT Review Conference had 
also been held in May and in his Government's 
view had produced positive results. The Final 
Declaration rightly affirmed the importance of 
universal adherence to NPT, and it was regrettable 
that 21 of the Agency's Member States had 
not yet signed the Treaty, and that another 11 had 
signed, but not ratified it. The NPT Review 
Conference had rightly emphasized the need for 
States party to NPT to conclude safeguards 
agreements with the Agency as soon as possible. 
His Government hoped that the three NPT 
Depositary Governments would subject the 
civilian sector of their nuclear activities to 
Agency safeguards in the near future, in the 
interests of equal competition between nuclearweapon 
States and non-nuclear-weapon States. 
The NPT Review Conference had also recommended 
that common export requirements should 
be strengthened, and that they should be accepted 
by all suppliers and recipients. It had also 
supported the role of the Agency in general and 
its activities in specific areas. In particular, it 
had stated that the further improvement of safeguards 
techniques should remain a matter of 
priority to the Agency, and that the Agency should 
complete a set of recommendations for the 
physical protection of nuclear material at an 
early date. The Review Conference had also 
endorsed the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
His Government welcomed the fact 
that the Board of Governors had heeded the 
recommendation of the Review Conference and 
set up an Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear 
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes. 
65. In conclusion, he wanted to commend the 
Agency and the Director General on their successful 
work and to assure them of his country's 
continued active support. 
66. Mr. BOSWELL (Australia) said that as was 
known, Australia had discovered very large 
deposits of uranium in recent years and the 
potential for further discoveries was high. But 
because Australia had an abundance of natural 
gas and easily won coal, a need for nuclear power 
had not arisen and was still some time off. With 
no domestic demand for uranium, Australia had 
the potential to export significant quantities. 
67. However, there had been many expressions 
of concern by the public about exports. Those 
had ranged from sincere worries about health 
hazards, fears for the environment, considerations 
of possible illicit diversion and objections 
[5] The draft agreement is set out in document 
GC(XIX)/556, Annex. 
to the use of nuclear power anywhere in the world. 
A public inquiry had begun to examine a proposal 
to mine and mill uranium in Australia. Australia 
was thus following a path which was well trodden 
by many advanced nations with environmental 
consciences, and there was no doubt that many 
other less-developed nations would follow as 
they, in turn, established nuclear industries. 

68. Much of the concern expressed by the public 
arose from a lack of information and understanding. 
There was certainly a need to educate 
and inform, so that rational debate could take 
place. But when factual, authoritative, unbiased 
information on nuclear matters was sought, very 
little could be found. He believed that many 
nations would be assisted if the Agency increased 
its publication of factual papers; those should 
not argue a case or contain any hint of emotionalism, 
they should simply set down the facts. 
69. The Agency had access to and could draw 
on the expertise and experience of many nations. 
There were numerous working groups and panel 
meetings tackling a variety of problems, such as 
radioactive waste management, codes of practice 
for mining, but they tended to produce what he 
might term technical specific papers. He 
suggested that they might produce parallel 
papers which could be readily understood by the 
general public. He had in mind expanded 
versions of chapters in the excellent Agency 
publication "Nuclear Power and the Environment". 
[6] 
70. The Agency's objective under the Statute 
was "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world"; it was concerned "to 
establish or adopt ... . standards of safety for 
protection of health and minimization of danger 
to life and property". [7] It submitted reports to 
the General Assembly and other organs of the 
United Nations. The Agency had a reputation for 
responsibility and it could further enhance that 
reputation by educating the ordinary man, who 
would see it as a responsible body in world 
affairs, not swayed by national interests, and 
one to which he could look for simple, reassuring, 
objective comment and sound advice on nuclear 
matters. 
71. He hoped that the result of the public inquiry 
would satisfy the Government and people of 
Australia that the industry would be acceptable and 
that very soon Australia would rapidly enter the 
business of exporting uranium. In the longer 
term Australia planned to upgrade the product 
before export. 
72. As Australia became a major exporter of 
uranium, a greater responsibility would fall on 
it to ensure that nuclear energy was used for 
peaceful purposes. Safeguards were the respon[
6] STI/PUB/321/Rev. 1. 
[7] Articles II and III. A. 6 respectively. 
-9 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


sibility of Governments, and the Australian 
Government, in addition to ratifying NPT, had 
given further undertakings to the Director 
General. [8] In accordance with those undertakings 
and Australia's NPT obligations it would 
be part of the Government1 s policy in the matter 
of future sales of uranium to non-nuclearweapon 
States, only to supply such States if they 
had either ratified NPT or had given assurances 
of non-explosive use and if they permitted Agency 
verification. Australia would do its utmost to 
apply and to develop the safeguards regimes 
applying to its exports; it could not work alone 
and it was primarily through the Agency that it 
looked for the co-operation of suppliers and 
consumers alike. 

73. Australia recognized the dangers inherent 
in developing the use of peaceful nuclear 
explosions outside appropriate international 
supervision. It saw a unique opportunity for the 
Board of Governors to rationalize and guide 
international thinking in the use of that technique 
through the newly formed Ad Hoc Advisory Group 
on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes. 
74. Finally, he wished to say how pleased 
Australia was to see the Agency broadening the 
scope of its activities and strengthening its cooperation 
and co-ordination with other international 
organizations. It valued the achievements 
of the Agency in the field of safeguards, which 
was of course a subject of paramount importance. 
Nevertheless, as the world turned increasingly to 
nuclear power, the Agency should broaden its 
field of activities to ensure that the nuclear 
industry was not only safeguarded but safe. 
75. The Australian Prime Minister accorded a 
very real priority to the work of the Agency 
within the United Nations family of organizations. 
Only if the work of the Agency was successful 
would there be any assurance that nuclear energy 
would contribute to the welfare of mankind. 
76. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) said that it 
was always enjoyable to welcome new Members 
to the Agency especially, for his delegation, when 
one of them was a member of the British 
Commonwealth. He was confident that Tanzania, 
the United Arab Emirates and Qatar would 
provide valuable contributions to the work of the 
Agency. [9] 
77. As the Director General had shown in his 
comprehensive survey of activities [10], the 
Agency was going through a busy and difficult time; 
busy, because of the gathering momentum of the 
new and accelerated programmes instituted in 
the past two years; and difficult, because of the 
repercussions of inflation and exchange rate 
[8] See document INFCIRC/209. 
[9] See document GC(XIX)/OR. 176, 
paras 14-20. 
[10] Ibid., paras 21-59. 
fluctuation on financial resources. At the same 
time, Member States had been troubled by the 
recession in world trade. Despite those 
difficulties, the Director General had, as ever, 
continued to provide a wise and prudent stewardship 
of the Agency's affairs, for which efforts he 
deserved every commendation. 

78. In the United Kingdom, the plans for the 
introduction of more nuclear power stations 
were proceeding on the lines he had explained to 
the General Conference the previous year [11], 
with continued building on the experience of many 
years in developing and improving capabilities in 
the fields of enrichment, reprocessing, and 
medical and industrial uses of radioisotopes. 
Work on the environmental and safety implications 
of the growing uses of atomic energy was also 
being increased and deepened. 
79. He would take the opportunity to mention 
that his delegation was looking forward to welcoming 
conference delegates to Winfrith the 
following Saturday where the United Kingdom 
100-MW power station of the steam generating 
heavy-water reactor type was located. 
80. Of the many aspects of the Agency's work 
mentioned in the annual report for 1974-1975 he 
wished to take particular note of the development 
of the Agency's plans for the publication of codes 
and guides on reactor safety (GC(XDC)/544, 
paras 118 and 120). The general acceptance of 
the Agency's radiological protection standards 
had been highly valuable, both in assisting the 
sound development of nuclear power and in 
reassuring public opinion in the countries concerned. 
The United Kingdom believed that 
similarly useful work could be done by the Agency 
in other fields related to safety, as an important 
element in orienting its work to satisfying the 
needs generated by the recent expansion of 
interest in nuclear power. The United Kingdom 
was taking part in that work at every level. The 
maintenance of the right balance between the 
desired comprehensiveness of the safety codes 
and the degree of flexibility permitting the 
evolutionary development of nuclear power was 
important, particularly in the case of the code on 
reactor design. The more 'detailed guides would 
provide a valuable back-up to the codes, and in 
their case it was more important to give sound 
advice in depth on certain well selected subjects 
rather than limited general advice on too wide a 
front. 
81. A major event in the past year had been the 
holding of the NPT Review Conference at Geneva 
in May 1975. And since in its Final Declaration, 
the Review Conference had requested the Agency 
to initiate or continue necessary studies on 
matters of joint concern, he would like to offer 
a brief account of his Government's attitude to 
some of the issues in question. 
[11] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 171, para. 14. 
- 10 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


82. The Review Conference had expressed the 
hope that all States having peaceful nuclear 
activities would establish and maintain effective 
accounting and control systems, and had welcomed 
the readiness of the Agency to assist 
States in so doing. Such an accounting and 
control system was an essential part not only of 
safeguards but also of the efficiency and economic 
operation of nuclear plants. The Agency, he was 
sure, would continue to offer every assistance to 
its Members in that field. 
83. The Review Conference had recommended 
that intensified efforts be made towards the 
standardization and the universality of application 
of Agency safeguards, partly through ensuring 
that safeguards agreements concluded with nonnuclear-
weapon States which were not parties to 
NPT should be of adequate duration and should 
contain appropriate provisions for the continuation 
of the application of safeguards upon 
re-export. Those recommendations would be 
welcomed by the Director General and his staff; 
and for its part, his Government endorsed the 
Director General's call for the universal adoption 
of safeguards on all civil nuclear activities, and 
would give full support to any action to that end. 
84. The Review Conference had also urged all 
parties to NPT actively to pursue their efforts to 
seek, in all achievable ways, the strengthening of 
common export requirements relating to safeguards, 
in the hope that there would be the widest 
possible measure of acceptance for such common 
requirements. His Government regarded that 
matter as one of great importance to every 
Member State. Possibly the objective might best 
be achieved through progress toward the standardization 
and the universality of application of 
Agency safeguards. Regarding the recognized 
need for more attention and support to be given 
to the improvement of safeguards techniques, 
instrumentation, and data handling, the 
Conference had noted with satisfaction the 
establishment by the Director General of a 
standing advisory group on safeguards implementation. 
His Government would play a full 
part in the work of that group. 

8 5. On the question of peaceful nuclear 
explosions, the Review Conference had 
recognized the Agency as being the appropriate 
international body through which potential 
benefits from peaceful application of nuclear 
explosions could be made available to any nonnuclear-
weapon State. It had urged the Agency 
to expedite work on identifying and examining 
the important legal issues involved in the 
structure and content of the necessary special 
international agreement or agreements; as also 
to set up appropriate machinery within which 
intergovernmental discussion could take place 
and through which advice could be given on the 
Agency's work in that field. In June the Board 
of Governors had established an Ad Hoc Advisory 
Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful 
Purposes, which was scheduled to meet shortly. 
His Government would take a full and constructive 
part in the Group's activities, in the belief that 
the Agency had much to contribute in that 
important and complex area. 

86. Much had been said at the Review Conference 
about the desirability of technical assistance being 
given on a preferential basis to States which were 
parties to NPT. His Government recognized that 
the Agency could not discriminate between one 
class of Member and another, while at the same 
time, feeling that States which had incurred the 
obligations of membership of NPT were entitled 
to expect preferential assistance from other 
States party to the Treaty. It had therefore 
decided that, in addition to the normal United 
Kingdom voluntary contribution to the Agency's 
technical assistance programme - which, as 
usual, had been pledged in full -a further, 
though necessarily smaller, contribution would 
be made, with the request that it should be set 
aside for training activities for the benefit of 
States which were party to NPT. In addition, 
the United Kingdom, when receiving requests 
for training from the Agency, would give 
particular emphasis to meeting requests 
originating in States party to NPT. As in 
previous years, the United Kingdom was ready 
to meet its full assessed contribution to the 
1976 budget. 

87. It was hoped that the Agency would study in 
detail two other subjects of concern to the Review 
Conference, namely, the physical protection of 
nuclear materials and the possible development 
of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres. In that 
regard, his delegation welcomed the work done 
by the Agency in preparing a new edition of its 
recommendations for the physical protection of 
nuclear material. [12] It was to be hoped that all 
Member States would do their utmost to implement 
the revised recommendations, as his own Government 
would certainly do. As for the important 
studies now being started concerning the 
feasibility of regional or multinational nuclear 
fuel cycle centres, the important aspects of 
identification of the complex, practical and 
organizational difficulties which would need to 
be dealt with in connection with such projects, 
to which the Review Conference had drawn attention, 
should not be overlooked. Notwithstanding 
those difficulties, the United Kingdom, as a 
country with major and expanding facilities 
covering the whole of the fuel cycle, would play 
its full part in the studies in question. 

88. Turning to the progress made by his 
Government in negotiation with the Agency and 
the Commission of the European Communities 
towards the conclusion of an agreement to 
implement its voluntary offer to accept Agency 
verification of EURATOM safeguards on the 
British civil nuclear industry, it had been hoped 
that the negotiations would have been concluded 
in time to enable a draft agreement to be submitted 
to the Board of Governors at its meetings 
immediately prior to the General Conference. 
[12] INFCIRC/225. 
- 11 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 

That had not proved possible, although the 
negotiations were, in fact, very near to conclusion 
and no matters of substance were outstanding. 
He was confident that the final text 
of an agreement would be ready for submission 
to the Board of Governors early in 1976. As 
soon as the necessary procedures for its ratification 
had been concluded, his Government 
would wish to implement the agreement without 
further delay. 

89. Mr. URSU (Romania), welcoming the 
United Arab Emirates, Qatar and the United 
Republic of Tanzania as Members of the Agency, 
said that the present session of the General 
Conference was being held at a time when the 
peoples of the world increasingly aspired for 
mastery over their fate and national wealth, for 
greater economic and social progress and for 
the establishment of a new international economic 
and political order. Its purpose was to evaluate 
the Agency's activities in 1974 and review those 
for the future in the light of the decisions adopted 
in particular by the Sixth and Seventh Special 
Sessions of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, identifying specific ways and means of 
putting into practice, in so far as the nuclear 
field was concerned, the objectives of building 
a better and more just world. 

90. The Agency's achievements in the preceding 
year had been positive in its fields of activity, 
which included nuclear power engineering and 
related technologies, environmental protection 
and safety of nuclear facilities and training of 
personnel for developing countries. Particular 
attention had been devoted to the problems of the 
fuel cycle, including nuclear materials and radioactive 
wastes. Romania, which had been among 
the countries to receive fissionable materials 
and also help in developing their own national 
technologies, considered that such assistance 
should be extended continuously. 
91 The research contracts programme, in 
spite of limited financial resources, had 
assisted institutes from the Member States in 
solving various applied research problems and 
in developing the applications of nuclear techniques 
in medicine, agriculture, biology, 
hydrology and so on. 

92. His delegation commended the Agency's 
efforts in stimulating fundamental research in 
plasma physics and controlled fusion, direct 
conversion of nuclear energy, solid state physics, 
neutron physics and structure of the nucleus. 
Important results had been obtained also in the 
nuclear data programme. 
93. The programme of the scientific meetings 
had taken due account of the specific needs of 
the developing countries. 
94. As regards the activities for the coming 
years, the Agency was entering into a new stage 
with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in an 
increasing number of developing countries, 
passing from the period of generous promises 
for the future to that of actual implementation. 
As the main international forum for co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Agency 
must increase its activity in that field to meet 
the increasing requirements of its developing 
Member States and provide effective assistance 
to them in the use of nuclear energy as an 
important tool in solving their economic and 
social problems. Such activity was provided for 
in Article II of the Agency's Statute and in 
Articles IV and V of NPT and reiterated in the 
final document adopted by the first NPT Review 
Conference, and must be reflected in the Agency's 
programmes for the future years. 

95. In its future programmes, the Agency should 
attach particular importance to facilitating the 
access of all States to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy on a non-discriminatory basis, greater 
technical assistance to non-nuclear-weapon 
States, including the supply of nuclear materials 
and equipment, and liberalizing the transfer of 
technologies. Promotion of fundamental and 
applied research in the nuclear field in the 
developing countries should also receive special 
attention, and the activities relating to nuclear 
power, research contracts for the developing 
countries, and the scientific meetings organized 
by the Agency should be further expanded. In 
that connection, the initiative taken by the 
Director General in convening the Conference on 
Nuclear Energy and its Fuel Cycle in 1977 was 
welcome. 
96. While Romania hoped that the Agency's 
activities in 1976 would be focused on problems 
of particular interest, especially to the developing 
countries, to assist them in the development 
of nuclear power and assimilation of nuclear 
technologies, it was essential that a just ratio 
be maintained between its main function, viz. 
development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, and its safeguards activities. 
97. Romania had been advocating a programme 
of true general and nuclear disarmament since 
on that depended international peace and security. 
At the Seventh Special Session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations it had strongly 
urged that the military budgets of all States 
should be reduced by 10%, the expenditure for 
1975 being taken as the base figure, and that 
half the funds thus released be made available 
unconditionally to a special United Nations 
development fund for the benefit of the developing 
countries. It also considered that a part of the 
fissionable materials made redundant by nuclear 
disarmament should be placed at the Agency's 
disposal for the purpose of technical assistance 
to developing countries. 
98. In the context of building a multilaterallydeveloped 
socialist society, Romania attached 
great importance to the development of science 
and technology, including nuclear energy, and 
was putting into practice the latest achievements 
of modern science; it promoted a policy of nuclear 
research. In accordance with its general foreign 
policy, it had been developing scientific co- 
12 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


operation with all the socialist, developing and 
other States and actively participating in international 
scientific and technical exchanges, thus 
contributing to a climate of detente and multilateral 
co-operation in the world. 

99. In his country's economic and social 
activities, nuclear power and nuclear technology 
had been given a central place. Under the new 
national programme on nuclear power adopted 
the previous year by the Eleventh Congress of 
the Romanian Communist Party about 6000 MW(e) 
of nuclear power would be installed, to which 
work the Romanian scientists and industry would 
contribute substantially. In view of the dimensions 
of the new national nuclear programme, an 
integrated National Centre of Physics had been 
established near Bucharest in 1974. About 
5000 persons of different professions were 
currently employed there for work or training. 

100. Romania's most important achievements 
were, among others, in the field of nuclear 
fuels (e. g. UO powder preparation, sinterization 
of UC"2 pellets, production of Zr alloys and 
experimental fuel elements). In achieving those 
results it owed much to technical co-operation 
with the Agency, the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) and several Member States. 
It hoped to put into operation by the year's end 
a pilot plant for the fabrication of natural uranium 
fuel elements. 
101. Positive results had also been obtained in 
research in nuclear physics, solid state physics, 
nuclear chemistry and electronics, especially 
with reference to nuclear power. Further 
important work had yet to be done in those fields 
and it was hoped that the Agency and other international 
organizations, as well as Member States, 
would provide greater assistance. 
102. As a developing socialist country, Romania 
wished in the future to benefit from the Agency's 
technical assistance and was ready, in its turn, 
to offer assistance to other developing countries 
and to make a voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund in proportion to its base rate of 
assessment. 
103. The Romanian delegation was, in principle, 
in favour of the budget increase, provided higher 
allocations were made for the new programmes 
of technical assistance and for research contracts 
for the benefit of the developing countries. In 
that connection, it was necessary to review the 
way in which the Agency's sources were utilized 
and to introduce a proper balance between the 
different items of expenditure in the budget. 
Since the proposed budget for 1976 was 30% 
higher than that of the preceding year without 
fulfilling Romania's conditions, his delegation 
was unable to support the draft budget proposed 
by the Board of Governors. 
104. Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) said that at the 
previous General Conference he had announced 
Iran's intention to implement a broad nuclear 
development programme as an important contribution 
to the solution of the country's energy 
problems over the next few decades. [13] 

105. Since that time the Atomic Energy 
Organization of Iran had grown into a major 
administrative unit in which more than 
600 scientists, technicians, experts and other 
personnel were employed. 
106. With a view to providing the country by the 
year 1994 with 23 000 MW of nuclear generated 
electricity, the Iranian Government had established 
close co-operation with technologically advanced 
countries in the field of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and had at the same time 
carefully studied the best possible ways to 
implement the Iranian nuclear power projects. 
107. The first domestic nuclear power plant 
would be composed of two pressurized water 
reactors of 1200 MW(e) each, at present being 
installed at a site near Halileh in the Persian 
Gulf. It was anticipated that the power plant 
would become operational during the year 1981. 
108. A contract for the construction of a second 
nuclear power plant had been signed. The plant 
would consist of two pressurized water reactors 
of 900 MW(e) each. Two possible sites were at 
present under study. The construction of the 
second plant would commence as soon as the 
final decision on siting had been made. 
109. With regard to prospecting for uranium in 
Iran, efforts were being stepped up and various 
promising regions were being singled out for 
detailed investigation. Meanwhile, action had 
been taken to ensure a supply of uranium for the 
Iranian nuclear power programme, including 
enrichment services. 
110. Despite the successful efforts in that area, 
the Iranian Government was concerned about the 
ever-increasing world nuclear fuel demand. The 
problem was being looked at closely by the 
Agency and it was hoped that it would come up 
with reasonable solutions acceptable to all States. 
111. The scarcity of qualified engineers and 
technicians all over the world, especially in the 
developing countries, created an important 
bottleneck in nuclear development. Iran had therefore 
decided to carry out a broad and diversified 
training programme. At present numerous 
young Iranian scientists and technicians were 
being trained under special agreements and with 
the aid of fellowships. 
112. A number of Iranian technicians and experts 
had improved their knowledge by attending 
Agency seminars or training courses. But in 
view of the crucial importance of such courses, 
there was need to improve them both in quality 
and quantity. 
[13] GC(XVIII)/OR. 170, paras 1-4. 
- 13 



GC(XIX)/OR. 177 


113. Finally, a word should be said on the 
development in Iran of nuclear research centres. 
At present, two research centres were in 
operation. One was the Nuclear Research Centre 
of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, 
which so far had carried out various research 
projects using existing facilities, including a 
5-MW research reactor and a Van de Graaff 
accelerator. The other research centre was the 
Centre for Radioisotope Research and Application, 
which was mainly concerned with the use of 
isotopes in hydrology, industry, biology and 
agriculture. 
114. Plans were under way for the establishment 
of a third nuclear research centre at Isfahan, 
which was expected to become operational around 
1978. The new centre would be mainly concerned 
with research and development in the field of 
nuclear technology. 
115. In view of its own initiative in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, the Iranian 
Government was gratified to see that the 
community of NPT nations continued to grow, 
even though the rate of that growth did not match 
its expectations. 

116. The fact that Iran has been one of the first 
countries to ratify NPT was an indication that 
it had always looked on nuclear energy as a 
major element for the betterment of mankind. 
117. In conclusion, he wished to stress the vital 
need for the transfer of nuclear technology from 
the more advanced States to the developing 
countries. The Agency, as the most appropriate 
international organization, was expected to play 
an important role in seeing to it that the transfer 
of technology was carried out in a spirit of 
sincere co-operation and without unnecessary 
obstructions. 
118. The transfer of technology was, apart from 
any other consideration, a moral task, without 
which it would never be possible to free the 
greater part of humanity from political and 
economic dependence on a small number of 
technologically advanced countries. 
. The session rose at 1 p. m. 

- 14 



GC 


GC(XIX)/OR. 178 

International Atomic Energy Agency 14 January 1976* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 23 September 1975, at 3. 20 p.m. 


President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 


Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
6 General debate and report for 1974-75(continued) 
1-105 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Hungary 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Brazil 
Holy See 
India 
German Democratic Republic 
Philippines 
Sweden 
1 13 
50 
60 
65 
77 
91 
99 
12 
49 
59 
64 
76 
90 
98 
105 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 26 September 1975. 
** GC(XIX)/559. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 
75-9526 


GC(XK)/OR. 178 


THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1974-75 
(GC(XIX)/544, 544/Corr. 1, 554)(continued) 

1. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary) said he was 
happy to note that the Conference's session was 
taking place in a climate of international detente. 
That was due largely to the results of the recent 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in 
Europe (CSCE), the Final Declaration of which, 
signed in Helsinki, opened a new era of European 
relations. The favourable evolution of the international 
situation was due essentially to the reestablishment 
of peace in the Indo-Chinese 
Peninsula. It was now up to the United Nations 
and its specialized agencies, as well as the Agency, 
to help the Vietnamese people, which had been so 
sorely tried, and it was to be hoped that the two 
republics of Viet-Nam would become members of 
the Agency. 
2. However, peace was still threatened. 
Fascist and racist regimes, war-industry circles 
in the advanced capitalist countries, and the 
situations in Cyprus and the Middle East, were so 
many obstacles to a further easing of tension. 
3. The Review Conference of the Parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT Review Conference)[l], had been 
one of the year's outstanding events, for it would 
beyond any doubt favour further steps towards 
nuclear disarmament. In the opinion of his 
delegation, the Final Declaration of that Conference 
was highly pertinent to the Agency's activities and 
should be borne in mind in all its aspects. In 
particular, in present circumstances, with the risk 
of a proliferation of nuclear weapons still growing, 
the Hungarian Government attached primordial 
importance to the strengthening of measures aimed 
at the prevention of any form of proliferation. In 
that connection, his Government unreservedly 
supported the proposal of the Soviet Union at the 
thirtieth session of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, that experimental nuclear explosions 
for military purposes should be banned 
completely. The Hungarian delegation welcomed 
the accession of five Member States of the 
European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) 
to NPT and hoped that other countries not yet 
party to NPT would follow that example. 
4. As he had already stated at the NPT Review 
Conference the Hungarian Government considered 
it indispensable that the Agency's Safeguards 
System (1965, as Provisionally Extended in 1966 
and 1968)[2] should be strengthened. States 
which were already party to NPT, but had not yet 
concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency, 
[1] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. The 
text of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is reproduced in document 
INFCIRC/140. 
[2] INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2. 
should thus do so without delay. That was all the 
more urgent in view of the fact that certain 
bilateral safeguards agreements contained 
infringements of the provisions of NPT. The 
Agency should do all in its power to ensure that 
that instrument was universally respected; that 
meant that the safeguards system should also be 
universally applied. From the point of view of 
nuclear safety and the application of safeguards, 
the establishment of regional nuclear energy 
centres was extremely desirable, even without 
regard to the great prospects which they offered 
for the production and consumption of energy. 

5. The Hungarian delegation attributed the 
greatest possible importance to the activities 
connected with peaceful nuclear explosions (PNE) 
which laid such a heavy burden of responsibility 
on the Agency. The methods of providing assistance 
to countries in that field would have to be 
studied with great thoroughness. Under the 
provisions of NPT, only nuclear-weapon States 
which had signed NPT were entitled to provide 
PNE services. Moreover, the Hungarian delegation 
had always held the view that the beneficiaries 
of those services should also in the first 
instance be States which had signed NPT. 
6. In technical assistance, the order of priorities 
should be determined by the requirements 
expressed by a majority of States; and in that 
connection it seemed clear that the applications of 
radioisotopes needed more attention. In almost 
70% of countries, the preservation of foodstuffs 
was a difficult problem. Apart from the energy 
crisis, other vitally important problems lay in 
food shortages and hence in the supply of foodstuffs 
and the improvement of agricultural production. 
7. The Hungarian delegation was pleased to 
announce that Hungary was participating in a joint 
Agency-United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) project relating to the construction of 
sterilization plants for medical equipment. It 
regretted, however, that UNDP was not making 
greater use of the Agency in implementing its 
projects, especially at the regional level. 
8. Conscious of the importance of the Agency's 
activities, and aware of its financial difficulties, 
the Hungarian Government had decided on a 33% 
increase in its voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund, an increase which would raise the 
level of the contribution to one million forints in 
1976. 
9. Referring to the Agency's budget for 1976, [3] 
the Hungarian delegation noted that although a 
marked percentage increase in the allocations was 
planned for certain sections, the funds for technical 
assistance would be insufficient. The allocations 
planned for publishing activities, which were very 
important, were also too small. On the other 
hand, his delegation supported the estimates for 
safeguards, which could be effective only if 
[3] GC(XK)/550. 
_ 2 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 


sufficient funds were available for their application. 


10. The Hungarian delegation welcomed the 
agreement concluded between the Agency and the 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA), 
as it bore witness to good progress in co-operation 
between intergovernmental organizations. It 
would be very useful if the Agency and CMEA each 
published material relating to activities and 
meetings of the other organization in one and the 
same working language. The exchange of information 
would be accelerated in that way. 
11. In conclusion, he said that despite past 
achievements his country, for want of funds, 
could not make as much use of nuclear applications 
as it would like to. That was one of the reasons 
why Hungary had tried to co-ordinate its national 
plans with the FAO/IAEA programme. The 
country's first nuclear power station was under 
construction and a sterilization plant for medical 
equipment was being built under a UNDP/IAEA 
project. Hungary was participating actively in 
food programmes and in various other Agency 
programmes on the basis of research contracts 
relating to scientific work being carried out in 
Hungary. 
12. The Hungarian delegation welcomed the 
representatives of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates 
and the United Republic of Tanzania, whose recent 
admission to membership of the Agency strengthened 
the latter's universal character. [4] 
13. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) congratulated the President on his 
election and welcomed the representatives of 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, the United 
Republic of Tanzania, and the delegation of the 
heroic people of the Republic of South Viet-Nam. 
14. The present session was being held in an 
atmosphere of international detente, which had 
further been promoted by the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe, That 
conference, which was bound to lead to a slowing 
down of the arms race, was a landmark on the 
road to peaceful coexistence between States having 
different social structures. 
15. As had been observed by Mr. L. Brezhnev, 
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, it was 
the achievement of international detente through 
effective progress in disarmament that would help 
to consolidate and maintain peace in Europe. 
Various agreements which had been concluded 
during the preceding years were a means of 
slowing down the arms race in certain areas. 
Among those agreements, first position must be 
accorded to NPT. Although it had not been 
possible to put a complete stop to the arms race, 
the Soviet Union considered that the situation was 
now such that specific disarmament steps could 
[4] See document GC(XIX)/OR. 176, paras 14-20. 
be taken at the international level. That was the 
aim of the new action taken by the Soviet Union for 
securing inclusion in the agenda of the thirtieth 
session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations of the important and urgent matter of the 
conclusion of an agreement on the general and total 
prohibition of nuclear weapon tests. Such an 
agreement would contribute greatly to the limitation 
of the arms race. 

16. Solution of the problems of disarmament 
required intensified efforts on the part of all 
countries and, in particular, of the Great Powers. 
The Soviet Union would certainly continue its 
efforts in that direction until general and total disarmament 
had been achieved, since that endeavour 
was an inseparable part of its peace-loving foreign 
policy. In that context, historical significance 
attached to its new initiative to induce States, and 
especially the Great Powers, to conclude an 
agreement on the prohibition of development of 
new types of weapons of mass destruction. An 
agreement along those lines, as suggested by 
Mr. Brezhnev, would in fact help supplement 
political detente with a military detente. It was 
no mere chance that the proposal had met with 
wide approval in world opinion. 

17. In recent years, there had been a definite 
intensification of the talks on disarmament. 
During the meeting at Vladivostok held in 
November 1974, the foundation had been laid for 
a new long-term agreement on the limitation of 
strategic weapons. Negotiations preparatory to 
drafting a treaty for that purpose were being conducted 
at Geneva. The talks on the reduction of 
armed forces and armaments in Central Europe 
were to be resumed shortly in Vienna. The Soviet 
Union and the United States were continuing their 
negotiations relating to PNEs as an extension to 
their Treaty on the Limitation of Underground 
Nuclear Weapons Tests of 3 July 1974[5]. 
18. The CSCE in Helsinki, too, was of great 
significance to the Agency since it had laid down 
specific forms of collaboration in economics, 
science, technology, environmental protection, 
etc., which were matters of direct concern to the 
Agency. Such collaboration was certainly of 
direct interest not only to countries of the European 
continent but also to those in other areas of the 
world. In the Final Act of the CSCE, it was 
emphasized that international and intergovernmental 
organizations could and should contribute 
to implementing the agreements arrived at. Of 
the important scientific and technical problems to 
which it had drawn attention, several came within 
the sphere of the Agency, for example, the study of 
new resources of energy, including atomic energy, 
plasma physics, theoretical and experimental 
physics and environmental protection. In the 
opinion of the Soviet delegation, the Agency should 
give due place to those problems in its programme 
and thus contribute to their practical solution. 
[5] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/208. 
-3 

GC(XIX)/OR. 178 


19. The current session was being held shortly 
after the NPT Review Conference, which had played 
an important part in strengthening the international 
authority of NPT, reinforcing its universal nature 
and increasing its effectiveness, thereby contributing 
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
20. As had been rightly emphasized by the 
Director General in his statement at the 176th 
plenary meeting, the NPT Review Conference was 
of particular importance for the Agency, since 
the recommendations which it had adopted would 
inevitably have considerable implications for the 
further development of the organization's 
activities in areas such as safeguards, technical 
assistance to developing countries in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy, provision of PNE services 
and so on. 
21. The delegation of the Soviet Union noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency's efforts in connection 
with NPT had met with approval at the NPT Review 
Conference. It was now the Agency's responsibility 
to implement the decisions of that conference. 
As regards safeguards in connection with NPT, the 
Agency was appreciably expanding and intensifying 
its activities. It was a positive achievement on 
the Agency's part, as had been noted in the documents 
of that conference, that in exercising its 
safeguards functions it respected the sovereign 
rights of States and did not interfere with the 
scientific or technical development of States party 
to NPT or hinder international co-operation in 
peaceful nuclear activities. 
22. That acknowledgement justified the course 
which the Agency was following in solving the 
complex problems of safeguards. It was essential 
that it should strengthen its authority as the 
competent international body in that field by 
developing and applying the best technical methods 
and systems for safeguards and by improving the 
organization of safeguards and inspection procedures. 
That objective could be attained more 
easily by improving and automating the processing 
of safeguards data, improving the equipment 
needed for analysis of such data and establishing 
effective national systems for nuclear materials 
accounting, 
23. Vital importance attached to the increase in 
the number of accessions to NPT, its ratification 
by countries which had already signed it, and the 
conclusion of the relevant safeguards agreements 
between States party to NPT and the Agency. In 
that connection it was particularly gratifying to 
note the accession to NPT of Members of 
EURATOM possessing an advanced nuclear industry 
such as the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, 
Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. It 
was now to be hoped that Japan, Switzerland and 
other countries which had not yet ratified NPT 
would not delay in following their example. It was 
essential that the Agency should expedite the conclusion 
and application of the safeguards agreements 
provided for in Article III, paragraph 1 of 
NPT. The General Conference should make an 
appeal to that effect to countries which had not yet 
concluded such an agreement, and the Secretariat 
should show greater initiative in that direction. 
24. The Agency was systematically and energetically 
pursuing its efforts to enhance the effectiveness 
of control. For several years past the 
Soviet Union had been according the Agency its 
assistance in improving safeguards techniques and 
it intended to continue active co-operation in that 
respect. It was clear that the organization of 
control and inspection had important implications 
for the effectiveness of operations. As regards 
recruitment of inspectors the Agency should, in 
principle, endeavour to secure the services of 
highly qualified experts primarily from countries 
party to NPT, while aiming at equitable representation 
of the various geographical regions, 
25. The NPT Review Conference had ascribed 
substantial importance to the problems raised by 
the exercise of control in countries which were not 
party to NPT. After noting that numerous States 
which supplied nuclear materials and equipment 
had reached agreement regarding the control 
measures provided for in Article III, paragraph 2 
of NPT, the Review Conference had stressed the 
need to reinforce those measures. In the opinion 
of the Soviet delegation, it was important that 
States supplying nuclear materials and equipment 
or other forms of assistance associated with the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy to a country which 
had not yet acceded to NPT should require the 
latter to undertake not to use the materials 
delivered for manufacture of nuclear explosive 
devices of any kind. 
26. The Agency should definitely increase the 
effectiveness of control in non-nuclear-weapon 
States which were not party to NPT. For that 
purpose it should, as far as possible, retain the 
provisions of its "old" safeguards system, and 
endeavour to extend the control measures to the 
whole of the peaceful nuclear activities of the 
countries in question. The Soviet Union fully 
endorsed the Director General's remarks on that 
subject during his statement. Several of the 
fundamental provisions on strengthening of Agency 
control which had been recommended by the NPT 
Review Conference could very well be incorporated 
in safeguards agreements forthwith. 
27. The NPT Review Conference had given strong 
support to the concept that non-nuclear-weapon 
States party to NPT should enjoy priority in obtaining 
technical assistance in the field of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, whether on a bilateral 
basis or through the intermediary of the 
Agency. 
28. The Soviet Union approved of the Agency's 
current studies on regional fuel cycle centres. 
The establishment of such centres would not only 
bring with it economic advantages for the developing 
countries, but would also strengthen the 
control exercised by the Agency in preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
29. The decisions taken by the NPT Review 
Conference in connection with Article V of NPT 
were also of great significance for the Agency. 
It emerged clearly therefrom that the Agency was 
indeed the appropriate interna-tional body referred 
-4 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 


to in Article V of NPT through whose intermediary 
services in connection with nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes should be supplied. In stressing 
the Agency's role in that domain, the conference 
had invited the Agency to expedite a solution to the 
problems raised by the conclusion of the international 
agreements foreseen in Article V, and to 
broaden its consideration of the subject "to 
encompass, within its area of competence, all 
aspects and implications of the practical applications 
of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes". 

30. The Soviet Union particularly approved of the 
Agency's activities under such headings as nuclear 
power, thermonuclear fusion research, environmental 
protection, the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), nuclear power station 
safety and the practical application of NPT. In 
that connection reference should be made to an 
area of particular importance, already mentioned 
by numerous delegates, namely the drafting and 
revision of standards for the physical protection of 
nuclear materials. The Soviet Union unreservedly 
supported those Agency activities, and consequently 
likewise approved its annual report (GC(XEK)/544 
and Corr. 1). 
31. As a result of the rapid increase in world 
energy demands and in the price of fossil fuels, 
nuclear power had acquired particular importance 
in recent years. It would soon become one of the 
principal ways by which the demand for electricity 
could be met. 
32. The Soviet Union was implementing a vast 
nuclear power programme, the outlines of which 
had been laid down for the years 1971-75 in the 
directives of the Twenty-fourth Congress of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In that 
connection it should not be forgotten that the Soviet 
Union had available adequate natural energy 
resources and that the development of nuclear 
power in the country was governed by economic 
considerations. The installed nuclear capacity 
in the Soviet Union already exceeded 5500 MW. 
The new reactors installed in power stations already 
in operation and in stations still to be commissioned 
would have a total capacity of the order 
of 15 000 MW. Like other countries the Soviet 
Union was at present using for power generation 
purposes fast-neutron, pressurized light-watercooled 
reactors with a unit capacity of 440 or 
1000 MW, and channel-type uranium-graphite 
reactors with a unit capacity of 1000 MW. 

33. Ten years of experience in operating the 
Novovorenezh nuclear power station, the Kola 
power station situated beyond the Arctic Circle, 
and also plants of that type built in other countries 
with Soviet assistance had proved the reliability, 
safety and economic viability of the facilities concerned. 
The stations were operating at a utilization 
factor representing over 75% of their installed 
capacity, at a price per kWh of electricity lower, 
for example, than that associated with thermalpower 
stations operating on coal from the Donets basin. 
34. A two-unit power station equipped with 
WWR-440 reactors, and providing for the possibility 
of expansion, at present represented the 

standard type of facility used in the Soviet Union 
and in States Members of CMEA, and should certainly 
likewise be of interest to numerous developing 
countries. The second unit of the Leningrad 
nuclear power station had been commissioned in 
mid-197 5. The design concepts applied to construction 
of the first nuclear power station in the 
world at Obninsk and of the Byeloyarsk station had 

come to full fruition in the erection of the 
Leningrad facility. The start-up of the second 
unit brought the capacity of the Leningrad station 
to 2000 MW, with the result that it was now the 
largest in Europe. In addition to building its own 
nuclear power stations, the Soviet Union was 
granting technical assistance for the construction 
of large facilities of that kind in the States 
Members of CMEA and in Finland, using a standardized 
model equipped with WWR-440 reactors. 

35. Wishing to promote the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy, the Soviet Union had likewise 
announced its readiness to enrich - under Agency 
supervision - uranium belonging to other countries. 
That kind of service at present constituted an 
important aspect of international co-operation in 
the sphere of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
36. In the Soviet Union sustained attention was 
being paid to the development of new sources of 
energy with improved yield, primarily fast neutron 
reactors. A nuclear power station equipped with 
reactors of that type was at present undergoing 
industrial trials, and as from the end of the 
following decade it was expected that facilities of 
that type would permit the rapid development of 
nuclear power generation based on a thorium fuel 
cycle, thus making it possible to save natural 
uranium resources. 
37. After completion of maintenance work, the 
Shevchenko nuclear power station, equipped with 
a BN-350 fast neutron reactor, had been brought 
up to a power level representing something like 
60% of its rated capacity, and would probably 
achieve the latter by the end of the year. Two 
years' operation of the reactor, the use of liquid 
sodium and the experience obtained during the 
maintenance work had made it possible to establish 
valuable documentation and solve various important 
problems associated with that type of reactor, 
and to ensure its future reliability and safety. 
38. At the site of the Byeloyarsk nuclear power 
station near Sverdlovsk, work was at present 
proceeding on the installation of a new BN-600 fast 
neutron reactor of 1470 MW(th) capacity. Construction 
work was practically finished, component 
assembly was under way and it was expected that 
the facility would be commissioned in 1977. The 
preparation of a project for a 1500 MW(th) fast 
breeder reactor was in progress. Those prototypes 
were intended to yield data on breeding 
characteristics and were consequently considered 
as the principal basis for the development of 
nuclear power in the Soviet Union in the near future. 
39. Research on controlled thermonuclear fusion 
represented one of the most important areas in 
-5 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 

the search for new energy resources. The present 
year had seen the erection in the Soviet Unioh of 
the world's largest facility for study of plasmas 
(Tokamak-10), and work had started on a plan for 
a demonstration thermonuclear reactor of the 
type Tokamak-20. 

40. Owing to the world-wide importance of 
solving the problems presented by thermonuclear 
fusion, including the technical and scientific 
difficulties involved and the high cost of the 
installations concerned, it was quite essential that 
scientists, engineers and construction experts 
from a large number of countries should pool their 
efforts. The Soviet Union was gratified at the 
Agency1 s activities in that direction. In the 
summer of 1975, on the initiative of the Agency 
and Soviet scientists, a meeting of experts had 
been held to consider large thermonuclear devices. 
It had discussed the designs developed in the Soviet 
Union, the United States, States Members of 
EURATOM and Japan. With the completion of 
those designs, close co-ordination and possibly 
co-operation in the construction of facilities and 
research carried out with those facilities, it would 
be possible, in the second half of the next decade, 
to begin development work on the main components 
of a pilot fusion power plant. 
41. The Soviet Union attached great importance 
to the use of nuclear power plants for ship propulsion. 
In May 1975 the atomic ice-breaker 
"Arktika" had undergone its first practical tests 
and in June had set out on its first voyage, inaugurating 
a new route. The "Arktika" was the 
most powerful non-military vessel in the world. 
42. Institutes and laboratories in the Soviet Union 
were successfully studying the fundamental 
properties of matter. Soviet scientists had carried 
out several unique experiments on the physics of 
the atomic nucleus and nuclear reactions. They 
had produced a new element now carrying the 
number 106 in the periodic table; and in collaboration 
with physicists at the European Organization 
for Nuclear Research (CERN), they had discovered 
a new elementary particle - the neutral h-0-meson. 
Several new phenomena and processes occurring 
in atomic nuclei during interaction with various 
elementary particles had also been discovered. 
The results were of great importance for a deeper 
understanding of the nature of matter and for the 
solution of practical problems, 

43. The Soviet Union welcomed the approval soon 
to be given to the agreement between CMEA and 
the Agency. [6] It participated actively in the work 
of that important organization of socialist countries. 
In recent years, CMEA had evolved important programmes, 
such as the programme of scientific and 
technical collaboration for the solution of fuel and 
energy problems for the period 1976-80, including 
nuclear power, and a study of the prospects for 
development of nuclear power in States Members 
of CMEA for the period up to 1990. 

[6] The draft agreement is set out in document 
GC(XIX)/545, Annex. 
44. The nuclear power programme envisaged 
joint study of about 80 important subjects, including 
problems of large power reactors, management 
and control of nuclear power plants, multipurpose 
reactor facilities, nuclear fusion and so on. 
45. The "Interatomenergo" Association, established 
in 1974 for co-operation in the production 
and supply of equipment and for the provision of 
technical and scientific assistance in the construction 
of nuclear power plants, had been functioning 
satisfactorily. 
46. Since the Agency's inception, the Soviet 
Union had been participating actively in the implementation 
of its programme of technical assistance 
to developing countries in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. That participation took the form 
of annual voluntary contributions, which were used 
essentially for the supply to those countries of 
Soviet equipment, instruments and nuclear 
materials, for the grant of fellowships for training 
scientists and specialists from developing countries 
in Soviet scientific institutions, for organizing 
study tours in the Soviet Union, and so on. In the 
years since the signing of NPT, the Soviet Union's 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund had 
risen from 100 000 roubles in 1968 to 500 000 roubles 
in 1975. 
47. Thanks to those contributions, the Agency had 
been able to organize ten study tours in the Soviet 
Union, in which 250 specialists from 40 countries 
of Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe had 
taken part. The participants had been able to visit 
the leading Soviet institutes, scientific centres and 
nuclear power plants. Preparations were now 
being completed for a new study tour which would 
focus its attention on nuclear power development. 
48. In pursuance of its policy of technical assistance 
to developing countries, the Government of 
the Soviet Union had decided further to increase its 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund, raising 
the amount for 1976 to 550 000 roubles in national 
currency. Those funds would be utilized, in 
accordance with the Agency's programme and under 
its control, for the supply of Soviet equipment, 
instruments and materials, for the organization of 
study tours and for other types of technical assistance 
to developing countries, especially to those 
which were party to NPT. 
49. In conclusion, he wished to emphasize once 
more that, in conformity with the peace programme 
approved by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, his country 
advocated extensive international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and further 
strengthening of NPT. It was to be hoped that the 
General Conference would promote co-operation 
of that type on the basis of equality and thus contribute 
to consolidating peace in the world. 
50. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) referred to the 
importance of the Agency's achievements during 
the 19 years it had been in existence in the 
development and use of atomic energy for peaceful 
purposes. The International Conference on 
-6 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 


Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle, to be held at 
Salzburg in 1977, was an initiative of outstanding 
value both for the developing countries and for 
those industrially more advanced. In practical 
terms that Conference would be of greater significance 
than the four Geneva Conferences; it would 
favour international collaboration and make way 
for standardization of the most effective nuclear 
techniques. 

51. Everyone knew that technical assistance was 
among the foremost concerns of the developing 
countries, yet the funds assigned to that sphere of 
activity stemmed almost entirely from voluntary 
contributions; the programmes were thus closely 
dependent on the good will of a few Member States. 
In principle, the contributions should be proportional 
to the budgets or to the gross national 
product of the industrialized countries so as to 
ensure a balance between the funds available and 
the requests for assistance from the developing 
countries. 
52. The distribution of resources under the 
Regular Budget ought to be better balanced, 
especially in view of the fact that ever increasing 
amounts were being devoted to safeguards 
activities. 
53. In 1974, the Brazilian Government had 
decided on self-sufficiency in the country's power 
production as its priority aim. Accordingly, it 
had made intensive efforts in prospecting for oil 
on the continental shelf and in the use of hydroelectric 
power; it had also decided to speed up 
the introduction of nuclear power. Brazil had a 
high rate of power growth; present aggregate 
generating capacity was 20 000 MW(e), but it was 
expected to reach 60 000 MW(e) by 1985, of which 
3200 MW(e) would be accounted for by nuclear 
energy. 
54. As the Director General had stressed in his 
statement, nuclear programmes gave rise to 
problems without parallel in other technologies. 
The safety of nuclear power stations and strict 
supervision of all the complex stages of the fuel 
cycle required the enlistment of highly specialized 
personnel; the Agency would accordingly make a 
very useful contribution by giving priority to 
training programmes. It had already organized 
a course at Karlsruhe and similar courses were 
to be held at Argonne and Saclay. 
55. The problem of financing was a matter of 
concern for all countries, no matter how far 
developed, but obviously much more so for 
developing countries which were launching nuclear 
power programmes because the instability of oil 
prices had made nuclear power competitive. The 
introduction of nuclear power naturally required 
an intensification of uranium exploration in all 
countries and the dissemination of information on 
thermal and fast reactor technology. 
56. Industrial pollution was also the cause of misgivings 
in Brazil, and an ecological institute had 
been set up to study ways of overcoming that 
problem. As far as the implications of development 
for the environment were concerned, it had 
to be stressed that the developing countries, which 
faced problems of hunger, inadequate housing and 
medical care, and unemployment, were forced to 
seek a compromise between the vital need to 
increase their productivity and the unavoidable 
risk of pollution inherent in industrial development. 

57. Although the Agency had never been particularly 
eager to become involved in such matters, 
it was nevertheless an organization eminently 
suited to enlightening world opinion on the true 
hazards inherent in the use of nuclear power. The 
high qualifications of its staff, its impartiality by 
virtue of its scientific and international character, 
and its world-wide range of action should encourage 
it to broaden the scope of its role as a clearing 
house for information and to take special action to 
that end. 
58. The Brazilian delegation wished to emphasize 
the encouraging results that had been obtained in 
the sphere of international co-operation, 
especially with France, the Federal Republic of 
Germany, Italy, the United States of America and 
certain other countries. The Government had 
signed an agreement with the Federal Republic of 
Germany, in June 1975, relating to uranium ore 
prospecting, mining and milling, the construction 
of reactors and other nuclear facilities, uranium 
enrichment services and fuel production, and 
irradiated fuel reprocessing. In the agreement 
the two Governments expressed their intention to 
place under Agency safeguards the export of 
materials, equipment and nuclear facilities, 
source materials and fissile materials produced, 
processed or utilized, and the technical information 
communicated. 
59. As delegates were aware, the Brazilian 
Government had invited the General Conference to 
hold next year's session in Brazil, and was prepared 
to place at the Agency's disposal all the 
services and facilities needed to ensure the smooth 
conduct of the proceedings. [7] 
60. Mr. ABS (Holy See) welcomed to the Agency 
the three States whose admission the Conference 
had unanimously approved, 
61. He said that it had never been the intention 
of the Holy See to play the role of a technical 
expert in the Agency's activities but rather to 
exercise its spiritual authority; in connection 
with nuclear energy that implied a double role, 
monitory and hortatory. It was for that reason 
that his delegation had singled out two specific 
items from all the problems meriting attention, 
namely the nuclear arms race and the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy. They did not appear 
as such on the agenda but were in fact at the root 
of all the items on the agenda. Unfortunately they 
were matters which could not be viewed very 
optimistically in present circumstances. 
62. Nuclear energy had first appeared on the 
world scene as an exceptionally powerful means 
[7] See document GC(XIX)/558. 
-7 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 

of destruction. The contribution it could make 
to world prosperity had only emerged later. In 
truth the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy had 
never been other than a secondary application of 
nuclear science and had very often been merely 
a screen for its military uses, a sort of a 
posteriori justification for research and industrial 
activities engaged in purely for military purposes. 
More than a decade had passed after the first 
destructive application of nuclear energy before 
the Agency had been founded, and one must ask 
oneself what the situation was like now, 20 years 
further on. In 1970 a treaty had come into force 
which was intended to check the proliferation of 
nuclear arms and to act at least as a symbolic bar 
to the continuation of the arms race. The following 
year the Holy See had acceded to that treaty 
not because it thought it could contribute very 
effectively to preventing proliferation but because 
it considered that any attempt to reduce nuclear 
terror was worthy of its support. Unfortunately, 
that treaty had not yet brought the hoped for 
results. In its Final Declaration the NPT Review 
Conference had expressed its serious concern 
that the arms race, in particular the nuclear arms 
race, was continuing unabated. In those circumstances 
the impressive figures for the situation on 
30 June 1975 concerning non-nuclear-weapon 
States which had signed, ratified or acceded to 
NPT could not do more than conceal from the 
uninitiated the fact that the most important among 
the non-nuclear-weapon States had still not seen 
their way to participate in the common efforts to 
curtail the spreading of nuclear danger, not to 
mention the fact that two members of the atomic 
club had not acceded to the Treaty either. Under 

those circumstances NPT was doomed to remain a 
pretext for the unabated continuation of the arms 

race rather than becoming an effective means of 

checking it. Thus the Agency's safeguards 

system would finally turn out to be nothing more 

than an effective tool in the hand of a completely 

inefficient craftsman. 

63. Turning to the problems currently associated 
with the development of the peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy, he noted with concern that at a 
time when the Agency ought to be expanding its 
programmes for introducing nuclear power owing 
to the increase in the price of fossil fuels, one of 
the main problems facing it was to find the 
resources necessary for such expansion when, 
like several Member States, it was experiencing 
severe economic difficulties. In fact the situation 
was a vicious circle. The peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy was severely hampered mainly 
because of a scarcity of funds and that scarcity of 
funds was itself nothing more than a direct or 
indirect consequence of the nuclear arms race 
which was an ever-increasing drain on resources. 
The economic crisis currently facing the world 
was not due to a natural catastrophe but was caused 
by difficulties experienced by men in understanding 
and co-operating with each other, in fact simply in 
living together. The crisis did not mean that 
there was a lack of resources but merely that 
valuable resources were still being wasted. 
64. The conclusion of the Conference on Security 
and Co-operation in Europe had undoubtedly marked 
the decline of a system which had relied mainly on 
the deterrent force of the nuclear shield. If man 
wanted peace, he had to adapt to the changing 
world. At previous sessions of the General 
Conference his delegation had already made 
appeals to reason. It now exhorted all countries 
to seek a common goal - peace and security. All 
mankind should pursue the path of peace and 
justice, taking advantage of the great instrument 
which had been placed at its disposal, namely, 
atomic energy. 

65. Mr. SETHNA (India) said his delegation 
welcomed the admission to the Agency of Qatar, 
the United Arab Emirates and the United Republic 
of Tanzania. India had friendly relations with 
those countries and looked forward to co-operating 
with them in the forums of the Agency. His delegation 
also wished to congratulate the Secretariat 
on its efforts in the past year, particularly in view 
of the increased demands on the Agency's services. 
66. The annual report for 1974-75 focused 
attention on the problems faced by Member States, 
particularly the developing countries, in connection 
with the development of nuclear power. Having 
identified the problems of financing and shortage 
of trained manpower encountered by developing 
countries in implementing their nuclear programmes, 
the. Agency had initiated a series of 
regional seminars and training courses. The 
Agency was also studying ways and means of 
meeting fuel cycle needs on a regional basis. 
67. The Agency had a programme in hand for 
establishing safety codes and guides for nuclear 
power plants. His delegation hoped that the 
Agency would take account of the difficulties 
encountered by the developing countries when it 
drew up those documents; for that reason it felt 
that the working groups should include participants 
from the developing countries, particularly those 
with viable nuclear programmes. 
68. He welcomed the priority accorded to 
research projects designed to improve the utilization 
of fertilizers and water resources for irrigation. 
Those were problems of vital importance to 
the developing countries. 
69. The Indian Government attached great 
importance to PNE because of their potentially 
wide application in the exploitation of the country's 
natural resources and would be participating in 
the work of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on PNE. 
It further considered the establishment of a PNErelated 
services unit in the Secretariat a useful 
step. The Agency should provide PNE services 
in the same non-discriminatory manner in which 
it provided all other services, in accordance with 
its statutory obligations. The results of studies 
on the peaceful nuclear explosion experiment conducted 
in India in May 1974 had been presented at 
the meeting of the technical committee on PNE 
which had met in Vienna in January 1975. 
70. The Government of India supported the 
Agency's budget for 1976, although it was disturbed 
at the prospect of an almost 30% increase 
8 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 


in the assessment on Member States. He was 
gratified that the Board of Governors had recommended 
a target of $ 5, 5 million in cash for 
voluntary contributions to the Agency's General 
Fund in 197 6 and his Government was happy to 
announce that it would be contributing the equivalent 
of $68 200 in Indian rupees. 

71. India would continue to make available 
experts, fellowships etc. to help the Agency provide 
technical assistance to other developing 
countries. He hoped that the technical assistance 
programme would continue to be governed by the 
well-established principles of the Statute and that 
no attempts would be made to limit that important 
activity in any way. 
72. With the expansion of nuclear power it was 
natural that attention should be focused on safeguards 
problems. The Indian Government had 
contributed to the evolution of the principles 
governing the objectives, scope and application of 
the Agency's safeguards. The Agency was only 
discharging its statutory obligations when it 
applied safeguards and therefore the principles of 
the Statute should take precedence over extraneous 
considerations. Any arbitrary attempt to impose 
obligations which were not universally relevant or 
accepted would lead to a sense of discrimination 
which was not in the Agency's long-term interests. 
Extending the scope or content of the safeguards 
system to make it conform to principles relevant 
only in the context of NPT would be fraught with 
consequences which needed to be carefully considered. 
Another aspect which deserved consideration 
was the excessively large proportion 
of human and material resources devoted to safeguards. 
With the anticipated increase in the 
quantities of material to be placed under safeguards 
he was concerned at the increases in manpower 
and costs which seemed to follow more or 
less automatically. A basic change of approach, 
placing greater reliance on national systems, was 
therefore necessary. 

73. India's nuclear power programme was in full 
swing. The Tarapur and Rajasthan nuclear power 
stations were providing the electricity required by 
the western and northern regions, and had played 
an important part during the conditions of drought 
prevailing in 1975. That fact had encouraged the 
Indian Government to persevere in its efforts in 
connection with the construction of the Madras and 
Narora reactors, both of which were progressing 
satisfactorily. A heavy water plant was expected 
to be operational at Baroda shortly. 
74. The ISOMED project for the radiosterilization 
of medical products, which was being supported by 
UNDP and the Agency, was in progress and the 
Indian Government hoped it would be able to implement 
the same type of project in the eastern 
region. 
75. But the most significant scientific and 
technological event of the year would be the completion 
of the variable energy cyclotron, which was 
due to be commissioned at the end of 1975. That 
would be a national facility built entirely in India, 
and the Indian Government was prepared to make 
its facilities available to countries in the region. 

76. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency would 
develop its programmes still further, more 
especially those affording potential economic 
benefits, and provide more funds for programmes 
intended for developing countries. 
77. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic 
Republic) said he welcomed the decision of the 
Conference to extend membership of the Agency 
to Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the United 
Republic of Tanzania. His delegation was also 
gratified that representatives of the Provisional 
Revolutionary Government of the Republic of 
South Viet-Nam were able to attend the General 
Conference for the first time. 
78. The Conference was meeting at a time when 
detente had become the main trend in international 
developments and the principles of peaceful coexistence 
were becoming the rule in relations 
between States with different social systems. A 
significant example was the conclusion of the 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. 
Thirty years after the liberation of the European 
peoples by the Soviet Union and other States of the 
anti-Hitler coalition, the Conference had contributed 
to the establishment of a peaceful Europe. 
Nevertheless, the fact could not be overlooked 
that a great deal remained to be done in order to 
stop the arms race. As Mr. Erich Honecker, the 
First Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Socialist Unity Party of the German Democratic 
Republic, had pointed out at the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe, Helsinki 
was not the final point, but the prelude to new 
initiatives. The goal of the German Democratic 
Republic was to banish war and aggression for 
ever. To attain that end, detente and work 
carried out on a solid foundation of collective 
security in Europe should be continued. 

7 9. His country considered that political detente 
should be supported by activities of various kinds 
in connection with arms limitation. It welcomed 
the proposal by the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics that there ought to be an agreement on 
the general and complete banning of nuclear tests. 
80. Among the international agreements that 
helped to slow down the arms race, mention should 
be made of NPT, which was serving the cause of 
detente and international security. It had created 
the conditions necessary for international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
The outcome of the NPT Review Conference had 
confirmed the fundamental purpose of the Treaty. 
Despite certain differences of opinion, it had 
demonstrated that NPT was a reality in international 
life and that it conformed to the interests 
of peoples and States. It should be pointed out 
that during the preparations for the meeting and at 
the Conference itself, a number of countries had 
acceded to NPT, among them the non-nuclearweapon 
States Members of EURATOM. 
9 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 


81. The Agency had had to solve problems of 
great political importance since the entry into 
force of NPT, problems which had been discussed 
at the NPT Review Conference, and it was a 
matter for satisfaction, his delegation felt, that 
the Agency had acquitted itself so well of that task. 
In establishing an international system of safeguards 
that did not violate the sovereign rights of 
States, it had created a powerful instrument for 
the implementation of NPT., The steadily growing 
activities of the Agency aimed at promoting the 
use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes activities 
designed to meet the requirements of 
developing countries in particular - offered clear 
proof that NPT was no obstacle to development. 
The use of PNE, already under examination by 
the Agency, was another problem worth mentioning. 
The German Democratic Republic attached 
great importance to safeguards designed to 
prevent the diversion of nuclear materials to 
military purposes, and was therefore attentively 
following all steps taken by the Agency in the 
area of safeguards. 
82. The German Democratic Republic wished 
to draw the Conference's attention to the tasks 
which devolved upon the Agency pursuant to the 
Final Declaration of the NPT Review Conference. 
They had a bearing in particular on enhancing the 
effectiveness and universality of safeguards, the 
preparation of recommendations concerning the 
physical protection of nuclear materials, a more 
thorough study of the problems associated with 
PNE, and so on. 
83. Many countries now attached great importance 
to nuclear power as it would help to meet growing 
energy demands. Three reactors with an aggregate 
output of 950 MW(e) were already in operation 
in the German Democratic Republic, and preparations 
were under way for the construction of 
further units. 
84. The Agency had chosen to emphasize the 
practical problems of utilizing nuclear energy. 
His country supported all activities aimed at 
providing greater safety in the nuclear industry 
and better protection of man and his environment. 
It was taking an active part in the programme 
under which safety codes and guides for nuclear 
facilities were to be prepared. 
85. The rapid evolution of INIS was a matter for 
satisfaction, and the measures taken to extend 
that system were most welcome. 
86. His country gave unstinting support to the 
Agency's technical assistance programme as a 
means of promoting the political and economic 
independence of developing countries. In 1975 
it had made a contribution of 160 000 marks 
towards the Agency's technical assistance activities, 
and for 197 6 it planned to raise its contribution 
to 200 000 marks. In that connection his 
delegation recalled that, in granting technical 
assistance on either a bilateral or a multilateral 
basis, donor countries and the Agency should 
consider whether the prospective recipient was a 
party to NPT or not. 
87. He was worried by the increase in costs that 
had resulted from inflation and currency fluctuations 
in 1975. The situation was difficult, but his 
Government hoped that the Agency would succeed 
in mastering it in close co-operation with other 
international organizations. 
88. As far as relations with other international 
organizations were concerned, the German 
Democratic Republic supported the applications for 
the conclusion of co-operation agreements with 
CMEA and EURATOM[8], As a member of CMEA, 
his country particularly welcomed the co-operation 
agreement between CMEA and the Agency, which 
offered substantial advantages to both sides. 
89. Referring to the deepening of co-operation 
with the World Health Organization (WHO) and the 
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects 
of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), he said that his 
delegation would like to see the Agency persist in 
its efforts to secure an arrangement with WHO 
similar to that already existing with the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO). The potential harmful effects of the use 
of nuclear energy could be countered by taking 
strict measures to ensure safety in facilities and 
to protect man and his environment; that meant 
all measures taken to prevent, detect and repair 
damage caused by radiation, namely, inspection of 
working areas, determination of exposure to 
internal and external radiation and so on. Such 
measures came within the scope of radiation 
protection and should be included in the programme 
of co-operation between the Agency and WHO. 
The German Democratic Republic was ready to 
lend its support to such co-operation. 

90. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Director 
General for the manner in which he had always 
directed the Agency and to assure him of the full 
support of the German Democratic Republic. 
Nuclear energy could be a source of great wealth 
in the service of peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. 
91. Mr. MEDINA (Philippines) congratulated the 
President on his election and welcomed Qatar, the 
United Arab Emirates and the United Republic of 
Tanzania to membership of the Agency. 
92. Member States had placed great hopes in the 
present session of the General Conference. The 
NPT Review Conference had stressed the assistance 
that had to be given to developing countries 
in the field of nuclear energy and, at the seventh 
special session of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, the international community had 
reaffirmed its determination to help the developing 
countries to overcome their economic difficulties. 
He hoped the Agency's Conference, too, would be 
responsive to the needs of those countries in 
relation to nuclear energy. 
[8] The draft agreement with EURATOM is reproduced 
in document GC(XDC)/556, Annex. 
- 10 



GC(XIX)/OR. 178 


93. The developing countries had suffered from 
the increases in the price of oil; the Philippines, 
for example, had been obliged to spend $700 million 
on petrol in 1974 and the expenditure would reach 
$2000 million in 1980. Unfortunately, it was not 
the only country to suffer from that situation, as 
the trade deficit of the developing countries that 
produced no oil, standing at $9000 million in 1973, 
had reached $36 000 million in 1975. In order to 
overcome that difficulty the Philippines intended to 
use nuclear energy to cover 30% of the country's 
requirements in 1985. But, far from sparing the 
nuclear industry, inflation had affected that sector 
even more than others. The cost of an installed 
kilowatt had increased from $525 at the end of 
1973 to about $825 in 1975. Periods of construction 
had become longer and the rates of interest 
had increased. The cost of nuclear fuel had 
tripled between 1973 and 197 5. 
94. All those factors made nuclear energy 
expensive and put it beyond the reach of most 
developing countries. It was not for the General 
Conference to name those responsible for such 
inflation, but rather to find means of helping the 
developing countries to finance their nuclear power 
programmes. The Director General had in the 
past invited the Member States to offer the developing 
countries favourable financial conditions. 
Some measures had already been taken, especially 
by the International Monetary Fund, but other 
solutions would have to be found. In that connection, 
the Philippines had proposed the creation of 
a special fund at the NPT Review Conference, 
which had invited the industrialized countries to 
take measures, especially of a financial nature, 
to assist developing countries party to NPT in the 
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
His delegation had some suggestions to make in 
that connection; it could not but regret, however, 
that, although the industrialized countries had 
undertaken in Resolution 2626 (XXV) of the General 
Assembly to allot at least 1% of their gross national 
product to assistance to the developing countries, 
only five of the 17 countries members of the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development had attained or surpassed that goal. 

95. Speaking about the measures the Agency might 
take to assist the developing countries in financing 
their nuclear power projects, he said that the 
Agency's technical assistance programme was an 
indispensable help to those countries but that its 
beneficial effects were vitiated by inflation. Compared 
with the $80 000 million that the nuclear 
industry had allocated to the peaceful applications 
of atomic energy between 1970 and 1975 - a sum 
which was expected to increase to $180 000 million 
for the years from 1975 to 1980 - the figure of 
$5. 5 million proposed as the target for the Agency's 
technical assistance in 1976 appeared little more 
than symbolic. The sums allotted to the technical 
assistance programme had always been insufficient 
and had never made it possible to respond to all 
requests. The target should be increased to at 
least $6 million. His country was prepared to 
contribute to the General Fund a fraction of the 
target representing more than its base rate of 
assessment, and to provide three Type II fellowships. 

96. Having referred to the enormous destructive 
power of nuclear energy when used for military 
purposes, he stressed the value of the Agency's 
safeguards activities and expressed the hope that 
exporting countries would insist on the application 
of safeguards to the entire fuel cycle in importing 
countries. The Agency's safeguards activities 
would inevitably expand with the growth of nuclear 
commerce, and would compel the Agency to incur 
greater expenditures. However, a reasonable 
balance should be established between its expenditure 
on safeguards and its expenditure on technical 
assistance, for the former was rising more rapidly 
than the latter and there was no reason why 
developing countries should finance increased safeguards 
expenditure while suffering from the consequences 
of inflation in the nuclear industry. The 
arrangements for safeguards financing which had 
been approved by the General Conference in 
1971 [9] would have to be reviewed after 1975. He 
suggested that the Conference request the Board 
right away to establish a safeguards committee to 
consider the question and to review the Agency's 
Safeguards System (1965, as Provisionally 
Extended in 1966 and 1968). 

97. His country appreciated the Agency's efforts 
to establish regional co-operation projects; it 
was party to an agreement on regional co-operation 
in nuclear science and technology and was currently 
participating in three regional projects. With the 
experience it had gained in Asia and the Far East, 
the Agency was now in a position to study the 
question of establishing a regional or multinational 
nuclear fuel cycle centre. The Philippines, 
grateful for the assistance received in 197 5, was 
prepared to help in such a study. 
98. He concluded by stating that the Philippines 
would continue to co-operate fully with the Agency 
with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of its 
work and improving the benefits that the developing 
countries would be able to secure from it. 
99. Mr. ALER (Sweden) pointed out that the share 
of nuclear energy in the overall electricity production 
of many countries had been increasing more 
and more rapidly in recent years. In Sweden, for 
example, nuclear reactors now in operation would 
at full power account for about 15% of the electricity 
produced. 
100. Such developments enhanced even more the 
importance of the role being played by the Agency, 
since it was the principal instrument for international 
co-operation in the nuclear field. The 
Agency played a major role in the establishment of 
an effective, world-wide system of safeguards. 
Since the previous session of the General 
Conference many States had ratified NPT and the 
number of safeguards agreements with the Agency 
had increased. However, no progress had been 
made in the negotiations on disarmament. Concrete 
undertakings by the nuclear-weapon States 
were necessary in order to prevent a further pro[
9] By Resolution GC(XV)/RES/283. 
- 11 

GC(XIX)/OR. 178 

liferation of nuclear weapons. Many of the recommendations 
made by the NPT Review Conference 
were very relevant to the orientation of the 
Agency's activities, especially in safeguards. In 
particular, it would be useful to apply safeguards 
to all the peaceful nuclear activities in importing 
countries which had not acceded to NPT. The 
Agency should also make concrete recommendations 
for the physical protection of nuclear material in 
use, storage and transit. It had already studied 
the establishment of regional or multinational 
nuclear fuel cycle centres, which would offer the 
dual advantage of enabling many countries to gain 
access to nuclear power and facilitating physical 
protection and the application of Agency safeguards. 
Closer international co-operation was 
also essential if other problems connected with 
nuclear safety, environmental effects, waste 
management and the transport of nuclear material 
were to be solved. 

101. The Agency ought no longer to concern itself 
so much with the promotion of nuclear science, but 
should concentrate more on the regulation of 
activities in the nuclear field. Many national 
organizations had already modified their programmes 
along such lines and it was reasonable 
that the Agency should do the same. Thanks to 
the flexibility of its recruitment policy, the Agency 
should be able to adapt its programmes without 
increasing its staff or its budget. 
102. With regard to regulatory activities, the 
International Conference on Nuclear Power and its 
Fuel Cycle, planned for 1977, ought to focus on 
the problems faced by countries which were implementing 
nuclear power programmes. 
103. The Agency also had an important task to 
perform in connection with technical assistance 
and training. Sweden would be making a voluntary 
contribution of US $74 250 to the General Fund for 

1976, but its main contribution would be made 
through the Swedish International Development 
Authority (SIDA). In 1974, SIDA had contributed 
about US $ 602 000 to the Agency. The Swedish 
Government considered that the Agency's technical 
assistance projects should be financed mainly 
through UNDP. Sweden - which had increased its 

contribution to UNDP in 1975 to about $46 million was 
one of the largest financial contributors to the 
Agency's technical assistance activities, an indication 
of the importance which it attached to that 
work. 

104. Sweden's nuclear programme was advancing 
rapidly. Five power reactors were already in 
operation and eight more were to go into service 
by 1985. Moreover, since the previous year 
Swedish industry had received a further export 
order for a reactor and industrial preparations 
for the exploitation of the vast Swedish uranium 
deposits had been concluded. 
105. He recalled that, during the previous 
session of the Conference, the Swedish delegation 
had raised the question of the designation of 
Members to the Board of Governors. [10] The 
Statute provided for the designation of the nine 
Member States most advanced in the technology of 
atomic energy including the production of source 
materials. It was difficult not to count Sweden 
among those nine. Consultations had taken place 
with a view to solving the problem, and the 
Swedish Government hoped that the Board would 
arrive at practical conclusions in good time before 
the 1976 designations took place. 
. The meeting rose at 5. 55 p. m. 

[10] GC(XVIII)/OR. 172, para. 97. 
- 12 



GC(XIX)/OR.17 9 
2 February 1976* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday, 24 September 197 5, at 11. 50 a.m. 

President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

6 
General debate and report for 1974-75 1 - 68 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Belgium 
1 - 12 

Republic of Korea 
13 - 18 

Argentina 
19-34 

Italy 
35 - 52 

Netherlands 
53 - 68 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 25 September 1975. 
** GC(XIX)/559. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 
75-9530 


GC{XIX)/OR. 179 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 
1974-75 (GC(XIX)/544, 544/Corr. 1, 554) 
(continued) 

1, Mr. ADRIAENSSEN (Belgium) said that the 
past year had provided ample food for thought, 
both about developments in nuclear energy and 
about their impact on the maintenance of peace 
and security in the world. Those reflections had 
been provoked by the Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT Review Conference) [1] 
and by the subsequent discussions in the 
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament 
(CCD). 

2, One of the conclusions drawn from that work 
was that although substantia] results had been 
achieved in connection with the dual objective of 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and peaceful 
utilization of the atom, nevertheless much 
remained to be done in those areas if the final 
objective - the widest possible utilization of 
nuclear energy for civilian and beneficial purposes 
in a world living in peace and security - was to 

be effectively achieved. 

3, The role the Agency had to play in the 
matter had been recognized or confirmed, and 

Belgium was particularly pleased at some of the 

conclusions which had been reached at the end of 
the work in Geneva, He was thinking, in 
particular, of the recommendations that 

intensified efforts should be made towards 

standardization and universality of application of 
Agency safeguards, that safeguards agreements 

should be of adequate duration to preclude 
diversion to any nuclear explosive devices and 
that such agreements should include appropriate 
provisions for the continuance of the application 

of safeguards to material and equipment when 

they were exported, 

4, Belgium also supported the recommendation 
that: "in all achievable ways, common export requirements 
relating to safeguards be strenthened, 

in particular by extending the application of 

safeguards to all peaceful nuclear activities in 

importing States not Party to the Treaty". 
Indeed, non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 

could only really be ensured if the whole of the 

nuclear fuel cycle in every country in the world 

was subject to adequate safeguards. That 
principle should, moreover, become universal 

the day that nuclear disaramament was achieved. 

5, Much attention had also been devoted to the 
very controversial problem of peaceful nuclear 

explosions (PNE) and methods of enabling the 

[1] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. 
The text of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/140. 
world community to participate in the potential 
advantages of such explosions without thereby 
hampering the process that would lead to the 
complete cessation of underground testing for 
military purposes. 

6. He did not intend to discuss problems which 
belonged to the province of CCD or to the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, and would 
confine his remarks to the already recognized 
role of the Agency in the nuclear explosions field. 
The Agency had already carried out interesting 
work on the subject by planning a methodology 
for meeting the requests for international PNE 
services and by setting up a special unit in the 
Secretariat. The four meetings of the 
Secretariat's Technical Committee on PNE [2] 
had already provided interesting information. 
7. His country fully understood the interest, 
apart from concerns of an economic type, that 
scientific applications of PNE might have for the 
scientific community. Mention need only be made 
of the study of high density fast neutron fluxes, 
the production of heavy elements, the study of 
the effects of high temperatures and pressure on 
different materials and the study of the interior 
of the earth's surface by means of seismic waves 
engendered by such explosions. As a consequence, 
Belgium felt strengthened in its conviction that 
complete diffusion of information obtained from 
PNE experiments and the making of such 
information available to all interested parties 
should be a moral and political obligation for the 
countries authorized under NPT to carry out 
such experiments, namely the nuclear-weapon 
States. As his delegation had already pointed out 
at Geneva, the development of a feeling of 
frustration in some countries should be avoided 
at all costs. Only complete access to all the 
scientific information obtained was likely to 
dissuade non-nuclear-weapon States from 
themselves engaging in research on explosives 
so as to obtain the information they wanted by 
themselves. 
8. By refusing to furnish that information, the 
nuclear-weapon Powers would inevitably expose 
themselves to the suspicion of wanting to create 
for their own benefit a new monopoly in certain 
scientific and technological fields. Such an 
attitude could not fail to provide new arguments 
for the present opponents of NPT who understandably 
did not want to see themselves relegated to 
the status of developing countries in the 
scientific field. 
9. His delegation thought that the nuclearweapon 
Powers which were currently carrying 
out nuclear explosion tests for peaceful purposes 
could make a gesture that would be greatly 
appreciated by, for example, agreeing to the 
presence of observers at that kind of experiment. 
Those observers, without of course having 
access to the explosive device itself, could 
[2] Held at Vienna from 20 to 24 January 1975. 
2 



collect on the spot scientific, technological and 
economic information resulting from those 
experiments. There were certainly interesting 
possibilities in that area which the Agency could 
develop. 

10. Furthermore, the presence of such 
observers would have a beneficial effect on the 
course of disarmament activities, in so far as 
they would be able to give assurances that the 
explosion in question had in fact been carried 
out for a peaceful purpose. It would in the final 
analysis be a measure of the type described as 
"confidence-building measures" envisaged in the 
Final Act of the Conference on Security and 
Co-operation in Europe. That document 
stipulated: 
"The participating States recognise the 
interest of all of them in efforts aimed at 
lessening military confrontation and 
promoting disarmament which are 
designed to complement political detente 
in Europe and to strengthen their security. 
They are convinced of the necessity to 
take effective measures in these fields 
which by their scope and by their nature 
constitute steps towards the ultimate 
achievement of general and complete 
disarmament under strict and effective 
international control, and which should 
result in strengthening peace and security 
throughout the world". 

11. He would comment in committee on 
Belgium's numerous achievements in the 
peaceful application of nuclear energy and on 
some aspects of the budget of particular interest 
to it. However, he wished at the present 
juncture to say a few words about the over-rapid 
increase in the Agency's budget. 
12. All countries were passing through a 
particularly difficult time from the monetary 
point of view and all were affected more or less 
seriously by inflation. But precisely because 
of that difficult situation, measures should be 
taken which, even if they were unpopular, should 
aim at keeping the rate of increase of expenditure 
within reasonable limits. The Belgian delegation 
intended to take the matter up in greater detail 
when the draft budget for 1976 was discussed in 
committee. For his delegation, the Agency was 
an enterprise whose real output must be in 
proportion to the expenditure demanded of its 
Member countries. In short, Belgium would 
offer active but vigilant co-operation in budgetary 
matters as in all others. 
13. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) said that his 
Government was keenly aware of the need to 
establish an effective long-term nuclear energy 
development plan in order to improve the 
country's capability to meet the rapidly 
increasing demand for energy, for technical and 
economic evaluation indicated that nuclear power 
must play a dominant role in future in the context 
of long-term energy requirements. 
GC(XIX)/OR. 17 9 

14. The Republic of Korea was embarking upon 
a major nuclear programme involving about 
25 nuclear power plants to generate 25 000 MW(e) 
by the year 2000. It would cost $30 000 million 
or more plus another $10 000 million for nuclear 
fuel. In order to meet such an enormous capital 
requirement, his country must annually invest 
on plant construction $1000 million up to 1982 and 
then $2000 million up to 1987. If the continuous 
growth of the economy was to be sustained, that 
increasing trend should persist further in the 
future. Such growth would impose an unbearable 
burden on the balance of payment of the 
developing countries, which relied on advanced 
countries for their major supplies. 
15. His Government firmly believed such a 
heavy burden could be alleviated by developing 
its own capability in design and construction 
management and in fuel cycle technology. In 
that connection, it fully supported the Agency's 
initiative in organizing nuclear-power-oriented 
training courses and in carrying out feasibility 
studies on the establishment of multinational 
regional key fuel cycle centres. It was willing 
to co-operate with other countries in the region 
in such centres, which were essential since key 
fuel cycle facilities were, from both the capital 
and technological point of view, intensive and 
most developing countries could not afford their 
own commercially viable facilities in view of 
their small nuclear programmes. Besides, the 
major commercial facilities being located 
outside the area where Korea was situated and 
the requirements for safeguards and environmental 
protection becoming more stringent, the 
transport of highly radioactive spent fuel over 
long distances would be almost impossible. The 
regional concept would not only satisfy those 
requirements but be economically advantageous 
to the area. 
16. His country was a strong advocate of the 
idea of safeguards and had given proof of its 
support of the system by signing NPT in 
July 1968 and by concluding numerous safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. However, it had 
not ratified NPT until 23 April 1975, not 
because it had wanted to keep open the so-called 
"nuclear option", nor because of the inherently 
unfair treatment of the non-nuclear-weapon 
developing countries in NPT but because it had 
wanted to see the whole of the Korean peninsula 
brought under the system of NPT at about the 
same time. 
17. Although it had waited all in vain, it still 
believed in the merit of "package accession". 
Simultaneous accession by several States should 
be actively promoted, for it could be one of the 
best ways of achieving universality of NPT. 
18. His Government, by ratifying NPT, had 
given proof of its strong desire to contribute to 
world peace in general and to the relaxation of 
tensions in the area in particular, and believed 
that action would further promote international 
co-operation in the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy and technology with due 

GC(XIX)/OR. 179 

consideration of the special needs of developing 
countries. It would urge all Member States to 
collaborate more closely in order to ease tensions 
and promote international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

19. Mr. IRAOLAGOITIA (Argentina) extended a 
welcome to the countries which the General 
Conference had approved for membership of 
the Agency. [3] 
20. Noting that the first nuclear power station 
in the southern hemisphere had been in operation 
at Atucha since 17 March 1974, he said that it 
was performing excellently and with greater 
reliability than conventional power stations; it 
had so far supplied 2, 5 million MWh of power 
to the national grid. Also at Atucha was a school 
for training nuclear power plant personnel 
which, it was hoped, would not only meet 
Argentina's manpower needs but also train 
technicians from other countries. 

21. It was expected that the 600 MW(e) CANDU 
reactor being built at Embalse under a contract 
concluded by the Argentine National Atomic 
Energy Commission with Atomic Energy of 
Canada Limited and the Societa. Italiana 
Impianti p. A. would go into operation in 1980. 
On 6 December 1974, Argentina had signed an 
agreement for the voluntary submission of the 
Embalse reactor to Agency safeguards, and his 
Government hoped that work on the construction 
of that reactor would not be hampered by factors 
extraneous to the letter and spirit of the agreement, 
which had been approved officially by the 
three Governments involved in the project. 
22. A study of the national and regional demand 
for electricity in Argentina had led to the 
formulation, for the period 1974-90, of an 
electrical power plant construction plan in which 
the construction of nine nuclear plants of 
500-600 MW(e) each and of one of 1000 MW(e) 
was envisaged. 
23. The construction of three 500-600 MW(e) 
reactors using natural uranium as fuel and heavy 
water as moderator and coolant was planned for 
the next ten years: a second reactor at Atucha, 
work on which was to start in 1976 and which was 
expected to go into operation in 1982; a reactor 
at Cuyo, the construction of which was scheduled 
to start in 1978; and a reactor at Bahia Blanca, 
the construction of which was scheduled to start 
in 197 9. 
24. The National Atomic Energy Commission 
was placing emphasis on the intensive training 
of personnel to design - in conformity with 
international standards - instrumentation for 
the Embalse plant and on the creation of the 
industrial infrastructure necessary for the 
design and production of nuclear power plant 
control instruments in general. 
[3] See document GC(XD)/OR. 176, paras 14-16. 
25. With regard to nuclear raw materials, 
the immediate purpose of uranium prospecting 
and of the evaluation of Argentina's uranium 
resources was to ensure that the needs of the 
country's nuclear power plants could be met 
from local sources. With the same purpose in 
mind, the establishment of complexes of 
economic size for the production of uranium 
concentrates was planned, including one - at 
Sierra Pintada - with an initial capacity of 
600 tons of uranium scheduled for 197 9. 
26. The production of uranium concentrates 
was proceeding normally at the "Malargue" and 
"Don Otto" plants, the combined output of 
which was sufficient for the needs of the Atucha 
reactor. At Cordoba, a plant for refining 
uranium concentrates to UO was being 
constructed. Development work at the 
"Los Adobes" mine had been initiated through 
the award of a contract to a private company. 
27. With regard to the Sierra Pintada complex, 
drilling, sampling and hydrometallurgical 
studies had been carried out, and progress was 
being made in the matter of tenders. Meanwhile, 
the Agency had successfully completed a 
feasibility study and the necessary infrastructure 
was being created. 
28. A fuel element fabrication plant with an 
initial capacity of 250 tons was scheduled to 
start operation in 1978. The first stage acquisition 
of equipment and invitation of tenders 
for the building - had already been initiated. 
29. A heavy water production plant with an 
initial capacity of 400 tons/year was scheduled 
to start normal operation in 1980. The feasibility 
study had been completed and future action 
decided upon. 
30. The use of radioisotopes and ionizing 
radiation in medicine, industry and agriculture 
was being strongly promoted, and isotope 
production by the National Atomic Energy 
Commission had approximately doubled during 
the past year. Promotion activities had included 
courses on radioisotope methodology given at 
Rosario de Santa Fe and at La Plata. 
31. In addition to those courses, training was 
continuing to be provided through courses at the 
Balseiro Physics Institute, San Carlos de 
Bariloche, which were being attended by the 
holders of fellowships awarded by the National 
Atomic Energy Commission. A metallurgy 
course lasting approximately eight months had 
been held during 1974; it had been attended by 
nine Argentinians and ten participants from 
other parts of Latin America. 
32. Although initial steps had been taken, 
implementation of the agreement with Canada 
for the transfer of technology had been delayed 
for reasons beyond Argentina's control. 
33. Special attention was being paid by the 
Argentine Government to international 
-4 



GC(XIX)/OR. 179 


co-operation, and in that connection an 
ambitious programme had been formulated in 
collaboration with the Agency's Division of 
Technical Assistance; the programme would 
involve all the countries of Latin America and 
also some countries in other regions, 

34. Argentina was very grateful for the 
technical assistance which it had received from 
the Agency, and he wished to emphasize his 
country's desire for broad co-operation in 
keeping with the peaceful objectives of its 
entire nuclear programme. 
35. Mr. CLEMENTEL (Italy) said that the 
present General Conference was taking place at 
a time when a major international effort was 
being made to reduce tensions and create in the 
world relations based on the principles of 
security and peaceful co-operation among peoples. 
36. Italy wished to express its greatest 
appreciation of the work done by the Agency 
in the period 1974-75, as outlined in the annual 
report (GC(XIX)/544 and Corr. 1) and in the oral 
statement made by the Director General [4], 
The results achieved had been particularly 
gratifying, especially considering the complexity 
of the problems now raised by the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, which had become established 
as the only valid alternative to conventional 
energy sources. Those problems included, 
among others, those relating to conservation of 
the environment, radioactive waste management, 
fuel supplies and physical protection of nuclear 
materials; the Agency was doing highly 
important work towards their solution. 
37. His country also unreservedly approved the 
activities designed to develop the utilization of 
nuclear energy and to halt the slowing down in 
the growth of installed nuclear capacity, which 
trend was due to both financial and psychological 
factors. Particular importance was attributed 
to the efforts designed to foster nuclear 
activities in the developing countries. Prom that 
standpoint, the proposed broadening of objectives 
in the Agency's technical assistance programme 
in favour of developing countries would be 
extremely useful and would also serve to 
strengthen international co-operation. 
38. With reference to his country's activities 
in the nuclear sector, on both the international 
and the domestic levels, he said that Italy had 
always been an active participant in international 
co-operation in the sectors within the Agency's 
field of activity. In that context, its ratification 
of NPT constituted further evidence of his 
Government's full adherence to the Treaty's 
guiding principles and its consistent support for 
efforts to achieve general, complete and 
controlled disarmament. 
39. The NPT Review Conference had provided 
the opportunity for a serious and thorough review 
[4] GC(XtX)/OR. 176, paras 21-59. 
of the Treaty, aimed at adjusting its provisions 
to present-day international realities and 
enhancing its effectiveness by adding to its 
adherents. Italy had taken an active part in the 
Conference, with the general objective of creating 
the necessary conditions for a better negotiating 
climate. The most positive outcome of the 
Conference had been its contribution to an 
increasing awakening of the international 
community to the risks entailed by proliferation 
and the genuine concern that existed regarding 
the slowness of the nuclear disarmament process. 
In addition, stress had been laid on the need for 
study of the requirements attaching to the process 
of acquisition of nuclear technology for peaceful 
uses, so as to ensure the proper application of 
safeguards designed to avert proliferation 
hazards. 

40. He would like to mention some particular 
points which lay more clearly within the Agency's 
competence. The NPT Review Conference had 
reconfirmed the right of the Contracting Parties 
to NPT to the broadest possible exchange of 
equipment, materials and scientific and 
technological information. In that regard, a 
stricter wording would have been desirable, 
specifically recognizing the obligation to transfer 
nuclear equipment, know-how and materials at 
a fair price and on a continuing basis, 

41. Since Italy had been working towards the 
concluding of an international agreement on 
peaceful nuclear explosions, with specific 
reference to the tasks which the Agency might 
perform in that delicate field, it accordingly 
welcomed the recent establishment of the 
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions 
for Peaceful Purposes, and intended to 
participate in its work. 
42. Italy shared the view that it was necessary 
to improve safeguards in countries which had not 
adhered to NFT, in order to meet a basic 
political requirement and to prevent possible 
adverse economic repercussions for parties 
to NPT. 
43. Another important problem taken up by the 
NPT Review Conference was the physical 
protection of nuclear materials, a matter which 
was now of concern to all countries, whether or 
not adhering to NPT, in face of the growing 
amounts of nuclear materials treated and the 
more frequent transfers, which led to greater 
risks of diversion, theft and sabotage. The 
Conference had stressed the need for further 
studies and recommendations in that area, 
particularly on well-defined criteria to establish 
the responsibility of States for ensuring the 
enforcement of uniform minimum standards. 
Italy was helping to explore that problem within 
the European Economic Community (EEC) and 
accordingly welcomed the work already begun 
in the Agency on the drawing up of relevant 
recommendations. 

44. All those issues would undoubtedly be 
taken up again at the second Review Conference, 
-5 



GC(XIX)/OH. 17 9 

scheduled for 1980. It was to be hoped that the 
prospect of such further discussions would, in 
the interim, contribute towards a balanced and 
effective operation of NPT, 

45. Despite its current economic problems, 
Italy had been making a dual effort to increase 
its contribution to the proposed broadening of 
the objectives of the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. The Italian Nuclear 
Energy Commission had increased the number 
of grants available to researchers and students 
from developing countries to 200 man-months; 
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had allocated 
the sum of L. 100 million to be used for the 
award of scholarships to candidates from 
developing countries. 
46. Coming to the main features of the 
development of peaceful nuclear activities in 
Italy, he said that, as in the major industrialized 
countries, the rising cost of petroleum had led 
to review of the country's energy policy 
objectives. In particular, plans had been made 
for containment of consumption, reduction of 
energy waste, reconsideration of other 
conventional primary sources (geothermal 
energy) and development of alternative sources 
(solar energy, fusion). The only valid 
alternative, however, had proved to be nuclear 
energy, mainly for the generation of electric 
power. A number of measures had therefore 
been taken, including the inclusion in the 
National Electric Board programme of 20 
nuclear power plants, with a capacity of up to 
20 000 MW(e), to be committed by 1978. By 
1980, nuclear energy was expected to account 
for approximately 12-14% of total power 
production, by 1985 about 40% and by 1990 
from 50-70%; towards the end of the century the 
proportion was expected to reach 85-90%. 

47. Secondly, his Government had recently 
drafted a number of laws, relating in particular 
to the siting of nuclear plants, and designed to 
permit speedy implementation of the energy 
programme, while safeguarding the autonomous 
powers of the regions and municipalities. Another 
draft law under study related to the creation of a 
High Commissariat for Energy, whose task would 
be to supervise the implementation of the national 
energy policy. 
48. Thirdly, steps were on foot to rationalize 
the national nuclear energy industry through 
concentration of the companies concerned into 
large industrial groups. 
49. Fourthly, under its third five-year plan, 
based on the guidelines laid down by the 
Interministerial Committee for Economic 
Planning, and involving investments of about 
$750 million up to 1978, the Italian Nuclear 
Energy Commission was to intensify its 
activities in both technological research and 
industrial promotion, including increased work 
on proved and advanced reactors and various 
phases of the fuel cycle. The Commission was 
participating, jointly with AGIP NUCLEARE, in 
the multinational company EURODIF in the 
sector of uranium enrichment (each to the 
extent of 12. 5% of the company's capital); and a 
second reprocessing plant was now entering into 
production. Lastly, research was being 
conducted in the fields of radioactive waste 
disposal, nuclear safety and thermonuclear 
fusion. 

50. It was gratifying to note the appreciation 
of other Member States for the role played by 
Italy in the advancement of nuclear technology 
which had resulted in the confirmation of Italy 
among the States represented on the Board of 
Governors, Italy would continue to co-operate 
to the utmost in the Agency's work, with a view 
to consolidating cohesion among Member States 
and achieving increasingly efficient utilization 
of the resources available for international 
co-operation. 
51. Speaking on behalf of the States Members of 
EEC, he expressed deep satisfaction concerning 
the conclusion of the co-operation agreement 
between the Agency and the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM) [5]. The draft 
agreement, which had been approved on 
15 September 1975 by the Council of Ministers 
of the EEC countries, represented the 
formalization of the fruitful co-operation 
developed between the two bodies over the past 
years. And lastly, on behalf of EEC, he would 
extend a wholehearted welcome to Qatar, the 
United Arab Emirates and the United Republic 
of Tanzania on their admission to membership 
of the Agency. 
52. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that 
the Agency would continue and further intensify 
its work, which was of particular value at the 
present delicate stage in the world's energy 
situation. As in the past, the Italian Government 
would extend to that work its constructive 
support. 
53. Mr. BOT (Netherlands) expressed the hope 
that the spirit prevailing during the seventh 
special session of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, devoted to development and 
international economic co-operation, would 
gradually permeate the whole United Nations 
system, including the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, 
54. One of the results of the seventh special 
session had been increasing emphasis on 
assistance to the least developed countries and 
the countries most seriously affected by current 
critical situations. The statement in the 
Director General's report on the provision of 
technical assistance by the Agency [6] that the 
long-range objective of a project should be 
clearly identified with the receiving countries' 
[5] The draft agreement is set out in document 
GC(XIX)/556, Annex. 
[6] GC(XIX)/INF/154, para. 89. 
-6 



GC(XIX)/OR. 179 


overall development goals and that a logical 
link should exist between the project's immediate 
and long-range objectives was therefore to be 
welcomed. Equal approval was due to the 
statement in the same document that projects 
involving highly sophisticated or advanced 
technology, or both, required particularly 
careful appraisal to ensure effective implementation, 
[7] as in no other way could the countries 
concerned derive optimal results from the 
assistance rendered. 

55. His delegation appreciated the inclusion of 
those points, as they were evidence of the 
Secretariat's efforts to bring its assistance more 
in line with the recommendations of the General 
Assembly. The technical assistance programme 
of the Agency should be ever more closely 
linked with activities financed by the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP). His 
Government therefore supported the proposed 
target for the General Fund and was pledging 
$70 400 for it, which amount corresponded with 
his country's assessed contribution. 
56. A further subject of discussion at the 
seventh special session had been the world 
energy situation. The Director General had paid 
detailed attention to that subject, and the 
Government of the Netherlands in principle shared 
his view that nuclear energy based on fission 
remained the only immediately available 
alternative to fossil fuel. However, the rapidly 
increasing application of nuclear energy required 
special measures for the protection of public 
health and the environment and all Governments 
should be aware of their responsibilities in that 
respect. The Agency's efforts to extend its 
programme on nuclear safety and environmental 
protection were therefore gratifying. However, 
adequate solutions to such problems could only 
be found if authorities and experts from all over 
the world co-operated as closely as possible, 
and the Agency, as the most universal organization 
in the field of nuclear energy, had the 
important task of facilitating international 
communication and stimulating international 
co-operation in that domain. He was pleased to 
note that, after some initial friction, fruitful 
co-operation between the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) and the Agency 
appeared to be developing. 


57. Another event of importance for the work of 
the Agency had been the NPT Review Conference, 
which had unanimously recognized the Agency as 
the appropriate international body stipulated in 
Article V of NPT, and had regarded the 
participation of the Agency in the NPT Review 
Conference as a valuable asset. His Government 
looked forward with interest to the inclusion of 
effective Agency safeguards in the Agency's 
programme for 1977-82. 
58. The Government of the Netherlands, 
although fully aware of certain basic imperfections 
[7] Ibid., para. 91. 
inherent in NPT, had nevertheless decided to 
ratify that Treaty without reservations, in 
concurrence with four other States Members of 
the European Communities. It hoped that other 
countries, too, would overcome their hesitations 
and accede to NPT. In the meantime it was 
encouraging to know that the basic ideals of 
non-proliferation were more widely entertained 
and were of a more global nature than the number 
of formal adherents to that instrument for the 
self-protection of mankind seemed to indicate. 

59. His Government had on various occasions 
stressed the vital importance of the Agency's 
work on the application of safeguards, both as 
applied under agreements in connection with 
NPT and under agreements outside the scope of 
the latter. 
60. It was a matter of urgency to improve 
safeguards techniques, especially measurements 
and accountancy methods, if the Agency was to 
fulfil its task effectively. His delegation therefore 
welcomed the establishment of the standing 
advisory group on the implementation of safeguards 
and the commissioning of the Safeguards 
Analytical Laboratory at Seibersdorf, 
61. Safeguarding nuclear exports to non-nuclearweapon 
States not parties to NPT was an increasingly 
pressing problem. He fully shared the view of 
the Director General and several delegates that 
it was essential that the major nuclear materials 
exporting countries should reach agreement on 
procedures and criteria serving as minimum 
common standards for safeguards requirements, 
in order to prevent the diversion of nuclear 
materials to other than peaceful purposes. 
62. Discrepancies existed between the safeguards 
system applicable to parties to NPT and the more 
traditional Agency's Safeguards System (1965, as 
Provisionally Extended in 1966 and 1968) [8]. 
They were illustrated in the book "Safeguards 
against nuclear proliferation" published by the 
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 
in January 1975 and written by an official of the 
Agency; the book discussed some basic issues 
relating to safeguards and their application and 
suggested that the Agency's Safeguards System 
based on document INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2 might be 
modernized and improved. Safeguards applied 
in connection with NPT and the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
(the Tlatelolco Treaty) (9], based on document 
INFCIRC/153, were more severe and indeed 
"safer" than those embodied in document 
INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2. The Netherlands Government 
fully shared the view of the Director General 
that an overall satisfactory safeguards system 
could not be achieved unless the placing of 
supplies of equipment and materials under the 

[8] Set forth in document INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2. 
[9] United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 634, 
No. 9068. 
-7 



GC(XIX)/OR. 179 

Agency's safeguards were made a condition for 
their delivery. 

63. With great interest his delegation had noted 
paragraph 6 of the annual report mentioning the 
increasing importance attached to the concept of 
nuclear fuel cycle centres on a regional basis. 
Both economically and from the point of view of 
physical security, such regional centres were 
preferable to national ones. The question seemed 
justified whether it was right that many countries, 
both industrialized and developing, should be 
continuing to strive for national nuclear fuel 
cycle centres, which were more expensive and 
less secure and represented a potential threat to 
non-proliferation. Perhaps the Agency should 
reconsider whether and, if so, to what extent it 
should continue its technical assistance to 
countries which were intending to establish 
nuclear fuel cycle centres on a purely national 
basis, in spite of the danger involved. In a 
matter of such vital importance, those countries 
should not be allowed to adduce legal or administrative 
problems, however real they might be, 
to justify their behaviour. 

64. The Netherlands, the Federal Republic of 
Germany and the United Kingdom had jointly set 
up an enterprise that was operating facilities in 
Great Britain and the Netherlands and would soon 
start to produce enriched uranium on an 
industrial scale by means of ultracentrifuge 
technology. The three countries hoped that 
their joint efforts would contribute in a positive 
way to the peaceful use of nuclear power. 
65. His delegation trusted that the conference 
on nuclear power and its fuel cycle, to be held 
at Salzburg in 1977, would result in specific 
recommendations for international or regional 
arrangements concerning enrichment, 
fabrication, reprocessing and waste management. 
The Netherlands therefore looked forward with 
great interest to the results of the Agency's 
study of the subject. 

66. The Agency would have to concern itself 
more than ever before with the question of 
physical protection against theft or other illegal 
action. The Netherlands Government had 
recently studied the problem in some depth and 
had been strengthened in its view that an 
international convention, formulating specific 
standards and techniques for protecting 
materials while in use, storage, and transfer, 
would be the appropriate solution. The Agency's 
recommendations on the subject were providing 
useful guidelines and should be further developed. 
67. His Government had some reservations as 
to the feasibility and desirability of using nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes, and therefore 
not only welcomed the establishment within the 
Secretariat of a special section to deal with 
requests for services relating to PNE, but also 
attached considerable importance to the establishment 
by the Board of Governors of an Ad Hoc 
Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for 
Peaceful Purposes. 
68. In conclusion, he affirmed that the 
Netherlands would continue to give its full 
support to the Agency. 
. The meeting rose at 1.10 p. m. 

-8 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
9 February 1976* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 25 September 1975, at 11. 10 a.m. 

President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Par agraphs 

6 
General debate and report for 1974-75 1-8 5 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Pakistan 
1-16 

Japan 
17 - 28 

Yugoslavia 
29 - 46 

Republic of South Viet-Nam 
47 - 53 

Nigeria 
55 - 70 

Canada 
71 - 85 

Closing date of the session 
87 - 89 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 29 September 1975. 
** GC(XIX)/559. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 
75-9534 


GC(XIX)/OR. 180 


THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1974-75 
(GC{XIX)/544, 544/Corr.l, 554) (continued) 

1. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that the present 
session of the General Conference marked the 
20th anniversary of the first Geneva Conference on 
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy which had 
raised tremendous expectations and hopes for all 
mankind with regard to the potential benefits of 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. Although those 
expectations had proved to be excessive, his 
delegation believed that remarkable progress had 
been made in the development of atomic energy, 
which today offered a real economic alternative for 
meeting growing energy needs and without which 
there would have been no viable means of responding 
to the energy crisis. In spite of that, however, 
the future pace of development of nuclear energy in 
the world and consequently the expansion of the 
Agency's programme was clouded by certain difficulties 
which must be recognized and overcome. 
The basic issues to be contended with included 
international concern about environmental impact 
of nuclear energy, moral indignation over the 
potential misuse of nuclear energy, growing difficulties 
in international trade and commerce for 
nuclear plants and equipment, and the effect of all 
those factors on developing countries. 
2. Considerable fears had been expressed 
recently in several advanced countries about the 
possible adverse effects on the environment and on 
public safety of expanding nuclear power programmes. 
It had become a political issue in some 
countries and voices were being raised in an effort 
not only to limit the installation of new power reactors, 
but to discourage their export. As a result 
of that generally unfair criticism, the responsible 
leaders and scientists in advanced countries had 
been compelled to speak out forcefully in the 
defence of nuclear energy which, indeed, offered 
the safest and cleanest way of meeting the growing 
energy needs throughout the world. Pakistan was 
happy to note that opinions in favour of nuclear 
power were reasserting themselves in most 
countries. 
3. The Agency should play an increasingly 
important role in creating better understanding of 
nuclear power by the public at large, and the 
expansion of its activities in the field of nuclear 
safety and environmental protection was welcome. 
In his delegation's opinion, the Agency was the 
proper organization for making a realistic and 
well-informed appraisal of the environmental and 
safety aspects of nuclear energy. The energy 
crisis had deeply affected the economies of the 
developing countries that lacked indigenous 
supplies of fossil fuels; they were in desperate 
need of low-cost energy to meet their growing 
requirements for industrial power, and nuclear 
power was the most economical and viable source 
for them. However, in addition to chronic shortage 
of funds to finance capital-intensive nuclear plants, 
lack of trained manpower and industrial infrastructure 
and technology, those developing countries 
were facing further difficulties as a result of more 
stringent and sometimes unreasonable conditions 
which the advanced countries were placing on the 
supply of nuclear plants, materials, technical 
know-how and information. That meant that the 
developing countries were suffering from pressure 
from two sides. They could not afford to import 
high-cost fossil fuels and found it increasingly 
difficult to purchase nuclear power plant facilities 
without compromising their sovereign rights to 
develop indigenous technology in the future; in fact, 
some of them were being compelled to revise 
existing agreements and treaties. That was likely 
seriously to jeopardize their economic progress 
and development. 

4. The major factor which had led to that 
hardening of attitude on the part of the advanced 
countries was the underground nuclear explosion 
carried out by India in May 1974, which had cast 
doubts on the good faith and intentions of all 
developing countries. That was very unfortunate. 
Instead of taking appropriate measures against 
violations by the country concerned, the advanced 
countries as a group were imposing collective 
punishment on all developing countries. They 
seemed to have got hold of a perfect excuse to put 
additional restrictions on the supply of plants, 
materials and technical know-how to all developing 
countries irrespective of whether they accepted 
Agency safeguards or were parties to multinational 
or regional treaties prohibiting the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. It was a fact that the 
event of May 1974 had done incalculable harm to 
all developing countries and even to the very cause 
of nuclear energy throughout the world. 
5. Even though Pakistan had not been given an 
opportunity to attend the Review Conference of the 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT Review Conference)[l] as 
an observer in a meaningful way, it had studied the 
published proceedings with great interest. It was 
for the parties to the Treaty to judge the outcome of 
that Conference and whether or not the frustrations 
expressed at the final results were justified or not. 
But Pakistan welcomed any effective measures to 
stop the further spread of nuclear weapons and to 
strengthen the security of non-nuclear-weapon 
States. It fully recognized the reality of the existence 
of five nuclear Powers which had global 
responsibilities for the maintenance of world peace. 
However, it believed that any attempt to enlarge 
that group directly or indirectly, openly or tacitly, 
was fraught with grave peril. If there was a sixth, 
seventh or eighth nuclear-weapon State, it would be 
impossible to stop the resulting chain reaction. 
Pakistan, for its part, firmly believed in the 
principle of non-proliferation as a matter of policy. 
It had placed all its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards. It had consistently advocated the 
establishment of nuclear-free zones, and had been 
encouraged that the concept of a nuclear-free zone 
[1] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. The 
text of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is reproduced in document 
INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 


in South Asia had been endorsed by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations the previous year. 
A nuclear-free zone could help to reduce regional 
tensions, improve the prospect of peace and give 
the poorer countries in the region a greater sense 
of security so that they could concentrate on solving 
the more pressing problems of poverty and 
economic development. 

6. Pakistan also urged the super Powers to act 
more quickly to reduce the dangerous escalation 
caused by continuing vertical proliferation, so that 
they could exercise moral leadership to prevent 
horizontal proliferation. They should also provide 
non-nuclear-weapon States which accepted 
international safeguards with the minimum essential 
security assurances and guarantees against 
nuclear threats or attack from any quarter. 
7. Recently the supplier countries had held 
not-so-secret meetings to devise means for 
placing additional restrictions and controls on the 
transfer of equipment, materials and information 
to the developing countries for their peaceful 
nuclear programmes. Those new conditions, 
which went well beyond the NPT and other obligations, 
affected all developing countries whether or 
not they were party to NPT and had accepted 
Agency safeguards. They were bound to create 
serious misunderstanding between the supplier 
States and the developing countries with peaceful 
nuclear energy programmes. Though well meant, 
those restrictions could be misused and might 
open yet another avenue for exploitation and 
obstructing the development of indigenous industrial 
technologies in the developing countries. Those 
countries were bound to view them in the context 
of the overall picture of transfer of technology for 
economic development. Already enough tension 
existed between the developing and advanced 
countries on the supply of raw materials, terms of 
trade, requirements for development aid, and that 
new potential source of conflict should be avoided. 

8. Before the situation worsened and misunderstandings 
multiplied, his delegation proposed that 
a meeting should be held of supplier and recipient 
States representing all interested Member States 
of the Agency to open a dialogue and reach an 
understanding on all issues, including any revision 
of Agency and other safeguards on equipment and 
materials, and to resolve the difficult question of 
safeguarding technical information and know-how. 
His delegation was against revising safeguards in 
a piecemeal fashion through setting up precedents 
under bilateral arrangements and then using 
resulting agreements as models. All the relevant 
issues should be thrashed out through consultation 
and open discussion between the groups concerned. 
9. Turning then to the Agency's programme, he 
said that nuclear power more than before had 
become of crucial economic importance to the 
developing countries. His delegation welcomed the 
increase of 31. 5% in the Agency's activities related 
to nuclear power. It endorsed the activities 
connected with the exchange of information on 
operating experience with nuclear power plants, 
the nuclear power market survey in developing 
countries and the efforts being made by the Agency 
to encourage the suppliers of and customers for 
small- and medium-power reactors to reach some 
understanding on the size, type and availability 
of such plants. It felt that training of manpower 
for nuclear power plants held the key to the 
successful implementation of nuclear power projects. 
The courses being arranged by the Agency 
with the co-operation of the Federal Republic of 
Germany, France, the United States of America 
and other advanced countries were a positive step. 
Pakistan was in the process of establishing a 
nuclear power training centre for training nuclear 
power plant engineers, operators and technicians 
and would be happy to host such a course in 
Pakistan in co-operation with the Agency. 

10. Availability of adequate and assured longterm 
supplies of uranium at a reasonable cost for 
future nuclear power plants in the world was 
essential before long-range plans for nuclear 
capacity could be made. During the last two years 
uranium prices had risen by a factor of three, 
which reflected the tightening of supplies and 
uncertainties about the future. Within the next 
20 years the existing proven resources of uranium 
must be increased by a factor of four. At present 
nearly all the known resources of uranium were 
located in a few advanced countries, but vast 
unexplored potential existed in the developing 
countries. The Agency should, in the interest of 
both the advanced and developing countries, step 
up its assistance for uranium prospection in the 
developing Member States so as to help increase 
the world's supplies of uranium and keep the 
prices within reasonable limits. 
11. As was recognized in the Agency's programme, 
world food production was not increasing 
in step with population growth, and crop failures 
and other national disasters had resulted in a 
reduction of food stocks to a level lower than at 
any time in recent history. His delegation was, 
therefore, unhappy that in spite of that, the Agency 
was planning only a negligible increase of 2. 1% in 
its programme in food and agriculture, which was 
certainly not commensurate with the needs. His 
delegation would like the Agency to take a new 
initiative in consultation with the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) and launch a comprehensive programme for 
applying nuclear radiation techniques for increasing 
agricultural production and preservation of food 
grains in the developing countries. 
12. Pakistan commended the achievements of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at 
Trieste which had achieved a place of esteem in the 
scientific community, had offered excellent training 
opportunities to scientists from the developing 
countries and had served as a meeting place for 
scientists from the Bast and the West. It hoped 
that the recent recommendations regarding the next 
six years' programme of the Centre made by the 
group of distinguished scientists set up by the 
Agency and the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 
would be accepted. 
-3 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 

13. Pakistan was one of the few developing countries 
which, because of a serious shortage of 
indigenous fossil fuel, had no other practical 
choice but to turn rapidly to nuclear energy for 
meeting its electric power requirements. That 
was why it had launched its first nuclear power 
project based on a CANDU reactor ten years 
previously with the co-operation of Canada. That 
power reactor at Karachi had already generated 
more than 1600 million kW hours during the last 
three years of satisfactory operation. The longrange 
planning study for nuclear power conducted 
with the help of the Agency indicated a requirement 
of 20 nuclear power plants In Pakistan over the 
next 25 years. It was planned to start with a 
600-MW plant for which tenders would be invited 
soon. 
14. Surveys of nuclear mineral resources had 
shown that Pakistan was potentially rich in 
uranium, thorium and other important nuclear 
minerals. Uranium prospecting was being intensified 
and it was hoped to meet future requirements 
through local production. 
15. Application of nuclear radiation and nuclear 
techniques in agriculture occupied a prominent 
place in Pakistan's programme. At its two atomic 
energy centres devoted to agriculture and biology, 
better yielding and early maturing varieties of 
wheat, rice and cotton had been developed through 
radiation and those were of considerable economic 
significance to the country. 
16. In the field of nuclear medicine Pakistan had 
completed its fifth nuclear medical centre, the 
Institute of Radiation Therapy and Nuclear 
Medicine, at Peshawar. The construction of a 
sixth centre of the same type had commenced the 
previous year. The nuclear medical centres had 
so far treated more than 20 000 patients. 
17. Mr. KATORI (Japan) said that, with the 
advance of science and technology, the use of 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes was spreading 
into new fields, and was expected to contribute 
further to the promotion of the welfare of mankind. 
The rapid growth in the demand for energy and 
the 1974 oil crisis had brought recognition of the 
immeasurable value of nuclear power as a source 
of energy, and of the importance of further 
developing its potentialities and use. Among the 
varied technology-intensive sources, it was only 
nuclear energy that could meet the qualitative and 
quantitative conditions required of a long-term 
source of energy supply. Indeed, the future of 
mankind depended on the successful implementation 
of nuclear energy development programmes. 
18. The Agency's active work in such important 
areas as safety and environmental protection -a 
more serious problem nowadays because of the 
progress made in development and utilization of 
nuclear power, technical assistance to distribute 
more widely the benefits obtainable from peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, and effective implementation 
of safeguards to prevent possible diversion for 
military purposes, all enjoyed his country's active 
support. The role of the Agency in solving the 
problems involved would become increasingly 
important, and it was a basic tenet of Japan's 
policy to strengthen co-operation with the Agency 
for the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 

19. In view of recent trends, international 
co-operation for the prevention of further proliferation 
of nuclear weapons needed to be promoted 
more intensively. In that regard, his country, 
which recognized the importance of NPT as an 
instrument for world peace, welcomed the 
reaffirming by the NPT Review Conference of the 
vital role of the Treaty in international efforts to 
avert further proliferation of nuclear weapons, to 
achieve the cessation of the nuclear arms race and 
to undertake effective measures in the direction of 
nuclear disarmament, and to promote co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under 
adequate safeguards. His Government, which had 
submitted the Treaty to the Diet for ratification in 
April 1975, was desirous of ratifying NPT as soon 
as possible in line with its desire to participate in 
international efforts for prevention of the proliferatibn 
of nuclear weapons. 
20. One of the most important factors in promoting 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy was to ensure 
the effective and smooth implementation of the 
Agency's safeguards. That concept had been 
strongly supported at the NPT Review Conference, 
and his delegation welcomed the efforts being made 
to improve the Agency's safeguards system, in 
particular the setting up of a standing advisory 
group on safeguards implementation. 
21. It was gratifying that the number of countries 
concluding safeguards agreements with the Agency 
in connection with NPT was increasing. In order, 
however, to obtain a more universal system, the 
inequality in the application of safeguards in 
connection with NPT as between the non-nuclearweapon 
States and the nuclear-weapon States 
needed to be removed. In his Government's view, 
all nuclear-weapon States should be ready to 
accept the application of safeguards to all their 
peaceful nuclear facilities. In that context, it was 
commendable that the United States of America 
and the United Kingdom were approaching agreement 
with the Agency for the voluntary submission 
of some of their peaceful nuclear facilities to 
Agency safeguards. It was essential that the 
remainder should follow that example. 

22. It was of interest for many countries to have 
information on potential benefits obtainable from 
peaceful nuclear explosions (PNE). He therefore 
noted with satisfaction the establishment of the 
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for 
Peaceful Purposes which was soon to begin work. 
The technology involved was still in the research 
and development stage, and, in addition, many 
legal issues remained to be resolved. It was to be 
hoped that Members which had already started 
research in the area in question would furnish the 
results obtained and that the work of the Advisory 
Group would progress smoothly. 
23. Over the past few years, the matter of 
physical protection of nuclear material had become 
4 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 


of greater common interest throughout the world. 
And he noted with great pleasure that the NPT 
Review Conference had urged the Agency to continue 
its work on the formulation of specific 
recommendations designed to improve protection. 
It was therefore to be hoped that the Agency would 
make further fruitful efforts in that field. 

24. As the NPT Review Conference had confirmed, 
nuclear energy was playing an important 
role in electricity generation and was contributing 
steadily toward elimination of the economic and 
technical differences between the developed and the 
developing countries. He found it encouraging that 
a greater number of developing countries were 
seeking to participate in the Agency. In the circumstances, 
the Agency's technical assistance programme 
for developing countries was taking on 
added importance, and his country highly appreciated 
the proposed increase in such activities. 
In support of the programme, Japan had increased 
its contribution to the General Fund each year at a 
rapid rate, and the amount pledged for 1975 came 
high on the list. He was happy to announce that 
his Government was prepared to contribute to the 
General Fund for 1976 in accordance with Japan's 
assessed rate. In addition, Japan had held various 
training courses, seminars and panels and had 
provided experts and received trainees under 
Agency fellowships; it would like to continue 
assistance activities of the kind in the future. 
25. With reference to the Agency's draft budget 
for 1976, he noted that assessed contributions on 
Member States under the Regular Budget were to 
increase by nearly 30% as compared with 1975[2]. 
Admittedly, because of the world-wide inflation, 
expenditure on administration had also been 
increasing. Like many other countries, however, 
Japan was experiencing the most severe economic 
depression for 30 years, so that its financial 
position was in difficult straits. Despite that 
situation, his Government would co-operate in 
accepting the draft budget for 1976. But if the 
Agency's budget continued to increase at such a 
high rate in the future, the resulting financial 
burden would be very heavy for its Members. He 
consequently hoped that the Secretariat would do 
its utmost to ensure more effective use of budgetary 
funds and to halt sharp increases in the future. 
26. Japan found nuclear energy a most promising 
alternative to oil as a source of energy and it was 
part of its basic policy to expand nuclear power 
generation rapidly to cope with the increasing 
demand for electricity. At present, a total of 
eight atomic power reactors were in commercial 
operation, with a total generating power of 
about 3890 MW. In addition, another 19 reactors 
with an aggregate output of 16 000 MW were either 
under construction or at the advanced planning 
stage. As a result of the present severe economic 
depression, the demand for nuclear energy was 
now expected to be around 49 000 MW in 1985, as 
compared with the previous estimated output of 
[2] See document GC(XIX)/550, Table 5. 
60 000 MW for the same year. The anticipation 
now was that that scale would be reached two years 
later. The proportion of nuclear power in relation 
to total power generation was expected to increase 
from 2. 4% in 1973 to 34. 4% in 1985. The current 
programme had been aimed at putting fast-breeder 
reactors and reprocessing plants into practical use. 
Thus far, the fast-breeder reactor had been 
subjected to various tests, and was expected to 
become critical in 1976. As for the pilot reprocessing 
plant, test operation had been started. 
Construction of the prototype advanced thermal 
reactor was in progress; it was expected to 
become critical in 1977. 

27. Nowadays it was not possible to develop and 
utilize nuclear power without public acceptance and 
proper measures to ensure the safety of power 
stations and protection of the environment through, 
e. g. , the safe disposal of radioactive waste. When 
planning the construction of a nuclear power station, 
the Japanese authorities had made it an 
essential condition to have the understanding of 
local people on reactor safety, and to pay careful 
consideration to environmental protection. It was 
his country's intention to maintain and intensify 
its efforts in research on reactor safety and on 
radioactive waste disposal. The disposal of 
radioactive waste was a matter of common interest 
to the world as a whole, and his country sincerely 
hoped that co-operative international action would 
be taken on the Agency's initiative to arrive at an 
acceptable solution for the problems involved. The 
recent efforts of the Agency toward the drawing up 
of international safety standards for nuclear power 
stations were highly appreciated. The work in 
question would, it was anticipated, contribute to 
the promotion of peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

28. In conclusion, he reiterated his view that the 
future would see more intensive promotion of the 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In 
that area, the activities of the Agency were contributing 
to the raising of living standards through 
technology advancement, to protection of the 
environment through research on safety, and to the 
maintenance of world peace through the application 
of effective safeguards for prevention, of the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. It was Japan's 
expectation that the Agency's activities would 
expand much more with the strong support of its 
Members; and it would spare no efforts on its 
part toward the achievement of the Agency's goals. 
29. Mr. VLAHOV (Yugoslavia) congratulated the 
President on his election and welcomed Qatar, the 
United Arab Emirates and the United Republic of 
Tanzania to membership of the Agency[3]. The 
present session of the General Conference was 
being held in a political situation somewhat more 
favourable than a year previously. The easing of 
tension in the world had continued despite all the 
unsolved problems still facing the international 
community. The recent Conference on Security 
and Co-operation in Europe which had been held 
[3] See document GC(XIX)/OR. 176, paras 14-16. 
-5 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 

in Helsinki provided grounds for hoping that that 
tendency would continue in the future and contribute 
to better understanding and co-operation in 
all fields, not only between European countries 
but universally. 

30. The Ministerial Conference of Unaligned 
Countries held recently in Lima had contributed to 
a better understanding of the problems faced by all 
developing countries. The Conference had underlined 
the need for faster and more universal 
transfer of know-how and technology from highly 
industrialized to less developed countries. At the 
Special Session of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations one of the g;eneral requests made 
was that co-operation between the developed and 
developing countries should be pursued, not on the 
basis of confrontation but as a means of promoting 
common interests. At the Ministerial Conference 
in Lima and at the Special Session of the General 
Assembly the importance of raw materials and 
energy as the basis for development had been 
particularly stressed. That had a very direct 
bearing on the problems of development and 
co-operation in the utilization of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes and therefore on the Agency's 
activities. 
31. The NPT Review Conference was of 
exceptional significance for the Agency and its 
future activities. At that Conference many countries 
had expressed their dissatisfaction at the 
unequal status of the nuclear- and non-nuclearweapon 
States under NPT. The nuclear-weapon 
States had been criticized for non-fulfilment of 
obligations stemming from NPT since they had not 
halted the nuclear arms race, the vertical and 
horizontal spreading of nuclear weapons had 
continued, nuclear tests for military purposes had 
not been stopped in all media and the security 
of non-nuclear-weapon countries had not been 
improved. Technical assistance provided by 
nuclear-weapon States to non-nuclear-weapon 
countries in the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy had not been significantly increased either. 

32. Expectations that the Final Declaration of the 
NPT Review Conference would be somewhat more 
decisive and concrete in the section on international 
co-operation had not been fulfilled. The obligations 
of nuclear-weapon States to render assistance 
to the non-nuclear-weapon States, particularly the 
developing countries, in the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy had not been precisely specified 
and all the Declaration contained was an invitation 
for all Parties to NPT "in a position to do so" to 
assist non-nuclear-weapon countries in that field. 
In that connection, Yugoslavia was against any 
kind of preferential treatment for non-nuclearweapon 
countries which were party to NPT as far 
as technical assistance provided by the Agency was 
concerned. 
33. The Final Declaration had clarified to a 
certain extent the question of PNE by specifying 
that the Agency was the appropriate international 
body referred to in Article V of NPT, through 
which potential benefits from peaceful applications 
of nuclear explosions could be made available to 
any non-nuclear-weapon State. 
34. The setting up by the Agency of an Ad Hoc 
Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for 
Peaceful Purposes was to be welcomed, as it 
would contribute to the formulation of a long-term 
programme in that delicate field. 
35. Yugoslavia felt that the Agency had 
successfully accomplished its tasks in respect of 
NPT to the extent that circumstances allowed. 
However, the increasing demand for the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy in all countries, 
and particularly in the developing countries, had 
now made it necessary for the Agency to conduct 
a thorough review of its obligations and tasks 
arising from NPT and the Final Declaration of the 
NPT Review Conference. 
36. The provision of technical assistance should 
not be arrested for fear that small and developing 
countries might misuse such assistance to produce 
nuclear weapons. The existing system of safeguards 
was sufficient to prevent such misuse. The 
moves made by some countries at the NPT Review 
Conference to place increased controls on the 
transfer of equipment, technology and nuclear fuel 
might have adverse effects. The developing 
countries could not wait endlessly for assistance 
bogged down in a mire of controls but would look 
for other ways of developing and applying nuclear 
technology which could only work to the Agency's 
disadvantage. 
37. The Director General's statement[4] and the 
annual report (GC(XIX)/544 and Corr. 1) demonstrated 
the diversification and significance of the 
Agency's activities. A large number of projects 
and programmes had been implemented in the 
nuclear power field and the continuing energy crisis 
meant that more and more countries were starting 
to build nuclear power plants, Yugoslavia being 
one of them. In providing assistance to Member 
States in that field, the Agency should concentrate 
on the concrete problems faced by countries 
embarking for the first time on nuclear power 
programmes. 
38. In view of the increase in nuclear power 
production and the simultaneous increase in public 
awareness in that field, the Agency should pay 
special attention to promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and also to assuring nuclear 
safety and environmental protection. It was also 
necessary to intensify work on the application of 
nuclear techniques in agriculture, biological 
sciences, hydrology, prospection and industry. 
Particular attention should also be paid to the 
problems associated with the fuel cycle of nuclear 
power plants. 
39. The large number of meetings, panels and 
discussions organized by the Agency served to 
further the exchange of technical knowledge and 
experience between Member States and contributed 
to the solution of technological problems. 
40. Research contracts with the financial participation 
of the Agency were an incentive to many 
[4] Ibid. , paras 21-59. 
-6 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 


countries to invest national resources in nuclearscience, and the possibility of increasing Agencyfunds for that purpose should be examined. 

41. An increasing number of developing countries 
was now capable of making effective use of the 
technical assistance offered by the Agency. The 
Agency should make every effort to increase the 
funds available and direct them towards projects 
in developing countries which were closely related 
to the production of energy of nuclear origin and 
the utilization of powerful radiation sources. 
42. An increase in the target for voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund from 
US $4.5 million to 5. 5 million was still insufficient 
to meet the needs of developing countries. 
Such an amount might be adequate for encouraging 
fundamental research in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, but for the development of nuclear 
power it was purely symbolic. 
43. As in previous years, Yugoslavia would 
make a voluntary contribution to the General Fund 
in proportion to its base rate of assessment. 
44. He expressed the firm belief that the 
Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle 
to be held in 1977 under the Agency's auspices 
would provide ample scope for the discussion and 
resolution of many problems of vital interest to 
Member States in the development of their nuclear 
power programmes. 
45. Finally, he wished to offer some suggestions 
for consolidating the work of the Agency. First of 
all, he considered that the developed nuclear 
countries should continuously increase their 
contributions to the Agency to enable it to expand 
the human and material resources available to 
assist developing countries with nuclear power 
programmes. His delegation also considered that 
the Agency could do more in co-ordinating interests 
between the developed and the developing 
countries and thereby fulfil one of its basic functions. 
The International Atomic Energy Agency, 
as an organization of Member States with equal 
rights and obligations, should be able to resolve 
the problems it was set up to deal with in a 
democratic way, but that principle had not been 
fully achieved. It was necessary to devise a 
system whereby all Member States of the Agency 
could participate in all its bodies, activities and 
decision-making. 
46. The development of world-wide co-operation 
in the field of nuclear energy under the Agency's 
guidance would not only help to resolve the energy 
crisis but also serve to improve mutual understanding 
in the world and establish equilibrium and 
confidence between all nations. It would surely 
also have a positive influence on the efforts being 
made towards nuclear disarmament. It was quite 
certain that large and even revolutionary advances 
in the peaceful application of nuclear energy could 
be achieved only if a complete ban on the testing 
and production of nuclear weapons was introduced. 
If that were achieved, vast human, material and 
financial resources devoted to nuclear weapons 
production could be transferred to peaceful 
applications, 

47. Mr. LE-VAN-THOI (Republic of South 
Viet-Nam), speaking for the first time as delegate 
of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of 
the Republic of South Viet-Nam, said he welcomed 
the admission of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates 
and the United Republic of Tanzania to membership 
of the Agency. 
48. His delegation was gratified to see the 
encouraging results obtained by the Agency in its 
programme for the present year, and fully 
supported the trends in the programme for the 
coming year, more especially the increase in 
activities relating to fellowships, training, and 
provision of equipment under its programme of 
technical assistance. 
49. It had to be pointed out, however, that the 
assistance provided by the Agency for South 
Viet-Nam had not so far always been used in the 
most effective way because of the prevailing 
financial and technical difficulties, together with 
the reluctance of international experts to work in 
an area fraught with strife. But, after 30 years of 
disastrous war, peace had finally been restored 
and it was to be hoped that the Agency would continue 
to give a.ctive support to the country's nuclear 
programme, which, though modest, was called 
upon to play an important role in the reconstruction 
of the country. 
50. Following liberation of the country, the 
Revolutionary Government had set up a technical 
and scientific institute in South Viet-Nam for the 
promotion and co-ordination of theoretical and 
practical research. The Nuclear Research Centre 
at Dalat was now functioning again satisfactorily 
and a team of research workers from abroad, 
mainly from the socialist countries, had joined 
the present scientific staff. 
51. Unfortunately, however, the nuclear fuel for 
the Triga Mark II research reactor had been 
removed by American officials just prior to the 
liberation of Dalat. Since that fuel was under 
Agency safeguards and since, furthermore, two of 
the fuel elements had originally been allocated to 
Viet-Nam by the Agency in 1968, it was hoped that 
the Agency, in fulfilment of its statutory responsibilities, 
would be able to provide the reactor with 
new fuel, thereby making it possible to carry out 
the requisite programme of research and training 
in the near future. 
52. In the meantime research was continuing as 
best it could with the aid of imported radioisotopes. 
His delegation appealed to all the advanced countries, 
irrespective of their economic and social 
structures, to assist in the reconstruction of 
Viet-Nam. It was hoped in that connection that, 
as a first step, the Agency would fully implement 
the six technical assistance projects that had 
already been approved in previous years. 

53. Now that the much-longed-for peace had 
finally been restored, the people of Viet-Nam 
-7 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 


were firmly resolved to fulfil the last wishes of 
President Ho Chi Minh, namely the building of a 
unified, independent and democratic Viet-Nam. 


54. The PRESIDENT said he was sure he would 
be speaking on behalf of all delegations in congratulating 
the Vietnamese people on the return of 
peace to their country. 
55. Mr. OGUNLANA (Nigeria) said that his 
delegation had examined the background documents 
for the present Conference with interest and would 
.air its views in the appropriate committees. 
Suffice it to say that the Nigerian delegation would 
continue to emphasize the importance of building 
the scientific infrastructure of developing countries 
rather than relying solely on aid from outside. 


56. The proliferation of definitions of underdevelopment 
were so centred around such items as 
per capita income and the availability of foreign 
aid, that the fundamental meaning of the term was 
swept under the carpet. At present, the underdeveloped 
world constituted around 68% of the 
world population but contributed less than 14% of 
the total world output. It was estimated that by 
the year 2000, the population of underdeveloped 
countries would have increased to about 78% ot the 
total world population, but that their contribution 
to world productivity would be less than 12%. 
Currently, therefore, the contribution of the richer 
countries was more than ten times that of the 
developing countries. If the present trend continued, 
then by the year 2000, the contribution of 
the richer countries would have increased to almost 
20 times that of the developing countries. It was 
disturbing to note that on the average, one man in 
the richer countries today was as effective as ten 
men from the poorer countries. As if that were 
not bad enough, by the year 2000 the present trend 
would make one man in the richer countries as 
effective as twenty men from the developing countries. 
57. That yawning technological gap between the 
advanced and the developing countries continued to 
increase. The ultimate development of the poorer 
countries was a task that they would have to 
accomplish for themselves. The poor countries 
were thus faced with the major problem of true 
independence, which political independence could 
not alone provide. True independence could only 
be achieved by establishing modern science as a 
cultural activity in society, and transforming the 
society's economy into one based on modern 
science and technology. The classical ingredients 
of economic growth - capital, labour and land - by 
no means sufficed to explain the rapid growth of 
the economies of the richer countries. The 
missing ingredient, which had variously been 
called "technical change", "research and development", 
"scientific, engineering and managerial 
advance", "advances of knowledge", "innovation" 
was of crucial importance. But whatever term 
was chosen to describe that crucial ingredient, 
"innovation" was what must always be borne in 
mind. 
58. In the final analysis, the problem of underdevelopment 
was not one of the transfer of 
technology, but really one of scientific and technological 
innovation. It would, therefore, be of no 
avail to rely only on the direct transfer of 
technology. Nor could it be over-emphasized that 
outside technological aid could never be disinterested. 
Underdevelopment had two characteristic 
features: the paucity of men around whom to build 
viable programmes and the dearth of innovative 
ideas among members of the society in question. 
59. True independence could be achieved only 
through the ability to harness natural resources, 
using a science-based methodology. Only through 
advanced technology could economic development 
be assured. 
60. As Nigeria was blessed with an abundance 
of natural resources, the first priority was to 
ensure the availability of adequate, reliable and 
commercially competitive energy for the development 
of the country. To ensure that that was 
achieved, a grass-roots endeavour by Nigeria 
itself was what was called for. Experience had 
shown that although advice might be received from 
foreigners, there could never be any assurance 
that no other motives existed behind their suggestions, 
especially when nuclear energy was involved. 
61. From that arose the need to establish the 
Nigerian Atomic Energy Commission as an 
autonomous body. The Commission was expected 
to play a key role in the establishment of 
Nigeria's economic independence. Nigeria had the 
resources and the population capable of utilizing 
them. The main objective of the Commission was 
to work towards the establishment of full ability in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
62. It was expected that the authority of the 
Nigerian Atomic Energy Commission would, like 
its counterparts in most other developing countries, 
be vested in the Presidency. Initially, it would 
function as an extra-ministerial department of the 
newly created Ministry of Petroleum and Energy 
so that the country would have an integrated 
energy programme. 
63. It was customary in developing countries 
first to build a physically impressive establishment, 
assemble an endless array of the latest 
equipment, and then wonder what contributions the 
oppressive establishment was capable of making. 
In contrast, the advanced countries first found the 
individual or individuals with an innovative idea 
around whom to build a viable programme. The 
resounding success of that approach was epitomized 
by such monuments as the Max Planck 
Institutes in Germany, the Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratory in California, and the Bhabha Atomic 
Centre in India. In fact, it was the policy of the 
authorities of the Max Planck Institutes "to first 
find an outstanding man, and then build an 
institute around him". 
64. The Federal Military Government of Nigeria 
was aware that the customary approach in developing 
countries led to a blind alley. Accordingly, 
-8 



GC(XlX)/OR. 180 

the country's nuclear programme would benefit 
from the successful experiences of other countries. 

65. The IAEA Advisory Group on Programmes 
for Nuclear Physics Research in Developing 
Countries which had been convened in Accra, 
Ghana, in June, provided useful information. It 
brought into sharp focus the fact that, if developing 
countries were to be able to partake genuinely in 
the benefits of nuclear energy, dedication and 
creativity on their part were necessary prerequisites. 
66. One of the hitherto unresolved issues in 
nuclear physics was the nuclear energy of helium 
which was considered anomalous. It was a pleasure 
to be able to inform the Conference that 
Nigeria's work had resolved that issue. Nigeria 
hoped that that result would be harnessed for the 
benefit of all mankind. 
67. Furthermore, a reformulation of quantum 
mechanics had been developed in Nigeria. The 
efficacy of that reformulation would, for one thing, 
enhance the country's studies of nuclear physics 
and the design of nuclear reactors. It would also 
enhance its remote sensing approach to mineral 
exploration. 
68. In keeping with the grass-roots idea of the 
Nigerian nuclear programme, one of the spin-offs 
would be an increase in the protein intake of the 
country. It was currently planned to have a 
reactor moored at sea, protected against storms 
by concrete breakwaters. The slightly warmer 
water around the plant would attract fish and 
encourage commercial fishing and possibly fish 
farming in the surrounding area. 
69. The Nigerian nuclear programme would not 
develop in a philosophical-social vacuum. The 
harnessing of technological achievements for 
social progress, the dynamics of social change due 
to technological advancement, the planning of the 
urban and rural regions of the community for 
optimal industrial and social development, the 
awareness that a lasting scientific endeavour must 
be a cultural activity, and above all, the dignity, 
economic emancipation and leadership role of the 
Black Man in the international arena were some of 
the long-term goals to which the work at the 
Nigerian Atomic Centre desired to contribute. 
70. He remembered with pleasure the friendliness 
and co-operation between the Agency and the 
Centre for Advanced Studies at Ife, which was the 
mustard seed of the Nigerian nuclear programme. 
He had no doubt that the friendliness and 
co-operation would wax stronger for the advancement 
of the programmes of Nigeria and of the 
Agency. 
71. Mr. BEBSLEY (Canada) said that his 
delegation welcomed the admission of Qatar, the 
United Arab Emirates and the United Republic of 
Tanzania to membership of the Agency. 
72. References had been made to the controversy 
concerning public acceptance of nuclear power. It 
was perhaps significant in that respect that, 
parallel to the present General Conference, a 
meeting of the Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries (OPEC) on oil pricing policy 
was also being held in Vienna, the results of which 
could have far-reaching implications. The 
increased cost of oil had given impetus to the basic 
activities of the Agency, but it was a widely-held 
view that there had to be a careful balance between 
development of nuclear power and controls to 
guard against diversion and ensure the safety and 
protection of the environment. The Agency had 
been able to make a major contribution to such 
development and control in three areas: the 
promotion of nuclear energy programmes of 
Member States by technical assistance, training 
and exchange of information; the development of 
nuclear safety and environmental protection programmes; 
and the improvement of international 
security through safeguards activities. 

73. It was gratifying to note that a large proportion 
of the Agency's Regular Budget was assigned 
to programmes of direct interest to the developing 
countries, more especially projects concerned 
with the introduction of nuclear power. In that 
context the Agency's new training programme in 
power project planning would be of substantial 
benefit. At the same time, it could provide assistance 
at the pre-introduction stage by offering 
increased opportunity for study of the various 
alternatives. In that connection, the market survey 
had also made a valuable contribution in 
defining the place of nuclear power in the needs of 
developing countries. Once the basic decision had 
been taken, it was then possible for the Agency to 
advise on such matters as siting, equipment and 
organization. 
74. He welcomed the Agency's decision to study 
the economic feasibility of regional fuel cycle 
centres, which would promote the optimum use of 
scarce resources. Joint efforts by teams from 
different countries could provide a breakthrough in 
the broader introduction of nuclear power for 
development purposes. His delegation shared the 
views expressed by other delegations on the importance 
of the role of regional fuel cycle centres in 
reducing the risks of proliferation of nuclear 
explosive devices by limiting the number of 
facilities producing fissile material. 
75. It also welcomed the revised recommendations 
on the physical protection of nuclear 
material[5], and supported all further efforts to 
deal with a particularly important aspect of that 
problem, namely the international transfer of 
nuclear materials. 
76. Furthermore, it was clear that the Agency 
was the organization best suited to assist in the 
definition of standards of safety and environmental 
protection. The continuing programme for the 
development of safety codes and guides was worthy 
of full support. 
[5] INFCIRC/225. 
-9 



GC(XIX)/OR. 180 

77. His country took an active part in the 
Agency's work in the field of radioactive waste 
management, which was a reflection of the 
Canadian policy of storing waste at land-based 
sites in retrievable form, rather than attempting 
to "dispose" of such materials, although an 
approach of that kind might not always be feasible 
in other countries. He strongly supported the 
efforts of the Agency to provide scientifically 
sound guidelines for the dumping of low-level 
radioactive wastes. 
78. One of the most controversial issues facing 
the Agency was the considerable degree of ignorance 
and misunderstanding relating to the environmental 
impact of nuclear power. There, too, 
the Agency should continue its efforts, with 
characteristic scientific objectivity and responsibility, 
to ensure a comparative study of the 
environmental effect of various alternative energy 
sources. The Agency's co-operation with WHO 
and the International Institute for Applied Systems 
Analysis with a view to a quantitative evaluation 
of the effects of all available options for energy 
production was very encouraging. 
79. Yet another important activity of the Agency 
was its role as a forum, which provided an 
opportunity for experts from all countries to keep 
abreast of the developments in the nuclear programmes 
in the form of seminars and other 
meetings; there had been record numbers of 
participants over the past year. In addition, the 
International Nuclear Information System was an 
invaluable means of communication, which his 
Government actively supported. 
80. As had been stressed by many delegations, 
the Agency's role was both evolving and expanding, 
and its basic functions, as reflected in the 
Statute, were gaining ever greater importance in 
face of problems that could not have been foreseen 
at the time of the Agency's establishment. One 
such problem, for example, was the fact that the 
extra cost of oil imports in 1974 alone - estimated 
at $10 billion - had more than cancelled out all the 
aid received by the developing countries over the 
previous year. The delegation of the Philippines, 
among others, had drawn attention to the implications 
of those and related developments for the 
Agency's technical assistance work. [6] 
81. Although the Canadian policy on development 
aid continued to be based on preference for some 
form of central funding of United Nations activities, 
his Government had pledged the full assessed 
share for voluntary contributions to the Agency's 
General Fund for technical assistance in 1976. 
The increase from the previous year seemed 
quite justified by the growing needs of the 
developing countries for Agency support and the 
erosion of the available resources due to inflation. 
82. In a statement at the NPT Review Conference, 
the Canadian representative had declared that 
[6] See document GC(XIX)/OR. 178, paras 93 
and 94. 
Canada would continue to play its full part in 
contributing to the Agency's technical assistance 
funds and also to the United Nations Development 
Programme and that increased amounts would be 
made available for assistance in the nuclear field 
to developing countries party to NPT. 

83. His delegation wished to commend the Agency 
on its very useful work in the field of PNE. His 
Government fully supported the Final Declaration 
of the NPT Review Conference, which stated that 
the Agency was the proper international body 
through which benefits from peaceful applications 
of nuclear explosions should be made available to 
non-nuclear-weapon States, and urged the Agency 
to expedite the study of the legal implications of 
the agreements envisaged under Article V of NPT. 
Hence the establishment of an advisory group on 
PNE was to be welcomed and he would closely 
follow its work. 
84. In conclusion, his delegation regarded the 
Agency's safeguards activities as of crucial 
importance and inseparably bound up with its 
technical assistance programmes. Effective 
safeguards were an essential basis for international 
co-operation in the transfer of nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology. In view of 
the constant state of flux in relations between 
States, it was vital, when introducing technologies 
with a potentially strategic significance, such as 
nuclear energy, to ensure that new risks were not 
thereby created for the international community. 
85. International co-operation required an 
impartial system of international safeguards. The 
Canadian Government looked to the Agency as the 
international community's main instrument for 
providing such guarantees. 
86. The PRESIDENT said that before adjourning 
the meeting he would ask the Conference to 
interrupt the general debate to devote a few 
moments to another agenda item. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION 

87. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to 
fix the closing date of the session, on the recommendation 
of the General Committee. 
88. The General Committee had considered the 
matter and had authorized him to recommend on 
its behalf that 26 September be fixed as the 
closing date. 
. 89. The Committee's recommendation 
was accepted. 

. The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 

- 10 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 

International Atomic Energy Agency 24 February 1976* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 25 September 1975, at 3. 15 p.m. 

President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

General debate and report for 1974-75 1-108 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Portugal 1 -8 
Libyan Arab Republic 9-1 4 
Bangladesh 15 - 26 
Poland 27 - 31 
Cuba 32 - 38 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 39 - 54 
Bulgaria 55 - 70 
Malaysia 71 - 77 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 78 - 88 
Mexico 89 - 91 
Austria 92 - 99 
Czechoslovakia 100-108 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 2 October 1975. 
** GC(XrX)/559. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 
75-9538 


GC(XIX)/OR. 181 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1974-75 
(GC(XrX)/544, 544/Corr.l, 554) (continued [1]) 

1. Mr. CONDE (Portugal) congratulated Qatar, 
the United Arab Emirates and the United Republic 
of Tanzania on being approved for admission to 
membership of the Agency. [2] He then paid 
tribute to the Director General for the competence 
with which he had discharged his duties and for 
the clarity with which he had set out the Agency's 
objectives. 
2. He recalled that he had been in the United 
States when the Agency's Statute had been drawn 
up and when the great debate on the dangers 
associated with nuclear energy had begun. He 
had witnessed an atomic explosion in the Nevada 
desert in 1957 and had appreciated the threat 
posed by that form of energy if it was employed 
for purposes other than those pursued by the 
Agency, but he was also aware of the hope which 
nuclear energy inspired in the hearts of mankind. 
3. The Portuguese Government would like to 
indicate what it proposed to do to fulfil its 
obligations with respect to the Agency. Since 
25 April 1974 it had been endeavouring to make 
as active a contribution as possible to international 
peace and security and to promote 
co-operation with all nations. 
4. It shared the Agency's interest in the 
application of the safeguards system, the 
physical protection of nuclear material, nuclear 
safety, environmental protection, as well as 
technical assistance and co-operation programmes. 
Accordingly it had placed its research reactor 
under Agency safeguards. 
5. The Government of Portugal was intent on 
strengthening its ties with the Agency so that 
Portugal might benefit from increased technical 
assistance. 
6. The uranium reserves of his country 
amounted to 8000 tons, of which half was being 
exploited. Further mining activity was planned 
in the Nisa region. The Portuguese Nuclear 
Research Centre was being completely 
reorganized to make sure that the knowledge and 
experience accumulated were channelled into 
specific co-operation projects in industry and 
agriculture. 
7. The Portuguese delegation approved the 
annual report for 1974-75 (GC(XK)/544 and 
Corr. 1) and the supplementary appropriation under 
the Regular Budget for 1975 [3] as well as the 
Agency's budget for 197 6 [4]. 
[1] GC(XIX)/OR. 180, paras 1-85. 
[2] See document GC(XrX)/OR. 176, paras 14-16. 
[3] GC(XDX)/548. 
[4] GC(XrX)/550. 
8. In conclusion, he said that activities of 
fundamental importance like technical assistance 
and co-operation programmes should be financed 
from the Agency's Regular Budget and not by 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund. 
9. Mr. ABDELAZIZ (Libyan Arab Republic) 
welcomed Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and 
the United Republic of Tanzania to membership 
of the Agency. 
10. He expressed his delegation's appreciation 
for the great achievements of the Agency in the 
past year. Its activities had covered all fields 
of the peaceful uses of atomic energy as well as 
technical assistance programmes of particular 
benefit to the developing countries. As one of 
those countries the Libyan Arab Republic had 
begun to benefit from such assistance and it 
therefore supported all technical assistance 
programmes, particularly those concerned with 
training; all the same it felt that much remained 
to be done to reduce the huge gap between 
developed and developing countries. It hoped 
that the day would come when all peace-loving 
countries in the world could co-operate closely 
in the field of atomic energy. 
11. It had become clear that the danger of 
atomic weapons being acquired by an increasing 
number of countries was a real threat to world 
peace. The situation was very serious and all 
countries should co-operate in directing advances 
in nuclear science to peaceful purposes rather 
than to military applications. The Libyan 
Government considered it essential for the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) [5] and the complementary 
agreement concluded with the Agency to be 
signed and ratified by all Member States. 
12. The Libyan Arab Republic had drawn up 
plans for establishing solid scientific foundations 
in the field of nuclear sciences based on the 
experience of experts who had previously been 
engaged in non-nuclear activities and the 
co-operation of all countries sincerely wishing 
to assist the developing countries. The Libyan 
Government was intent on developing its nuclear 
energy programme and would give it full 
financial and moral support, bearing in mind 
that any knowledge acquired or projects undertaken 
should be directed towards peace and 
prosperity. The nuclear energy programme 
would be undertaken by the Libyan Atomic Centre 
at Tripoli. Activities had already started at 
the Tajoura Research Centre to the east of 
Tripoli where several laboratories were doing 
work in the field of analytical chemistry as well 
as training the personnel needed for the implementation 
of the nuclear energy programme. In 
the initial stage that programme would be based 
on the following installations: a research reactor 
of the swimming-pool type with an initial power 
of 2 MW(e) rising to 8 MW(e) and then 10 MW(e). 

[5] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



GC(XIX)/0R.-181 


The flux density would initially be 1. 6 to 

1. 8 x lO* n/cm sec and could be increased 
later by a factor of 1.5, Upgrading would 
involve modifications to the heat exchangers and 
reactor core. 
13. The second installation was a radioisotope 
laboratory with a radiation level of 500 Ci. The 
isotopes produced would be used for various 
medical, agricultural and industrial applications 
and would generally be of great benefit to the 
national economy. The third installation would 
be an activation analysis laboratory equipped 
with a small versatile accelerator which could 
also be used for, nuclear physics research. The 
fourth installation was a hot plasma physics 
laboratory with facilities for research in the 
field of thermonuclear fusion. That initial 
research programme was part of the general 
plan of the Libyan Atomic Centre which was to 
have numerous departments specializing in 
various nuclear activities, such as reactor 
technology, nuclear physics, radiobiology, 
nuclear chemistry, nuclear engineering, uranium 
prospecting and radiological safety as well as . 
training and scientific information departments. 
14. In conclusion, the Libyan delegation 
expressed the hope that the Agency would 
increase its training facilities to Member States 
in need of trained manpower. 
15. Mr. CHOUDHURY (Bangladesh) 
congratulated the President on his election and 
welcomed Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and 
the United Republic of Tanzania on their 
admission to the Agency. He reiterated his 
Government's confidence in the Agency's 
efforts to promote the development and 
application of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes throughout the world. He had noted 
with great satisfaction the Director General's 
statement to the Economic and Social Council 
of the United Nations (ECOSOC) in July in which 
he had stressed Member States' need for 
increased services from the Agency. 
16. At the moment his Government was placing 
greatest priority on its nuclear power programme. 
Nuclear power was currently the only means of 
meeting increased energy demands in theworld; ~ 
particularly in Bangladesh. Furthermore, 
nuclear power was now cheaper than power 
obtained from oil-fired plants, even when the. 
capacity of the facilities was as low as 100 MW. 
It therefore represented an attractive economic 
alternative for many' developing countries, more 
especially Bangladesh. Some 40 developing 
countries were interested in nuclear electricity, 
which would account for more than half the 
capacity to be installed between 1980 and 1990. 
17. Although nuclear power was economically 
viable, its acceptance by the public constituted 
an acute problem in many countries. The safety 
of the nuclear power production system, the 
handling and storage of radioactive waste, and 
the risk of unauthorized use of fissile material 
and of proliferation of nuclear weapons were 
the aspects that chiefly gave rise to misgivings. 
His delegation agreed with the Director General 
that it was imperative for the Agency to undertake 
an extensive programme for the preparation 
of a set of internationally acceptable safety 
standards, codes and guides for the main types 
of nuclear power plant. Cessation of not only 
the manufacture and stockpiling of nuclear 
weapons by the major Powers but also the 

spreading of such weapons to other countries 
were equally essential, since the fact that they 
might also fall into the hands of criminal 
elements posed a terrible threat to mankind. 
It was therefore vital for the Agency to broaden 
the scope of its safeguards activities and make 
them more effective. 

18. The programmes relating to safety, 
environmental protection and non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons were not the only matters of 
concern to the developing countries; they also 
had serious problems in the areas of financing 
and recruiting qualified personnel. The Agency 
should therefore provide advisory services, 
training courses and qualified personnel, at the 
same time organizing the international funding of 
nuclear power projects for the developing 
countries, more especially in the States which 
were least developed. 
19. His delegation was gratified to see that the 
Agency was giving high priority to the problems 
faced by the developing countries in the introduction 
of nuclear power. Those countries had urgent 
need of proven and standardized power stations 
in the 100-400 MW(e) range. He wholeheartedly 
supported the Agency's programme for the joint, 
purchase by several countries of a series of 
identical nuclear power plants with a capacity of 
100-400 MW(e). He suggested that the Agency . 
should seriously try to arrange the financing of 
the installation of the nuclear power plants in 
those countries through the International Bank 
for Reconstruction and Development and other 
international and regional financial organizations, 
20. The Agency had played a very commendable 
part in the Review Conference of the Parties to 
NPT (NPT Review Conference) [6] which had 
brought about a considerable increase in the 
number of, signatories thereof. It was on that 
account that he urged the Agency to improve the 
efficiency of the system for automatic processing 
of safeguards data; that was very,important if 
the sphere of application of safeguards was to be 
expanded. 
21. Bangladesh attached great importance to 
the International Conference on Nuclear Power 
and its Fuel Cycle that was to be held in 1977 to 
study the acute problems involved in the implementation 
of nuclear power programmes. 
22. With regard to the programme and the 
budget estimates for 1976, his country approved 
[6] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. 
-3 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 

the programme for augmenting technical 
assistance activities relating to reactors, safeguards, 
nuclear safety and environmental 
protection, nuclear explosions for peaceful 
purposes (PNE) and life sciences. While 
approving an increase of 17% in the funds 
assigned to safeguards, he felt that the Agency 
should make a special effort to improve safeguards 
techniques and to strengthen the present 
system without resorting to an undue increase in 
staff. 

23. Turning to technical assistance, he was 
happy to see that the proportion represented by 
equipment had gone up from 37% in 1973 to about 
41% in 1974, and hoped that the relative size of 
the equipment component would continue to 
increase in the coming years. His Government 
was greatly concerned, however, at the inadequacy 
of the technical assistance financed from the 
Agency's own resources, together with the fact 
that it had not been possible to meet one third of 
the technical assistance requests in 1975. He 
proposed that the Agency should fix the target for 
voluntary contributions for 1976 at not less than 
$ 6 million, to which sum would be added the aid 
provided by Member States in the form of 
fellowships, expert services and equipment. 

24. His country supported the Director General's 
proposal for a 30% increase in the Regular Budget 
between 1975 and 1976. Such action was essential 
in order to keep sufficient posts and funds for the 
Agency's increased activities and in order to meet 
increased costs due to inflation and fluctuations in 
the exchange rate. The Agency would require more 
funds if it was to finance adequately its various 
activities in the developing countries, 
25. Furthermore, his delegation realized that 
the increase in contributions to both the Regular 
Budget and the General Fund would be a heavy 
burden on the less affluent Member States, more 
especially in Africa, South Asia and Latin 
America. Those countries required immediate 
international aid to counteract widespread 
starvation, disease and illiteracy, and long-term 
technical assistance to improve their socioeconomic 
conditions. A great deal had been said 
in the United Nations and its specialized agencies 
on the establishment of a new international 
economic order based on the redistribution of 
wealth and the narrowing of the gap between the 
developed and underdeveloped countries; his 
Government fully supported the General Assembly 
resolution on a 10% reduction in military 
expenditure by the permanent Members of the 
Security Council, and utilization of some of the 
money saved in that way as aid to developing 
countries. He suggested that part of those 
savings could also be used for financing international 
bodies. 
26. Recalling that the world was spending close 
to $300 000 million a year for military purposes, 
of which $5000 million went on nuclear weapons 
(already representing about 16 000 megatons), 
he stressed that the Agency had the special 
responsibility of preventing both the vertical and 
horizontal proliferation of such weapons. He 
warmly supported the appeal made by the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations for a 
complete ban on the production of nuclear weapons. 
A halt in their production would permit savings 
of thousands of millions of dollars, which could 
then be placed at the disposal of the Agency for 
technical assistance purposes, including the 
communication of technologies and the financing 
of nuclear power projects in the developing countries. 

27. Mr. KARSKI (Poland) said that 1975 had 
been marked by a number of important anniversaries, 
among them the 30th anniversary of 
the victory of the anti-Nazi coalition over fascism, 
of which Poland had been one of the main victims. 
The tragic events of that time had induced 
countries to unite their efforts to preserve peace, 
as shown by the 30-year history of the United 
Nations. Important progress had been recorded, 
especially at the NPT Review Conference, at the 
meetings of the Conference of the Committee on 
Disarmament and, first and foremost, in the 
Final Act of the Conference on Security and 
Co-operation in Europe, which should serve as 
a model for regional peaceful co-operation in 
numerous fields. The present state of affairs 
was highly promising and all countries represented 
at the General Conference should do their utmost 
to strengthen peace in the world and rid it of the 
threat of an armed conflict. In that spirit the 
Soviet Union had proposed the conclusion of an 
international treaty for the complete and 
universal prohibition of nuclear weapons tests. 
Similarly, numerous States were urging the 
Agency to redouble its efforts to render NPT 
universal in scope. 

28. He thanked the Agency for the efforts which 
it had made to increase the number of accessions 
to safeguards agreements concluded in connection 
with NPT. However, it should not be forgotten 
that, as a result of nuclear power station 
construction contracts, certain countries were 
in a position to develop their nuclear potential 
in an uncontrolled manner, which involved a 
growing hazard for the whole world. The 
establishment of regional fuel cycle centres 
would favour the creation of nuclear-free zones, 
while at the same time enabling States to profit 
more easily from the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

29. Poland was anxious that the Agency should 
aim at playing a universal role and consequently 
welcomed Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and 
the United Republic of Tanzania to its ranks. His 
Government was gratified at the agreement 
between the Agency and the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA) [7], and at the 
co-operation agreement between the Agency and 
the European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM) [8J. Research on the peaceful uses 
[7] The draft agreement is set out in document 
GC(XIX)/545, Annex. 
[8] The draft agreement is set out in document 
GC(XIX)/556, Annex. 
-4 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 


of atomic energy was simultaneously a factor 
for progress and enabled the Agency to expand 
its scope. Poland accorded a favoured position 
to research on nuclear physics, hot plasma 
physics, nuclear chemistry, radiobiology, and 
the industrial, medical and agricultural 
applications of nuclear energy. 

30. Poland was in process of building its first 
nuclear power station. The facility had been 
purchased from the Soviet Union but was being 
constructed largely by Polish personnel. The 
progress accomplished by Poland in the nuclear 
field was being made possible by extremely 
broad co-operation with countries such as the 
Soviet Union and the other members of CMEA, 
and also with the Agency. Poland hoped to 
conclude further contracts of that type, and to 
participate in joint research and development 
programmes and in co-operative industrial 
undertakings, with both industrialized and 
developing countries. 
31. Turning to the Agency's programme for 
1976, he congratulated the Director General and 
the Secretariat on their excellent work. His 
Government accepted the programme as proposed, 
but hoped that the Agency would endeavour to 
implement the decisions contained in the Final 
Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation 
in Europe, which marked the beginning of 
European collaboration in nuclear research and 
development. Recognizing the important role 
played by the Agency in providing assistance 
to the developing countries, the Polish Government 
had decided to increase its voluntary 
contribution to the General Fund by 67% as from 
1976. Poland was also interested in the 
programmes relating to reactors, nuclear 
safety, environmental protection, and the 
applications of nuclear technology to biology, 
medicine and agriculture. It likewise desired 
to participate more closely in the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS), which should 
be so organized as to permit its wider use by the 
less developed countries. The Agency was of 
course restricted by the financial difficulties 
accruing from fluctuations in exchange rates and 
from inflation, and the Polish Government congratulated 
the Secretariat and the Director General 
on the efforts they were putting forth to make the 
best possible use of the Agency's available 
resources, 
32. Mr. SAENZ SANCHEZ (Cuba) was pleased 
to see the admission of Qatar, the United Arab 
Emirates and the United Republic of Tanzania 
to the Agency. The Conference's session was 
being held at a time when the peace-loving peoples 
of the world were striving to enhance levels of 
assistance and co-operation at international level. 
The recent Conference on Security and Co-operation 
in Europe had substantially contributed to the 
realization of those aims. 
33. In its efforts to build a new society, the 
revolutionary Government of Cuba was devoting 
particular attention to scientific and'technological 
development, and had therefore allocated large 
resources to the establishment of research 
centres. That will to accelerate development was 
amply demonstrated in the field of education: 
illiteracy had been non-existent for almost 
15 years past and 98, 8% of children between the 
ages of 6 and 13 were receiving free education. 
In comparison with the pre-revolutionary period, 
there were eight times more pupils enjoying 
secondary education and five times more students 
attending universities. 

34. Before the revolution there had been 
practically no research centres in Cuba. The 
revolutionary Government had established more 
than 105 research establishments in the fields 
essential to the country's development. They 
employed more than 4000 university graduates 
on a full-time basis and about 12 000 working 
part time. During the period concerned, the 
Academy of Sciences had also been set up, with 
22 research establishments attached to it. In 
addition, the four universities placed strong 
emphasis on scientific research. Hundreds of 
fellows were studying at universities and 
research centres in various socialist and 
friendly countries, and with the assistance of 
international organizations. 
35. In order more effectively to direct 
national scientific policy, the Cuban Government 
had in 1974 established a National Council for 
Sciences and Technology, followed a few months 
later by a National Commission for the Peaceful 
Utilization of Atomic Energy. The principal 
functions of that commission were to lay down, 
co-ordinate and supervise scientific and technical 
policy connected with the peaceful applications of 
atomic energy, to provide the means of training 
the national staff required for that purpose, and 
to promote international collaboration in the 
nuclear field, especially with the Agency. 
36. The Five-Year Plan for 1976-80 envisaged 
the beginning of construction of a nuclear power 
station in Cuba, which would be an essential 
component in the country's energy development. 
There would be a need for a team of highly 
qualified experts on reactor calculations, 
physics and technology, capable not only of 
operating atomic power stations but also of 
progressively assimilating various aspects of 
the associated technology. Construction of 
nuclear power stations was to be preceded by a 
whole range of activities, including the design 
and construction at the beginning of the Five-Year 
Plan of a zero-power critical reactor, and the 
building of a research reactor for the local 
production of radioisotopes and labelled 
compounds. In order to implement all those 
activities in the most satisfactory manner, the 
Academy of Sciences' Nuclear Research 
Institute would be housed in new premises. 
There, it would be possible to provide more 
thorough training to the experts and technicians 
who would be participating in the construction 
of the country's first atomic power station. 

37. The application of nuclear techniques had 
yielded remarkable results in the mining and 
5 



GC(XIX)/OR.181 

metallurgical industry, the preservation of 
certain categories of food commodities, the 
sterilization of various supplies and the induction 
of mutations in plant species of economic 
importance. Those were the areas in which 
Cuba wished to concentrate its efforts during the 
years to come. The application of nuclear 
methods and techniques to medicine was proceeding 
satisfactorily, and it was also expected that work 
in that direction would be continued. The Atomic 
Energy Commission attached particular 
importance to all aspects of radiological 
protection and was at present engaged in drafting 
national radiation protection standards. All those 
were priority activities, in one form or another, 
within the first Five-Year Plan on science and 
technology, which was about to receive the 
revolutionary Government's approval. 

38. Cuba would continue to collaborate with the 
Agency by offering voluntary contributions as in 
the past. He was pleased to observe that the 
Agency's programme for 1975-80 took account 
of the interests of all Member States. Cuba, 
which had no petroleum resources, was making 
a serious effort to develop nuclear power in 
order to offset that lack. 
39. Mr. NEMETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) said the period that had elapsed since 
the previous session of the Conference had been 
characterized by the consolidation of international 
detente. That state of affairs had come about 
largely as a result of the measures adopted 
during recent years to slow down the arms race 
and achieve nuclear disarmament. Important 
steps in the process had been agreements 
between the United States and the Soviet Union 
on the limitation of strategic weapons and underground 
experiments with nuclear weapons, the 
agreement concluded at Vladivostok which laid 
the basis for an agreement aimed at stopping 
the strategic arms race, and Soviet proposals 
to prohibit the development of new types and 
systems of weapons for mass destruction. The 
most outstanding development, however, had 
been the signing of the Final Act of the 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in 
Europe in which all the signatory Governments 
had undertaken to give concrete expression to 
detente. Thus, the role of the Agency as the 
organization responsible for supervising the 
application of NPT and, therefore, of the 
non-proliferation arrangements, had been 
enhanced. 
40. NPT could be completely effective only if 
as many States as possible acceded to it. It 
was therefore a matter for satisfaction that 
five States Members of EURATOM (Belgium, 
the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, 
Luxembourg and the Netherlands) had decided 
to become parties to NPT at the NPT Review 
Conference. 
41. In its Final Declaration the NPT Review 
Conference expressed the opinion that the 
parties to the Treaty had satisfactorily 
fulfilled their obligations under the main 
provisions of the Treaty, and it had stated that 
the Agency's safeguards, far from interfering 
with the sovereignty of the non-nuclear-weapon 
States, contributed to the expansion of international 
co-operation in the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. It had recommended that the 
Agency should pursue its safeguards activities 
with increased efficiency. 

42. So far the Agency had successfully discharged 
that task and the Ukrainian delegation 
was convinced that it would continue doing so in 
the future. It was, however, the safeguards 
system itself that needed to be strengthened, 
since safeguarded fissionable materials supplied 
to a particular State through the Agency or on 
the basis of a bilateral agreement might be used 
not only for the activities specified in the supply 
contract but also for other purposes. Such an 
assumption was in no way unjustified, as it was 
difficult to know in advance and in full detail 
what would be the programme of nuclear energy 
applications in a given country. However, 
contracts for the supply of fissionable materials 
provided for the safeguarding only of their use 
in a well-defined area and took no account of 
other activities connected with the use of 
nuclear energy. For those reasons, the 
Ukrainian delegation considered it essential to 
ensure that States not party to NPT receiving 
fissionable materials should be required to place 
all their nuclear activities, without exception, 
under safeguards. In its Final Declaration the 
NPT Review Conference had expressed an 
identical opinion. 
43. The establishment of regional fuel 
reprocessing centres presented great advantages 
for many non-nuclear-weapon countries. Such 
centres would make it possible to meet efficiently 
and economically the continually growing needs 
for nuclear energy, and would, moreover, be 
placed under Agency safeguards. 
44. Agency activities in the field of nuclear 
science and technology, in particular in 
connection with INIS, deserved particular 
mention, as did the tightening of its co-operation 
links with various regional organizations, the 
activities of which were connected with the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, especially with 
CMEA, which had recently concluded an 
agreement with the Agency. CMEA was an 
organization for the integration of the socialist 
countries and its programmes touched on all 
fields of activity of importance to its members; 
it attached particular importance to progress in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy at the 
national level. Its programme of scientific and 
technical co-operation for 1976-80 made 
provision for a number of peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy: e. g. measures for radiological 
protection and protection of the environment, 
improved methods of handling radioactive wastes, 
development of methods for controlling radioactive 
pollution and for decontaminating nuclear 
installations and measures for the control and 
monitoring of pollution in the Baltic Sea and the 

6 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 


Danube. The experience gained by CMEA 
would undoubtedly be of great use to the Agency. 

45. Scientists from the Ukrainian SSR participated 
actively in the work of CMEA in many 
fields of nuclear physics. In May 1975 CMEA's 
Scientific and Technical Co-ordination Committee 
on Radiological Protection had met at the 
Nuclear Research Institute of the Ukrainian 
Academy of Sciences to study various problems, 
including the applications of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes, the development of nuclear 
power, the classification of nuclear power 
station failures and methods of detecting reactor 
breakdowns, regulations governing protection 
of the environment in case of radioactivity 
leakage from power plants using water-cooled 
and water-moderated reactors and so on. On 
that occasion a group of Agency consultants had 
presented a paper on its work in connection with 
safety codes and guidelines for nuclear power 
plants. 

46. Work in the Ukrainian SSR on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy was concerned in 
particular with advanced research on the nucleus, 
the increasing use of radioisotopes and other 
radioactive sources and their practical 
applications in the national economy. 
47. Theoretical and experimental study of the 
nucleus had led to the discovery of new effects 
connected with shell structure, yielding new 
information about the properties of the nucleus 
and the mechanism of reactions. The interaction 
constants of different nuclear particles had been 
the subject of intensive research. Information 
about the interaction constants of neutrons of 
various energies was regularly communicated 
to the Agency and published by it. Research had 
been undertaken on dissociation gases as 
coolants in fast-neutron reactors. New data had 
been obtained on the mechanism by which faults 
developed in various materials exposed to 
radiation, and the nature of structural deformations 
and of the laws governing them had been studied 
as a function of dose and irradiation conditions. 
Polymers and other materials with predetermined 
properties had been obtained by means of ionizing 
radiation, 
48. In the domain of agronomy the discovery 
of a number of physiological and biological 
processes had led to the development of techniques 
for accelerating plant growth for the purpose of 
increasing productivity. New varieties of plants 
and micro-organisms that had been obtained or 
were being studied were highly promising. The 
development of a method of rapid analysis of the 
nitrogen content of certain irradiated seeds 
afforded a means of selecting high-protein-content 
seeds without devitalizing them. La the years 
ahead a large-scale campaign would be launched 
against fruit-tree parasites, using the sterile 
insect technique. 
49. In medicine, studies on tumour treatment 
with neutrons had revealed that the method 
offered certain advantages over gamma-ray 
treatment. Statistical data collected in that 
connection would serve as a basis for drawing 
conclusions about the various types of radiation 
and the doses that might be recommended for the 
treatment of various tumour diseases. 

50. Work was also done in the Ukrainian SSR 
on derived applications of nuclear activity, 
e. g. the use of low-temperature thermal waste 
from nuclear power plants. Such work might be 
of great interest to the Agency. The Ukraine was 
willing to consider concluding research contracts 
with the Agency relating to any matter that might 
be of interest to it. 
51. As regards the construction programme, 
the 1000-MW nuclear power station at Chernobilsk 
was nearing completion; in future years its 
capacity would be increased to 4000 MW. Apart 
from the construction of other nuclear power 
plants it was intended to erect large multipurpose 
nuclear plants for power production, water 
desalination and irrigation of arid land. The very 
extensive application of radioisotopes and 
radiation sources in many branches of 
Ukrainian industry contributed to a considerable 
increase in productivity and improvement of 
working conditions. Radioisotopes were also 
being used successfully in medical institutions. 
Because of the quality of its product, the 
national industry producing various types of 
medical equipment using isotopes ranked with 
the world's best. Equipment of that type had been 
offered to the Agency by the Ukraine as a 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund. 
52. The Ukrainian SSR was pleased to announce 
that its contribution to the General Fund in 1976 
would be increased to 80 000 roubles in national 
currency, an amount which might be used to 
supply facilities, equipment and materials of 
various kinds and to provide assistance under 
Agency supervision, priority being given to 
developing countries which were party to NPT. 
53. Thanks to its activity the Agency was 
acquiring more and more authority internationally, 
as was indicated by the increasing size of its 
membership. The Ukrainian delegation therefore 
took pleasure in welcoming the representatives 
of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the 
United Republic of Tanzania. It was also 
gratified by the participation of a representative 
of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of 
South Viet-Nam in the present session. 
54. Finally, he wished to express the 
conviction that the Agency, as a body for the 
co-ordination of all nuclear activities for 
peaceful purposes, would contribute unceasingly 
to the establishment of a lasting peace. 
55. Mr. KOSTADINOV (Bulgaria) said he 
wished to associate himself with other 
delegations in congratulating the President on 
his election and in welcoming the representatives 
of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the 
United Republic of Tanzania, which States would 
-7 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 

henceforth participate in the Agency's efforts 
to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 

56. The current session was taking place in an 
atmosphere of international detente. The 
agreements concluded in Europe in preceding 
years and especially the positive results of the 
Conference on Security and Co-operation in 
Europe would certainly contribute to detente, 
peaceful co-existence and co-operation between 
countries of different social and economic 
structure. The agreements between the Soviet 
Union and the United States also deserved 
mention in that context; they were of vital 
importance for the consolidation of peace 
throughout the world, for the prevention of a 
nuclear world war and for the slowing down of 
the arms race. The Soviet Union's proposal at 
the United Nations, aiming at the prohibition 
without reservation of nuclear arms testing, was 
also to be welcomed. 
57. Such detente was a prerequisite for the 
expansion and consolidation of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. As a member of the United Nations 
family the Agency had an important part to play 
in that respect. That role had been confirmed by 
the NPT Review Conference, which had expressed 
great appreciation of the Agency's activities in 
connection with Articles III and IV of NPT. The 
Agency was continuing to strengthen its authority 
as an international organization competent in 
matters relating to the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and to the development of 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
58. Bulgaria attached great importance to 
NPT and was pleased at the Agency's efforts in 
the field of safeguards, the universal acceptance 
of which would ensure the international control 
of nuclear materials and their utilization for the 
benefit of mankind. The safeguards activities 
of the Agency would, of course, continue 
expanding with the growth in the number of 
countries which had concluded safeguards 
agreements with it, and Bulgaria for that reason 
welcomed the fact that the Agency was trying to 
devise effective methods for checking on the 
movement of nuclear materials. The application 
of new control techniques would result in savings 
thanks to a reduction in the number of inspections, 
especially in countries with proven national 
systems of accountability and control. 
59. The Bulgarian delegation, which had 
studied with care the various Agency activities 
mentioned in the annual report, noted with 
satisfaction that the Agency had persisted in its 
efforts to enable developing countries to acquire 
the means to utilize nuclear energy in the 
realization of their peaceful aims. The Agency 
was clearly taking account of current developments 
and supporting the introduction of nuclear 
energy in more and more countries. That 
policy was having a considerable influence on 
the nature of the technical assistance which the 
Agency was providing, with a view to the 
exploitation not only of nuclear energy itself but 
also of all the other achievements of nuclear 
science and technology, especially those 
connected with nuclear physics and medicine and 
with the use of ionizing radiation in 
agriculture. 

60. Aware of the fundamental importance of 
technical assistance, Bulgaria had regularly 
contributed to the General Fund in keeping with 
its base rate of assessment and would do so 
again in 197 6. As regards the use made of the 
General Fund, his country noted with pleasure 
that a steadily increasing percentage of the 
resources was being spent on the provision of 
equipment. That was very important for many 
developing countries greatly needing modern 
equipment, the absence of which often hampered 
the development of nuclear science and technology. 
From the information given in the report about 
technical assistance, it appeared that the latter 
was being provided mainly in two areas: nuclear 
power generation and agriculture. That fact was 
significant in that many countries were having 
not only to cope with the energy crisis but also 
to expand their agricultural production. The 
results obtained thanks to the Agency's help, 
especially the development of several improved 
cereal varieties, were rather encouraging. 

61. Parallel with the progress which it was 
achieving in nuclear science and technology 
Bulgaria was making more and more use of 
radioisotope and radiation techniques in other 
fields. Until a few years previously, such 
techniques were employed principally in 
scientific work; now they were also being used 
with increasing frequency in industry (especially 
for flaw detection, automation and process 
control), medicine, geophysics, geochemistry 
and agriculture (for example, in rationalizing 
various types of work). At the Bulgarian 
Institute of Nuclear Research and Nuclear Power, 
a team of specialists had, with the Agency's 
help, devised prototypes of new instruments 
which had received the approval of the competent 
bodies within the Agency and were being used in 
the course of safeguards inspections. 
62. With regard to nuclear power generation, 
the solution of Bulgaria's problems was being 
greatly facilitated by the disinterested help of 
the Soviet Union. The Bulgarian delegation had 
already had occasion to mention the start-up of 
the country's first nuclear power station, at 
Kozloduy, which had been built and put into 
service in a relatively short time, four years 
and three months, and was operating satisfactorily. 
After the entry into service of the 
second unit, which was under construction, the 
total capacity of the station would be 880 MW. 
The intention was to increase the station capacity, 
in two subsequent stages, to 2640 MW. 
63. The Bulgarian nuclear power programme, 
which was part not only of the country's overall 
power programme but also of its environmental 
protection programme, included the improvement 
of techniques for the internal and external 
monitoring of nuclear power plants, nuclear 
-8 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 


material accountancy and control in accordance 
with the provisions of NPT, the production 
within the country of nuclear power plant 
equipment, optimization of the medical surveillance 
of nuclear power plant personnel, the 
formulation of laws and of operating standards 
in the light of the expected development of power 
generation, and the training of personnel. The 
Committee for Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy 
was active in all those fields, in co-operation 
with the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of 

Power Production and other competent 
institutions. With regard to the serious question 
of the safe disposal of radioactive waste, steps 
were being taken to enlarge the existing areas 

available for burial. 

64. Until about 1990, the reactors operating in 
Bulgaria would be thermal reactors of the types 
WWBR-440 and WWER-1000. However, 
Bulgaria was following with interest the work 
being done in the field of fast reactors and 
expected to embark on the construction of its 
first fast reactor between 1986 and 1990. 
65. The first Bulgarian specialists in nuclear 
power generation had been trained with the help 
of Soviet experts and of courses given in 
Bulgaria at the place of work and at establishments 
of higher education. In that connection, 
the Bulgarian delegation wished to thank the 
Agency for all it was doing to facilitate the 
training of specialists in nuclear power plant 
construction and operation. 
66. Bulgaria considered the courses, seminars 
and study tours organized by the Agency very 
useful and would be pleased to participate in the 
organization of some of them; it was already 
concerned with the organization of the study tour 
which was planned for November 1975 and would 
include a visit to the Kozloduy nuclear power 
station. The Bulgarian authorities would do 
everything necessary to enable the 
representatives of developing countries to 
benefit from Bulgaria's experience in the 
construction and operation of nuclear power 
stations. 
67. As regards equipment, Bulgaria was 
concentrating on co-operation within the overall 
programme of CMEA - or, to be more precise, 
within the programme of "INTERATOMENERGO", 
an association created on the initiative of 
CMEA's Permanent Commission for the Peaceful 
Utilization of Atomic Energy. 
68. In that context, the Bulgarian delegation 
was pleased at the Board's decision to recommend 
to the General Conference the conclusion of an 
agreement between CMEA and the Agency. Over 
the years, CMEA had expanded its collaboration 
with a number of countries regardless of their 
social and political regime and had established 
close ties with the Agency, whose representatives 
had participated in many CMEA undertakings 
in the field of the peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy. Conclusion of the proposed 
agreement would lead to a strengthening of 

collaboration relating to nuclear power 
generation, the design and construction of 
equipment, isotope production, radiation 
protection and the use of isotope methods and 
instruments in various sectors of the economy, 

69. With regard to the Agency's programme 
and budget, inflation and exchange rate 
fluctuations were undoubtedly causing difficulties, 
but a 25% budget increase for those reasons 
alone was hardly justifiable. The Director 
General and the Secretariat were to be commended 
for their efforts to achieve economies through the 
regrouping of certain activities, facilitated by 
the existence of many unfilled posts which would 
make it possible to provide for staff expansion 
as INIS was extended. 
70. In conclusion, the Bulgarian delegation 
wished to assure the Agency that the Bulgarian 
Government would continue to support all its 
activities in the field of the peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy. 
71. Miss LIM (Malaysia) said that on the 
occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the 
first international conference held on the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy, it should be 
remembered that the mission given to the 
Agency had been to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world and 
to ensure that the assistance provided was not 
used in such a way as to further any military 
purposes. However, there was a danger that 
concern with preventing nuclear energy from 
being used for such purposes would make the 
Agency overlook the fact that it was supposed to 
encourage uses of nuclear energy that were of 
benefit to humanity. 
72. The arms race was at present becoming 
more intensified. The lack of progress towards 
a comprehensive treaty banning the testing of 
nuclear weapons led to a problem of world 
security and, in particular, the security of 
non-nuclear-weapon States which had foreclosed 
their nuclear options by acceding to NPT, and to 
questionings as to whether their gesture had any 
meaning. The NPT Review Conference had 
stated that the co-operation of nuclear-weapon 
States was necessary to ensure that non-nuclearweapon 
States did not feel threatened by the use 
of force involving either nuclear weapons or 
non-nuclear weapons. The developing countries 
were not obtaining any benefit from nuclear 
energy at the moment and, in addition, the 
recession and increase in the cost of energy 
were delaying their entry into the nuclear age. 
73. Nevertheless, the Director General was to 
be congratulated on the action he had taken to 
expand the Agency's activities in the fields of 
particular interest to the developing non-nuclearweapon 
countries; particular mention should be 
made of the studies on reliability of nuclear 
reactors, waste disposal, safeguards, the 
creation of regional fuel reprocessing centres, 
the carrying out of the tasks entrusted to the 

GC(XIX)/OR. 181 

Agency by the NPT Review Conference, the 
technical assistance programme and the 
application of nuclear techniques in medicine, 
agriculture and hydrology, 

74. The Malaysian delegation considered that 
the Agency should adapt itself to the changing 
needs of the developing countries, which 
expected nuclear technology to make a rapid 
improvement in their social and economic 
conditions. It welcomed the arrangements made 
to hold a meeting during the present session to 
consider the projects carried out under the 
Asian Regional Co-operation Agreement. All 
those activities were financed largely from the 
General Fund; the latter consisted mainly of 
voluntary contributions and had as its 1976 target 
the sum of $5. 5 million. Several delegations had 
expressed the hope that in future there would be 
an increase in the target level, the figure for 
which was paltry in comparison with the world's 
expenditure on arms. In fact, one third of the 
requests for technical assistance had to go 
unsatisfied in 1975 owing to lack of funds. Her 
delegation acknowledged with appreciation the 
additional contribution of $100 000 made by a 
nuclear-weapon State for technical assistance 
projects which the Agency had been unable to 
carry out in 1975 due to lack of resources. 
75. The developing countries were particularly 
interested in the Agency's food and agriculture 
programme, but the 1976 budget allocated only 
an average of $250 000 for each of the components 
of that programme. It was to be hoped that some 
industrialized countries would be able to increase 
their contributions so as to help meet the special 
needs of the developing countries. To be 
meaningful, technical assistance must be timely 
so that the developing countries could embark 
on nuclear programmes before inflation and 
currency instability put them out of their reach. 
The 1976 programme provided an increase of 
only 2, 5% for technical assistance and training, 
whereas the increase for safeguards was nearly 
five times greater. The Malaysian delegation 
would like a balance to be preserved between 
those two fields. 
76. In regard to safeguards, the NPT Review 
Conference had urged that the same kind of 
safeguards should be applied to both classes of 
States party to NPT and not directed solely to 
non-nuclear-weapon States. Moreover, the 
share of the costs of safeguards borne by 
developing countries should be reduced. 
77. In conclusion, she said that Malaysia 
recognized the value of the role played by the 
Agency in promoting co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and in assisting the 
developing countries and that it would continue 
to participate in those activities of the Agency. 
78. Mr. KRASIN (Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic) said he was gratified that 
the Conference's session was taking place in an 
atmosphere of international detente that was 
assuming increasingly concrete form. A major 
event in that respect had been the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe, which 
heralded a new era in world history. The 
unanimous decisions taken at the level of the 
European continent in favour of consolidating 
peace - a unique happening in the annals of 
international relations - would have tremendous 

repercussions. In that connection he quoted an 

extract from the speech by Mr. Brezhnev at the 

end of that Conference. 

79. The main thing now was to supplement the 
political detente with a military detente. It was 
therefore essential to curb the arms race and 
prevent all further proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, so as gradually to achieve general and 
complete disarmament. The Agency had a 
leading part to play in the prevention of all 
further proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
materials. The NPT Review Conference had 
itself emphasized that role and had pointed out 
that, five years after the entry into force of the 
Treaty, the Agency's safeguards activities had 
in no way encroached upon the sovereignty of 
States or hindered their scientific and technical 
progress. 
80. His delegation was gratified at the way in 
which the NPT Review Conference had welcomed 
the plan to set up regional fuel cycle centres and 
the working out of measures for the physical 
protection of materials. The recommendations 
by the Review Conference on Article V of NPT 
were extremely important. 
81. Pursuing its unrelenting struggle for a halt 
to the arms race and implementation of practical 
measures gradually leading to general and 
complete disarmament, the Soviet Union had 
placed on the agenda of the thirtieth session of 
the General Assembly of the United Nations the 
question of a treaty relating to a general and 
complete ban on nuclear arms tests and 
prohibition of the manufacture and use of new 
types of weapons of mass destruction. 
82. The atmosphere of detente was having a 
beneficial effect on the activities of international 
organizations, more especially those of the 
Agency, whose authority was steadily growing 
as the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout 
the world increased. His delegation was gratified 
to see that the Agency intended to step up its 
activities relating to nuclear safety and environmental 
protection, further development of INIS 
and expansion of inspection activities, including 
the provision of analytical services in connection 
with safeguards; also its work in power and 
reactor matters and its co-operation with the 
World Health Organization (WHO) and the larger 
scientific and technical centres for health protection. 
83. Likewise, his delegation warmly welcomed 
the conclusion of a co-operation agreement 
between the Agency and CMEA. The strengthening 
of relations between those two organizations 
opened up for the countries of the world broad 
prospects of economic and scientific development 
through the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
- 10 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 


84. For its own part, the Byelorussian SSR had 
in 1975 carried out an expanded research 
programme on the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. Mention should be made, more 
especially, of work in the following areas: 
radiation chemistry, calculation and systematic 
classification of nuclear constants, solid-state 
physics, radiobiology, application of radiation 
in agriculture, and improvement of production 
processes as applied in industry and medicine. 
85. For a number of years the research work 
carried out in Byelorussia under contracts with 
the Agency had produced excellent results in 
radiobiology. The planned development of work 
on activation analysis techniques would enable 
his country to collaborate more closely with 
the Agency. At present Byelorussia intended to 
participate in the joint IAEA/WHO programmes 
concerned with studying the role and content of 
trace elements in cardiovascular pathology. 
86. As far as progress in nuclear power was 
concerned, the main problem at the present 
stage was transition from thermal reactors to 
fast neutron reactors with a low doubling time, 
which were more reliable, safer, more 
economical and non-polluting. In that connection 
the work of the Nuclear Energy Institute of the 
Byelorussian Academy of Sciences was of major 
interest. It concerned the development of new 
types of nuclear power plants based on fast 
reactors cooled by a dissociating gas, 
particularly nitrogen tetroxide. The specific 
combination of thermal properties and chemical 
reactions found in the latter gas was such that 
it would certainly be possible to reduce the cost 
and volume of heat-exchangers and turbines in 
the plant as a whole, and also the cost of 
electricity and heat. The theoretical and 
experimental research work that had been done 
during the last few years at the Byelorussian 
Academy of Sciences on the physical and thermal 
properties of nitrogen tetroxide used as coolant 
(technology and resistance to heat and irradiation) 
had made it possible to design, in 1974/75, a 
nuclear power plant based on the new coolant; the 
project appeared to have a bright future and was 
the basis of successful co-operation between the 
members of CMEA. 

87. Realizing the economic difficulties which 
developing countries were having to face, 
Byelorussia intended to raise its voluntary 
contribution to the Agency's General Fund for 
1976 to 20 000 roubles in national currency, 
which sum could be used for the provision of 
material and equipment to those countries. 
88. In conclusion, his delegation wished to 
welcome the representatives of Qatar, the United 
Arab Emirates and the United Republic of 
Tanzania. It was also happy to see the representative 
of the Provisional Revolutionary 
Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam 
present at the Conference. He was certain that, 
as a result of international detente, the Agency 
would further strengthen its authority and offer 
the scientists of all countries extensive 
opportunities for co-operation in the interests 
of the people of the world and in the consolidation 
of world peace. 

89. Mr. ALBA ANDRADE (Mexico) said that 
his Government's long-term policy in nuclear 
energy was aimed at making greater use of its 
peaceful applications in order to speed up the 
country's economic and social development. 
With the extraordinary possibilities offered by 
nuclear energy in mind, it had drawn up a 
programme whose object was to make possible 
greater recourse to the new sources of energy 
which were essential for its further advancement. 
It was essential to start drawing on nuclear 
power before conventional sources of energy 
became exhausted. But nuclear energy could 
contribute to industrial development and the 
well-being of mankind only if it were renounced 
as an instrument of destruction or a means of 
political coercion. It was those considerations 
which had led tn 1975 to amendment of 
Article 27 of his country's political constitution, 
in order to specify plainly that competence in 
regard to nuclear fuel supply for nuclear power 
production and to regulation of its applications 
which, according to the law, was ruled out for 
other than peaceful purposes, lay exclusively 
with the State. Those were the principles 
governing the international policy pursued by 
Mexico which, as a peace-loving country, had 
been among the sponsors of the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America [9] (the Tlatelolco Treaty) and among 
the first to ratify NPT. It therefore followed 
that its whole nuclear programme had been 
placed under the Agency's safeguards system, 
to which Mexico gave its full support as a means 
for ensuring that material, services, equipment 
and facilities furnished by the Agency should be 
used exclusively for peaceful purposes. Likewise, 
Mexico was in favour of establishing safety 
standards for the protection of health against 
possible hazards resulting from the use of 
nuclear energy. 

90. There was, however, another highly 
important function also devolving upon the Agency, 
namely, the provision of technical assistance. 
The need in that area was for a substantial 
expansion at a more rapid pace than that 
envisaged for the development of safeguards 
activities. Any efforts made by the Agency in 
that direction would therefore have his country's 
support. 
91. Mexico had benefited greatly from the 
assistance furnished by the Agency in connection 
with its nuclear power programme, particularly 
in relation to the two Laguna Verde reactors 
(Veracruz) [10], the first of which would come 
[9] United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 634, 
No. 9068. 
[10] Being furnished under the agreements 
reproduced in documents INFCIRC/203 and 
Addendum 1. 
- 11 



GC(XrX)/OR. 181 

into operation in 1979 and the second a year 
later. The possibility of constructing additional 
power stations in various parts of the country 
was under study. According to forecasts, by 
1990 nuclear power should account for 30% of 
total electricity production. If that objective was 
to be attained, large amounts of uranium would 
be required. Prospecting work was being 
actively pursued and it was expected that an 
area of 1 million square kilometres would be 
surveyed over the next seven years. Results 
already obtained were very promising and a 
number of likely areas were now being evaluated. 
Mexico deeply appreciated the help given by the 
Agency in technical assistance and in the training 
of personnel needed for the creation of a domestic 
nuclear fuel industry. 

92. Mr. MANZ (Austria) said he would like to 
congratulate the President on his election and to 
proffer a welcome to the new Members. Since the 
preceding session of the General Conference, the 
Agency had expanded its activities and would 
accordingly need to find the necessary resources, 
despite the financial difficulties besetting it and 
its Members. In addition to its regular contribution, 
Austria would be making a voluntary 
contribution to the General Fund in 1976 in the 
amount of $ 31 900, and would make available 
the same amount of Type II fellowships as in the 
previous year. 

93. With regard to NPT, his Government had 
noted with satisfaction that an additional 13 nonnuclear-
weapon States had signed the Treaty and 
that another 13 had ratified it. Furthermore, 
the NPT Review Conference would doubtless 
lead to more effective steps to implement the 
Treaty. A number of measures designed to that 
end had already been taken; in 1974, several 
major exporting countries had reached an understanding 
to apply certain standards in the implementation 
of Article III. 2 of NPT, For its part, 
Austria was in the process of preparing 
regulations to govern the required export control 
system; the regulations in question would come 
into force before the end of the year. As the 
Austrian delegation at the NPT Review Conference 
had already pointed out, it was essential to 
establish standard procedures and practices in 
relation to physical protection, based on guidelines 
and recommendations to be drawn up by 
the Agency, in order to prevent sabotage or 
access of unauthorized persons to nuclear 
material. Progress had also been made in work 
on the conclusion of safeguards agreements in 
connection with NPT; in that regard, he mentioned 
that the safeguards analytical laboratory at 
Seibersdorf would shortly be completed and 
would soon become available for use by the 
Agency. 

94. The Agency's work in nuclear safety and 
environmental protection included the drafting 
of codes and guides for nuclear power stations, 
the promotion of research and the holding of 
symposia. One such symposium had been held 
in Vienna in co-operation with the Nuclear Energy 
Agency of the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development; the results had 
proved very successful and such co-operation 
should be extended to other organizations 
dealing with the same issues. 

95. The Agency should likewise endeavour to 
establish closer co-ordination and co-operation 
at the international level with other bodies 
dealing with energy supply problems, e. g. in the 
matter of conducting market studies. Its links 
with the World Energy Conference had been 
strengthened; the Conference Commission 
responsible for studying possibilities for savings 
in energy resources was to begin its work at 
Vienna in October, with the Agency's active 
support. Activities d"f that kind would help to 
ensure a more global approach to the energy 
problem. 
96. Furthermore, steps should be taken to 
foster the exchange of information on developments 
in public opinion regarding the construction 
of nuclear power stations. His delegation 
recommended that every possibility of pooling 
such information within the Secretariat should be 
examined. In addition, symposia and conferences 
dealing with safety and other general aspects of 
nuclear power should consider the items on their 
agendas also from the point of view of public 
acceptance of nuclear plants; such meetings, 
too, were sources of information for the 
individual as well as for the mass media. 

97. In 1977, Austria would have the honour of 
acting as host to the planned International 
Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel 
Cycle, which was to study the problems arising 
at the various stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
As representative of the host country, he wished 
to inform the General Conference that the main 
construction work for the Agency's permanent 
headquarters at the Donaupark would be completed 
by the end of 1975 and that the buildings would be 
ready for occupancy by 1978. 
98. Referring to his country's nuclear energy 
programme, he said that its first nuclear power 
station would be put into operation in 1976 and 
would help to meet the additional demand for 
energy expected in the 1980s. A second nuclear 
power station was to be constructed at a later 
date. 
99. In conclusion, he paid a tribute to the 
Director General and the Secretariat for their 
joint efforts over the past year and for the 
excellent co-operation maintained with the 
Austrian authorities. 
100. Mr, NEUMANN (Czechoslovakia), after 
congratulating the President on his election, 
said that the Conference's session was taking 
place in an atmosphere of international detente, 
a particular contribution to which had been made 
by the completion at Helsinki of the third stage 
of the Conference on Security and Co-operation 
in Europe and by the formulation of political 
principles that were to govern the relations 
between the States of Europe. It would now be 
- 12 



GC(XIX)/OR. 181 


necessary to ensure that the same development 
extended to other parts of the world, that 
detente also entered the military domain, 
permitting an end to the arms race, and that 
nuclear energy was used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. In that connection the 
importance attached by the recommendations 
of the Helsinki Conference to international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy should be emphasized, and such 
co-operation encouraged in every way, 

101. Recalling the role of the Agency in 
implementing NPT, he said he was convinced 
that the strengthening of safeguards provided 
for in the Treaty would be noted with approval 
by the delegates. NPT should be of a universal 
nature and it was to be deplored that a number 
of countries, some which possessed nuclear 
weapons and some which did not, had not yet 
acceded to it. The Czechoslovak delegation 
supported without reservation the efforts made 
to expand and consolidate NPT, and those of the 
Agency to increase the effectiveness of safeguards 
and to persuade all States party to NPT to 
accept them. 
102. The year that had elapsed since the last 
session could be considered satisfactory, as 
many important non-nuclear-weapon countries 
had ratified NPT and concluded safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. It was essential 
that those countries should now begin to apply 
fully the Agency's safeguards system, without 
seeking to avoid the issue by new demands or 
procedural formalities. Czechoslovakia approved 
of the present safeguards system, which 
respected the sovereign rights of States, did not 
hamper their economic, scientific and technological 
development, and did not prevent international 
co-operation in the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. As much attention as possible 
should be paid to implementing the conclusions 
of the NPT Review Conference concerning the 
establishment of standardized and universal 
safeguards, the organization of national systems 
of accounting and control, and so on. 
Czechoslovakia could offer the services of its 
experts in the establishment of national 
surveillance systems and was prepared to let 
other countries benefit from the experience it 
had acquired in the application of Agency safeguards 
to its nuclear installations. In 1975 it 
had begun to implement Article III. 2 of NPT and 
it was convinced that other countries would soon 
follow the same course. 

103. In preparing for the current session of the 
General Conference the Czechoslovak delegation 
had carefully studied the Agency's accomplishments 
during the preceding year, and its 
programme for 1976. It set particularly high 
value on the Agency's efforts in the field of 
nuclear power and nuclear safety. The Agency 
was applying itself to the solution of the 
important problem of providing mankind with 
a safe, economical and clean form of energy, 

and was seeking to ensure effective protection 
of the environment throughout the world. 
Czechoslovakia likewise supported unreservedly 
the radiation protection programme, especially 
where it concerned the safety criteria 
applicable to the study, construction and 
operation of nuclear power installations. It was 
also ready to participate actively in traditional 
types of work under the Agency's programme, 
such as the use of radionuclides and ionizing 
radiation. 

104. The Czechoslovak delegation was fully 
satisfied with the expansion of INIS during the 
past year and supported without reservation the 
proposed programme for that activity. 
105. The same was true of technical assistance. 
The Government of Czechoslovakia was providing 
assistance to the developing countries on a 
bilateral and multilateral basis as well as 
through the Agency. It thought highly of the 
programme drawn up for those activities and 
recommended giving priority in the provision 
of technical assistance to developing countries 
that had ratified NPT. As in 197 5 Czechoslovakia 
would contribute 250 000 crowns in national 
currency to the General Fund. 
106. As to the Agency's Regular Budget for 
1976, he considered that the anticipated increase 
of nearly 30% was actually surprising, 
particularly as the increase for activities was 
only some 5% whereas 25% was due to inflation. 
The Czechoslovak delegation fully approved the 
budget only in so far as it provided for work on 
safeguards, nuclear power and reactors, nuclear 
safety and environmental protection, and lastly 
INIS. It was convinced that the Secretariat 
recognized the full importance of those matters 
and would spare no effort to achieve maximum 
economy, in particular by reducing administrative 
expenses. 
107. He also wished to stress the importance of 
the co-operation agreement recently concluded 
between the Agency and CMEA, and fully 
supported all measures provided for in the 
Agency's programme with a view to intensifying 
co-operation between the Agency and the Standing 
Committee of CMEA in connection with the use 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
108. In conclusion, he was pleased to invite the 
Agency to hold the second international symposium 
on nuclear information in his country, which was 
also prepared to offer in 1976 five long-term 
fellowships to attend Czechoslovak institutions 
of education, four one-year fellowships to 
institutions attached to the Czechoslovak 
Academy of Sciences or other research institutes 
coming under the national nuclear programme, 
and subsidies for the purpose of supplementing 
three one-year fellowships financed by the 
United Nations Development Programme. 
. The meeting rose at 5. 55 p.m. 

- 13 



GC(XIX)/OR. 182 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
24 February 1976* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 26 September 197 5, at 10. 50 a.m. 

President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragra .phs 

General debate and report for 1974-75 1 .- 29 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Turkey 1 .-8 
Egypt 9 -- 19 
Mongolia 20 -- 28 

13 
Examination of delegates' credentials 30 -- 39 

14 
Election of Members to the Board of 40 .- 43 
Governors 

General debate and report for 1974-75 44 -- 87 
(continued) 

Finland 44 . 60 
Ghana 61 .- 68 
Thailand 69 -- 76 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 77  - 87 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 September 1975. 
** GC(XIX)/559. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 

75-9542 


GC(XIX)/OR. 182 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1974-75 
(GC(XDC)/544, 544/Corr.l, 554) (continued) 

1. Mr. TUNALIGIL (Turkey) welcomed 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the United 
Republic of Tanzania to membership of the 
Agency [1], It went without saying that the 
universality of the organization had been 
enhanced by their decision to join. 
2. The changes which were at present taking 
place in international relations seemed to have 
assumed compelling dimensions,, due partly to 
the recent realization of the need to amend the 
existing rules of the Internationa] system, which 
appeared to be unsatisfactory in the present-day 
context, and partly to the emergence of potential 
new economic centres in regions other than the 
traditional areas of economic power. There was 
likewise to be discerned in international affairs 
a shift of emphasis from military and political 
towards economic potential. From that trend 
his delegation concluded that "interdependence" 
among nations had once more become a concept 
of prime importance. However, in a world 
where one half of the population lived in relative 
ease and the other half was starving, one could 
not speak of genuine "interdependence", justice 
and of a fair international system. What was 
now needed was not a short-term, even if 
equitable, distribution of existing wealth, but a 
system which would redistribute the opportunity 
and capability to create wealth. 

3. With these considerations in mind, it was 
his delegation's belief that the Agency was 
likewise failing adequately to assist its 
developing Member States, which were desperately 
striving for an improvement in their energy 
levels and resources. Still, that should not 
affect overall confidence in the Agency, which 
constituted a unique organization for the planning 
and provision of assistance. The Agency was of 
crucial importance for the developing countries' 
incipient nuclear industry and for meeting their 
needs as regards nuclear research and training. 
In that connection he was happy to announce that 
his Government had decided to increase its 
1976 voluntary contribution to the General Fund 
to the assessed level, and he hoped that all 
Members would give proof of their faith in the 
Agency by promptly contributing their share to 
the General Fund. The Turkish Government 
considered that the Agency's technical assistance 
functions should be adapted to the changing 
concept of international relations, and in view of 
the generally acknowledged importance - against 
the background of the energy crisis - of nuclear 
energy and related matters, his delegation 
expected the Agency to contribute even more to 
international co-operation in the nuclear field. 

[1] See document GC(XrX)/OR. 176, 
paras 14-16. 
4. His Government felt strongly that more 
assistance should be accorded to uranium 
prospecting projects, and also that more funds 
should be made available for training and the 
provision of equipment under the technical 
assistance programme. The time had come to 
revise the rules governing the grant of technical 
assistance, with a view to introducing necessary 
elements of flexibility into the arrangements for 
the financing of projects. It might be desirable 
to establish a special emergency technical 
assistance fund in order to secure implementation 
of certain projects. More flexible rules would 
enable the Agency to transfer funds from one 
project to another should circumstances so 
demand, and it should be possible for unused 
Agency technical assistance funds to be credited 
to the account of the country in question for 
application in subsequent years, as was the case 
in respect of United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) projects. 
5. Another pressing need was the standardization 
on an international basis of the legal 
provisions governing nuclear energy matters. 
The untrammelled flow of information on nuclear 
energy was likewise a basic need for the 
developing world. Turkey firmly believed in the 
free exchange of information, and in that con~ 
nection his delegation wished to praise the work 
of the International Nuclear Information System 
(INIS). It was a pleasure for him to inform the 
General Conference that more than 85 persons 
representing 32 countries and seven international 
organizations had participated in the INIS/AGRIS 
Training Seminar held in Ankara in June 1975, 
and that the Seminar had proved to be extremely 
beneficial to all participants, 
6. The Turkish Government was anxious to 
introduce nuclear power into the country, and 
provisions to that end were included in the third 
Five-Year Economic Development Plan. 
7. He wished to stress that the Agency would 
in the crucial years ahead be confronted by the 
difficult task of meeting the needs of the nuclear 
energy programmes of the developing world. 
Those needs would be numerous, ranging from 
materials and equipment to training and fellowships. 
Needless to say, the Agency's success 
in that mission would greatly depend on the 
existence of an altruistic and genuinely 
co-operative spirit among those Member States 
which were financially and technologically 
stronger than the rest. 
8. In conclusion, he affirmed that the Turkish 
Government pledged its full support to the Agency 
in its efforts to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy tn the world. 
9. Mr. SIRRY (Egypt) said that nuclear energy 
had established itself as the main future source 
of energy to meet the ever-increasing demands 
for electricity, heat and indeed potable water. 
There were however many technological problems 
associated with the development, construction 
and operation of nuclear power reactor systems 
-2 



GC{XIX)/OR. 182 


of proven types to be solved. In addition, the 
development of other reactor systems of the 
future, such as the fast breeder and hightemperature 
gas-cooled reactors, should be 
pursued vigorously. At the same time, close 
co-operation between the developed and the 
developing countries would be necessary in the 
planning of nuclear programmes to be undertaken 
during the following few decades. That 
should include, first,, continuous review of the 
energy demands for different applications in the 
various countries; second, future cycle requirements 
covering uranium supplies, fuel element 
fabrication, uranium enrichment capacity and 
reprocessing of nuclear fuel; and third, the 
problem of disposal of highly radioactive wastes 
and measures to guarantee nuclear safety and 
environmental protection. 

10. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency was aware of such problems, as was 
reflected in the activities undertaken under the 
1975 programme and those planned for 1976. 
In that connection, it supported the convening of 
the International Conference on Nuclear Power 
and its Fuel Cycle in 1977 and the Agency's 
activities in organizing special courses for 
training scientists and engineers from developing 
countries in the planning and implementation of 
nuclear projects. It also wished to urge the 
Agency to expand and intensify its activities in 
the field of nuclear power and to allocate a 
higher percentage of its budget to that part of the 
programme. The importance of the Agency's 
role in ensuring adequate and timely supplies of 
materials and services, particularly in connection 
with the nuclear fuel cycle, hardly 
needed emphasis. 
11. Egypt considered that the Agency1 s 
activities in the uses of nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes (PNE) should be further 
expanded and accelerated, since many developing 
countries were expecting to derive great benefits 
from the use of nuclear explosives in their mining 
and civil engineering projects. It was to be hoped 
that the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on the subject 
would make a significant contribution in that 
direction. 
12. His Government's policy regarding safeguards 
was well known. It firmly believed that 
an effective system of safeguards should be 
foolproof and based on the principle of universality. 
13. Egypt had always taken an active interest 
in the safeguards system and particularly in the 
work of the Safeguards Committee (1970), which 
had formulated the contents of the agreements 
to be concluded with the Agency under the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT) [2], 
14. Since many delegations had expressed 
regret that all States had not acceded to NPT, 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
his delegation wished to state clearly that in its 
desire to promote, strengthen and safeguard 
peace and security in the world and particularly 
in the Middle East, Egypt had always firmly 
supported NPT. Believing that the widest 
possible adherence to NPT was essential to its 
effectiveness and viability, it had been among the 
first countries to sign it. It had however no 
choice but to stop short of ratification since 
Israel, which had acquired the potential 
capability to manufacture those deadly weapons 
of mass destruction, had heretofore refused to 
adhere to NPT. Nevertheless, Egypt had not 
hesitated the preceding year to join Iran at the 
General Assembly of the United Nations in 
calling for the establishment of a nuclear-free 
zone in the Middle East. It hoped that those 
States which had been instrumental in bringing 
about NPT would bear in mind their special 
responsibilities in that respect. He assured the 
Conference that Egypt would not be the first 
country to introduce nuclear weapons into the 
region. 

15. In the preceding year, Egypt had made 
further progress in the development of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear technology. Its 
nuclear programme included the construction of' 
its first atomic power plant near Alexandria, 
which was expected to become operational by 
mid-1981. It would generate 600 MW(e) of 
electricity, and desalinate 20 000 m^ of 
sea-water daily. That potable water was to be 
used in an associated pilot agricultural farm to 
study the economic and technical aspects of the 
use of desalinated water in agriculture and special 
irrigation techniques, special cropping patterns 
and salinity problems. Tenders for the project 
were being evaluated, and site development work 
was under way. The negotiations for a bilateral 
agreement on co-operation with the United 
States of America in the civil uses of nuclear 
energy were in progress, and an agreement was 
expected to be concluded in the near future. 
16. Another important activity was the establishment 
of a national radiation technology centre, 
to go into operation early the following year, 
comprising a one-million curie cobalt-60 source, 
and a 1. 5-MeV accelerator which was supplied 
by UNDP and was being installed with the 
Agency's help. The centre would carry out 
research and development work in medical 
sterilization, food preservation and agroindustrial 
applications, 
17. His Government fully endorsed the Agency's 
promotional activities in the applications of 
radioisotopes and radiation techniques in biology, 
agriculture, medicine and industry, which were 
of great benefit to developing countries. It had 
however noted with some concern the high rate 
of growth of funds allocated to safeguards in 
comparison with those to promotional activities 
or technical assistance. It hoped that a more 
equitable balance would be struck between 
those activities and that the continuous increase 
of safeguards expenditure from $ 5. 2 million in 
1975 to a proposed $6.4 million in 1976 would 


GC (XIX)/OR. 182 

be revised in order not to impose too heavy a 
burden on the developing countries, 

18. Egypt considered that technical assistance 
to developing countries was one of the most 
important activities of the Agency, which could 
be made more effective by providing assistance 
for relatively large integrated projects to be 
implemented on a biennial or triennial basis, as 
it had suggested at the preceding session of the 
General Conference [3], That suggestion 
deserved serious consideration. In 1976, 
Egypt would maintain its voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund at the same level as in 
1975, which was in excess of its base rate of 
assessment. 
19. In conclusion, he wished to extend a warm 
welcome to Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and 
the United Republic of Tanzania to membership 
of the Agency. 
20. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia) congratulated 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the United 
Republic of Tanzania on having been approved for 
membership of the Agency, 
21. The Conference's session was taking place 
at a time of detente, marked by the successful 
conclusion of the Conference on Security and 
Co-operation in Europe, at which the decisions 
reached not only represented a turning point in 
the history of relations between the peoples of 
Europe but also opened the way for the establishment 
of lasting peace in other continents, 
including Asia, where the Vietnamese people's 
victory in its struggle for freedom and independence 
had led to positive changes. In that 
connection, he emphasized that his country 
favoured the strengthening of peace and security 
in Asia on a collective basis and the development 
of collaboration among all Asian States. 
22. His Government considered it important to 
strengthen and to secure the universality of 
existing treaties and agreements on disarmament, 
among which NPT occupied a special place. NPT 
was playing an important role in minimizing the 
risk of nuclear war and had become recognized 
as a major instrument of peace. However, a 
number of countries with considerable military 
and economic potential - including some already 
possessing nuclear weapons and some with the 
capacity to produce them - had not yet acceded to 
NPT. Further steps should be taken to increase 
the number of States party to NPT, thereby 
making it more effective, and his delegation 
welcomed the proposal that preference in the 
provision of technical assistance should be given 
to countries which had concluded with the Agency 
safeguards agreements in connection with NPT, 
Moreover, his delegation considered that the 
Agency's task in carrying out its safeguards 
functions would be made much easier if exporting 
countries provided the Agency with information 
about the nuclear material and equipment which 
they were supplying to other countries. 
[3] See ciocument GC(XVIII)/OR. 172, para. 42. 
23. Like many other delegations, the Mongolian 
delegation attached great importance to the 
Agency's work in formulating and improving 
standards for the physical safety of nuclear 
material. The Agency's activities in connection 
with environmental protection, the handling of 
scientific and technical information, nuclear 
power plant safety and other problems also had 
its full approval. 
24. His country supported the Agency's activities 
connected with the concept of regional 
nuclear fuel centres. The establishment of such 
centres would increase the effectiveness of 
Agency safeguards. 
25. The Agency was doing important work aimed 
at implementing the provisions of Article V of 
NPT, which related to the use of PNEs. While 
recognizing that all States should have access to 
the potential benefits of such explosions, his 
country considered that non-nuclear-weapon 
States should not carry them out themselves and 
that the services necessary for carrying them out 
should be provided through the Agency. In that 
connection, he pointed out that several international 
legal and other aspects of PNEs 
required further study. 
26. His delegation noted with satisfaction the 
increase in many forms of technical assistance 
being provided by the Agency, since Agency 
technical assistance was important for the large 
number of Member States trying to exploit the 
achievements of nuclear science in industry, 
agriculture, medicine and scientific research. 
The training of specialists was a significant 
aspect of Agency technical assistance and one in 
which Mongolia was particularly interested. 
27. His delegation also noted with satisfaction 
that contacts between the Agency and the Council 
for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) were 
becoming closer. It hoped that collaboration 
between the two organizations would help in 
realizing the desire of all peoples for peace, 
open up new possibilities for economic and 
scientific development in many countries and 
promote the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. 
28. With regard to voluntary contributions, his 
delegation welcomed the raising of the target to 
$5. 5 million and his country would be making 
its modest contribution to the General Fund. 
29. The PRESIDENT announced that provided 
delegates had no objection, it would expedite the 
conduct of business if the Conference interrupted 
the general debate at that juncture to deal with two 
other items - the examination of delegates' 
credentials (agenda item 13) and the election of 
Members to the Board of Governors (agenda 
item 14). 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS 
(GC(XIX)/561) 

30. The PRESIDENT drew the Conference's 
attention to the report of the General Committee 
.. 4 



GC(XIX)/OR.182 


on its examination of delegates' credentials 
(GC(XIX)/561). In relation to paragraphs 4 and 
5, the Director General had received credentials 
satisfying Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure for 
the delegates of Albania and Algeria since the 
report had been prepared. 

31. Paragraph 7 of the report contained a draft 
resolution which the Committee recommended 
the Conference to adopt. 
32. Mr. VALDES (Chile) said he must protest 
at the observations contained in paragraph 2 of 
the report. By making irrelevant comments 
about the credentials of the Chilean delegation, 
the delegations of the Soviet Union and 
Czechoslovakia had introduced politics into the 
strictly technical agenda of the Conference. 
33. Such a misplaced attitude was all the more 
surprising inasmuch as it contained elements 
that were completely contrary to the basic rules 
governing the Conference's meetings and 
contrary to the principles of law and international 
relations. 
34. The credentials of the Chilean delegate 
had been submitted and scrutinized strictly in 
accordance with the principles set forth in 
Rules 27 and 28 respectively of the Rules of 
Procedure of the Conference. 
35. His Government had normal relations with 
more than 90% of the States Members of the 
United Nations which, like Chile, respected the 
principles governing international community 
life. 
36. In that connection, he could not but 
emphasize the fact that the two delegations 
which had attacked his country's Government 
had in their statements in the general debate [4] 
stressed their adherence to the principles of 
Helsinki. They appeared to forget that an 
important place was given in those principles to 
a confirmation of non-interference in the internal 
affairs of other States. However, he did not 
think it was a matter of a lapse of memory; he 
was sure that those countries were showing by 
their attitude that they only accepted those 
principles when it suited their interests to do so. 
The motives of the attacks against Chile were 
clear to his delegation. 
37. Lastly, he could not refrain from mentioning 
that the credentials of the Chilean delegate were 
identical with and signed by the same authority 
as had been those of the Chilean delegate to the 
eighteenth session of the General Conference in 
1974. They had been considered valid in 
1974. [5] It could be seen that objections had 
[4] Summarized in documents GC(XIX)/OR. 178, 
paras 13-49 and GC(XIX)/OR. 181, paras 100-108 
respectively, 
[5] See document GC(XVIII)/538, para. 4. 
been made to them on the present occasion 
solely for political reasons at the whim of those 
responsible. 

38. The PRESIDENT said that in the absence 
of any objection he would assume that the 
Conference was prepared to adopt the draft 
resolution recommended by the General 
Committee in document GC(XIX)/561, 
paragraph 7. 
. 39. It was so decided. 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XIX)/557) 

40. The PRESIDENT drew attention to his 
memorandum in document GC(XIX)/557 on the 
election of Members to the Board, in 
paragraph 2 of which he notified the Conference 
that 11 Members had to be elected and specified 
the number to be elected from the various 
geographical areas mentioned in Article VI. A. 1 
of the Statute. 
. 41. The Conference appointed a member 
of the Austrian delegation and a member of the 
Swedish delegation to serve as tellers. 

. 42. A vote was taken by secret ballot to 
elect 11 Members to the Board. 

43. The PRESIDENT suggested that in view of 
the time it would take to count the votes, the 
Conference should continue with the general 
debate while awaiting the results of the elections. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1974-7 5 
(GC(XK)/544, 544/Corr.l, 5 54) (continued) 

44. Mr. LAURILA (Finland) said that 20 years 
had elapsed since the unforgettable Atoms-for. 
Peace Conference in Geneva had taken place, the 
most remarkable features of which had been its 
spirit and its atmosphere of enthusiasm. Maybe 
it had just been that enthusiastic spirit which had 
led many famous scientists to make prognoses 
and promises of unrealistically fast development 
and of new technologically applicable scientific 
discoveries in the near future. The public at 
large was told in general that the golden atomic 
age was "just around the corner". 
45. However, the course of events and progress 
had been considerably different. It was true that 
today the large-scale use of nuclear energy in a 
number of countries was a reality, even if its 
part in the general energy economy was still 
modest. The technology used, however, was not 
based on new scientific discoveries. The 
thermal reactor had not become old-fashioned. 
The real progress had been in technology, and in 
many cases the advances had been due to the old 
and proved method of trial and error. That the 
difficult problems in the development of the 
peaceful use of atomic energy did not belong to 
the field of nuclear physics, perhaps not even to 
-5 



GC(XIX)/OR. 182 

nuclear technology, had had to be learnt. The 
greatest problems had been and still were outside 
physics and techniques. 

46. The best way he had found to characterize 
the wide range of the real problems was to say 
that those problems were arising as an inevitable 
result of an effort to implant new, intricate and 
large-scale technical systems into the already 
complex machinery of modern society. Despite 
those difficulties, the number of nuclear power 
plants was large and was growing. The amount 
of radioactive waste produced annually including 
the fissile material, plutonium increased 
at the same time. In the disposal of 
radioactive waste problems of public acceptance 
necessarily arose, but disposal as such could 
and had to be solved solely with the aid of 
science and technology. Even in the case of 
plutonium, much still remained to be done 
before reliable and improved methods of using 
that fissile material as a source of energy for 
peaceful purposes would become commercially 
available. The real problem with plutonium was, 
however, how to guarantee that it did not fall 
into the hands of people and nations who, for some 
strange reason, loved nuclear weapons and 
yearned to become owners of them. 

47. The danger of the proliferation of nuclear 
explosives had been recognized since the birth of 
the atom bomb. Ways and means of preventing 
proliferation had been under consideration ever 
since 1945. The desire to create a world-wide 
"safeguards" system was apparently an important 
factor in developments which led to the founding 
of the Agency. The Agency's activities were, 
however, wider, and its duties to provide 
technical assistance for its Member States when 
they were trying to apply the achievements of 
nuclear science for the peaceful benefit of their 
peoples would not be underestimated. 
48. Once the political decisions had been made 
on both the national and the international levels 
regarding the creation of a safeguards system 
or systems, the question of the implementation 
of the safeguards remained. That problem was 
partly administrative and organizational, partly 
technical. In both cases existing practice was 
the result of historical development. Before the 
Agency had been able to start its own activity, 
safeguards could be arranged only on the basis 
of bilateral agreements. Once created, it had 
been impossible to eliminate the system of 
bilateral control arrangements as the international 
system of Agency safeguards was created. The 
only sound way had been to reconcile the two 
systems. Today it could be noted with satisfaction 
that great progress had been made in 
that direction. 

49. The basic techniques - and he was using the 
word techniques in its broad sense - of safeguards 
control were also developed before the Agency's 
day. The feeling could not be avoided that some 
remnants of the thinking of the early days of 
bilateral co-operation were still reflected in the 
Agency's current safeguards concepts. Nevertheless, 
his delegation considered that, 
particularly during the past few years, the 
Agency's Safeguards System (1965, as Provisionally 
Extended in 1966 and 1968)[6] had been 
effectively developed in a sound direction. 

50. In building up its own solely peaceful 
nuclear programme, Finland had been brought 
into contact with many countries. Consequently, 
it had also concluded a number of bilateral 
nuclear co-operation agreements. In those 
agreements, due account was taken of the fact 
that Finland had submitted its peaceful nuclear 
activities to Agency safeguards. Up to the 
present, Finland had had no reason to complain 
about the functioning of those arrangements. 
51. On the basis of its practical experience, 
Finland had become firmly convinced that a 
world-wide and unified system of safeguards was 
far superior to a network of many kinds of 
bilateral arrangements. The Finnish delegation 
considered that the existing safeguards practices 
embodied in the Agency's Safeguards System were 
satisfactory. They were, of course, open to 
criticism, but it was worth asking whether it 
would not be better to make the Agency's system 
more satisfactory rather than setting up entirely 
new and additional safeguards systems on a 
bilateral basis. 
52. In his view, a survey should be carried out 
within the Agency of the various elements that 
should be subjected to safeguards requirements 
in order to determine the basic facts to be 
incorporated in an optimal safeguards system. 
NPT provided the Agency with a large-scale 
concept, and attempts would be made to 
strengthen it further. That could only be done 
through multilateral arrangements; otherwise 
there would be a risk of going back to the era of 
bilateralism. 
53. Indeed, the real weakness of the existing 
system was not in the safeguards system as such, 
but in the fact that too many countries were 
keeping themselves outside any safeguards whatsoever 
or had accepted the application of safeguards 
only in a very limited way. As an international 
agency, the Agency had the status of a civil 
servant who had to fulfil statutory functions. One 
of those functions, of course, was to administer 
safeguards where asked to do so. If that was the 
Agency's role, then it had but limited possibilities 
for action in getting more general acceptance of 
international safeguards. 
54. The only existing international instrument 
which could be used as a basis for further 
development of the most complete and reliable 
safeguards system for the whole world and 
within the framework of the Agency was NPT. 
It had become evident at the Review Conference 
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT Review 
[6] INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2. 
-6 



GC(XIX)/OR. 182 


Conference) [7] that even that instrument could 
and should be made more effective and, at the 
same time, more attractive to the countries still 
remaining outside it. 

55. The NPT Review Conference had been not 
only a major event in the field of arms control 
and disarmament, but also an event with 
important consequences for the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy, and hence for the work 
of the Agency, In its Final Declaration the NPT 
Review Conference had reviewed Articles III, IV 
and V at length and, in so doing, had put forth a 
number of authoritative interpretations. 
56. With respect to Article III, the NPT Review 
Conference had expressed its strong support for 
effective Agency safeguards and had urged that, 
in all achievable ways, common export requirements 
relating to those safeguards should be 
strengthened, in particular by extending the 
application of safeguards to all peaceful nuclear 
activities in the importing States not party to 
NPT. It had also urged that such common 
requirements should be accorded the widest 
possible measure of acceptance among all 
suppliers and recipients. His delegation was 
encouraged by the determined efforts under way 
in that direction. 
57. In that connection, Finland had suggested 
that, in order to strengthen further the Agency's 
Safeguards System, States party to NPT should 
consider committing themselves not to import 
nuclear materials or special equipment from 
countries which were not party to NPT or which 
had not accepted NPT safeguards or which 
otherwise had shown that they acted as if they 
were not party to that Treaty. Finland believed 
that that suggestion was still worth serious 
consideration, and the Finnish delegation 
certainly intended to pursue it in an appropriate 
form. 
58. In reviewing Article IV, the NPT Review 
Conference had reaffirmed the inalienable right 
of all States party to NPT to develop research, 
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes without discrimination and in 
conformity with Articles I and II of NPT. It had 
also recognized that regional or multinational 
nuclear fuel cycle centres might be an advantageous 
way to satisfy the needs of many States 
in the course of initiating or expanding nuclear 
power programmes and had welcomed the 
Agency's studies in that area. Bearing in mind 
the rapidly increasing amounts of plutonium and 
radioactive waste, he wished to draw attention to 
the increasing needs to create universally acceptable 
rules for dealing with waste disposal 
problems. 
59. Several studies and research projects were 
being carried out, but very little was being done 
in regard to the problems of liability that would 
[7] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. 
arise not only nationally but also - which was 

more important - internationally, in connection 

with waste disposal and transport. Taking into 

account the risks involved in the possible misuse 

of the huge amounts of radioactivity in such 

wastes, he believed that the scope of NPT should 

be enlarged to cover not only nuclear materials 

but also nuclear wastes. 

60. Finland also supported the NPT Review 
Conference's interpretation of Article V, 
according to which any potential benefits 
accruing from PNEs could be made available 
to non-nuclear-weapon States party or not party 
to NPT by way of nuclear explosion services 
provided by nuclear-weapon States, as defined 
by NPT, and conducted under appropriate 
international observation and international 
procedures - under the auspices of the Agency as 
called for in Article V, and in accordance 
with other applicable international obligations. 
It was imperative, however, that access to such 
benefits, whatever they might be, should under 
no circumstances lead to any proliferation of 
nuclear explosive capability. 

61. Mr. ALLOTEY (Ghana) said it was a 
matter of considerable gratification to his 
delegation that the applications of Qatar, the 
United Arab Emirates and the United Republic 
of Tanzania for membership of the Agency had 
been approved. 
62. He recalled that the Director General's 
statement [8] had included a survey of the 
Agency's activities, and he wanted to touch on 
a number of issues involved. 
63. Since the previous regular session of the 
General Conference a number of international 
conferences had taken place including the NPT 
Review Conference. Ghana was proud to have 
played a meaningful role in that Conference, 
having already ratified NPT, but his delegation 
shared the fears of the Director General that 
certain non-nuclear-weapon States "had left the 
Conference with a feeling of frustration, wondering 
whether giving up the nuclear option made any 
sense in the present state of affairs"[9]. His 
delegation therefore hoped that international 
discussions on nuclear arms reductions and a 
total nuclear test ban would produce concrete 
results within a reasonable period of time. 
Referring to the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste (Trieste Centre), 
he recalled that in June his country had had the 
honour to host the meeting of the Advisory Group 
on Programmes for Nuclear Physics in Research 
in the Developing Countries, sponsored by the 
Agency and dealing with the problems of nuclear 
physics teaching and research in the developing 
countries of Africa, the region acknowledged as 
the least developed from the point of view of 
[8] GC(XIX)/OR. 176, paras 21-59. 
[9] Ibid., para. 45. 
-7 



GC (XIX)/OR. 182 

nuclear physics programmes. His country was 
proud that it had been able to host the first 
international meeting of that kind in a developing 
country in Africa. Equally gratifying to his 
delegation was the work of the ad hoc consultative 
committee appointed by the Director General to 
draw up proposals for the activities of the 
Trieste Centre. In its report that committee had 
expressed great admiration "for the vision and 
courage of those who initiated the project for 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics", 
and for the confidence and sustained interest of 
the sponsors namely the Agency, the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 

Organisation (UNESCO) and the Italian Government. 
Thanks were also due to the Swedish 
International Development Authority (SIDA), 

UNDP and the Ford Foundation for their 
generous support of the Centre. His delegation 
hoped nevertheless that a more stable way of 
funding the Centre could be found. His 
delegation was satisfied with the invaluable role 
that the Trieste Centre had been playing as a 
meeting place for scientists from the developing 
countries and their counterparts from the 
advanced countries. His delegation was also 
delighted that the duration of the sponsorship 
agreement between UNESCO and the Agency for 
the operation of the Trieste Centre had been 
extended for a further three-year period. 

64. Ghana endorsed the current emphasis on 
technical assistance programmes for introducing 
nuclear power and technology into Member 
States. That emphasis called for corresponding 
attention in respect of safeguards, physical 
protection of nuclear materials, nuclear safety 
and environmental protection, and it was 
gratifying that the Agency had attached priority 
to those areas. The oil crisis had shown the 
need for developing countries to find alternative 
sources of power, and the report of the market 
survey conducted by the Agency in 1974 indicated 
the economic potential and attractiveness of 
nuclear power. The priority that the Agency was 
giving to the programme for introducing nuclear 
power into Member States was thus a move in the 
right direction. As a developing country gripped 
in the throes of the energy crisis Ghana would 
have to look to nuclear power and he hoped that 
the Agency would grant Ghana the necessary 
assistance when the time came. 
65. The proposed target of $5. 5 million for 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 
1976, which would be used to provide technical 
assistance, showed an appreciable increase over 
the figure for the current year, but in absolute 
terms the Agency was not responding adequately 
to the urgent demands from developing countries 
for vital assistance. His delegation therefore 
agreed with the Director General that it might 
be advisable to review the policy of technical 
assistance to take account of present realities 
and future forecasts. In that connection his 
delegation wished to reiterate its belief that 
technical assistance - like safeguards - should be 
funded, at least in part, by the Regular Budget 
and not entirely by voluntary pledges. To let the 
-

vital needs of Member States depend on such 
uncertainties did not reflect the degree of 
concern his delegation had come to associate 
with the Agency's attitude to technical assistance. 

66. One of the objectives of the Agency's 
technical assistance programme was to ensure 
that knowledge acquired through technical 
assistance continued to be applied on conclusion 
of the project. That not only required training 
of competent national staff but also their 
retention in the recipient countries to carry on 
where the assistance left off. Regional training 
programmes were a means of promoting staff 
training. In 1971 and again in 1974, with 
assistance from the Agency and UNDP, Ghana 
had been privileged to organize interregional 
training courses for laboratory technicians from 
English-speaking countries in Africa. The 
catalytic effect of those courses on staff 
training and development in the countries 
concerned would no doubt have an impact on the 
radioisotope applications programmes of the 
countries from which the participants were 
drawn. Ghana was grateful for the assistance 
received from the Agency and UNDP, which made 
it possible for those courses to be held and he 
hoped that the two organizations would also support 
future training courses in his country. 
67. He recalled that in his statement the year 
before he had informed the General Conference 
of the active steps being taken by the Ghana 
Atomic Energy Commission to implement a 
government decision to reactivate the Ghana 
Nuclear Reactor Project. [10] His delegation 
appealed to the Agency to support that 
programme, especially by the provision of 
supplies and equipment and the award of fellowships. 
While the main objective of the Ghana 
Nuclear Reactor Project was to carry out 
scientific research on the reactor, the research 
programme of the Ghana Nuclear Centre would 
be biased towards applied research, which in 
turn would be geared to the developmental and 
economic needs of the country. At the same time 
it was hoped that the project would help to 
introduce nuclear power technology into the 
country and would strengthen the programme of 
applications of nuclear techniques. In line with 
his Government's policy of co-operation with 
other African countries the Ghana Atomic Energy 
Commission planned to foster collaboration with 
scientists from West Africa and indeed from all 
African countries in a joint endeavour to apply 
nuclear science and technology to the solution 
of problems of national development. To that 
end, the facilities available at the Kwabenya 
Nuclear Centre would be placed at the disposal 
of scientists from African countries for meaningful 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy in research and development. 

68. In conclusion, he wanted to place on record 
his delegation's great esteem for the Director 
[10] GC(XVIII)/OR. 173, para. 63. 
8 



GC(XIX)/OR. 182 


General and its thanks to the Agency for 
responding to his country's requests for 
assistance. 

69. Mr. TALABHAT (Thailand) said that his 
delegation would like to join in welcoming 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the United 
Republic of Tanzania to membership of the 
Agency. It also welcomed the participation for 
the first time of the delegation of the Republic 
of South Viet-Nam. Those latest additions 
to the membership strengthened his country's 
conviction that the Agency could and did play an 
important role in the material advancement of 
the developing countries. 
I 

70. His delegation had studied the annual 
report (GC(XIX)/544 and Corr. 1) and listened to 
the Director General's opening statement with 
keen interest; the two together furnished a clear 
and concise account of the Agency's complex and 
wide-ranging activities up to the time the session 
had begun. The Director General and his staff 
were to be commended on their successful work. 
71. Thailand, which had been an active Member 
since 1957, was greatly interested in all aspects 
of the Agency's work. As a developing country 
with only a moderate state of nuclear development, 
however, it was naturally more concerned 
with the areas of less complex technology, such 
as the application of isotopes and radiation in 
medicine, agriculture and environmental 
protection. In that regard, it was most 
encouraging to note the growing close collaboration 
between the Agency and the World Health 
Organization (WHO), the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 
On the financial side, UNDP's steady assistance 
to the Agency through its increasing financial 
support was also to be borne in mind. 
72. As a firm believer in regional co-operation, 
Thailand had been a party since 1972 to the 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear 
Science and Technology [11], It was ready to 
continue its active participation in that worthwhile 
endeavour, in which the Agency had an 
important role, 
73. During the past year, his country had been 
a keen participant in the study of various 
aspects of the use of PNEs, and it was pleased 
to note that the NPT Review Conference, in 
which it had also taken part, had designated the 
Agency as the appropriate international body for 
the purposes of Article V of NPT, thus giving 
added force to the earlier Board resolution 
providing for the establishment of an advisory 
group to study the subject in greater depth. 
Earlier in the year it had furnished an expert 
for a technical committee convened by the 
Agency to study recent developments in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear explosions. On the 
other hand, his country did not support 
unconditional use of PNE, despite its vast 
potential in economic benefits and would not have 
resort to it at home without prior public consent. 
Furthermore, the costs involved in its use 
needed thorough study by an impartial and 
respected body such as the Agency. 

74. His delegation welcomed the proposal made 
by the Director General in his opening address 
concerning steps to improve the Agency's safeguards 
activities. The action advocated would, 
inter alia, require full co-operation from both 
the recipient and the supplier States. His 
delegation likewise attached importance to the 
matter of the physical protection of nuclear 
material on which subject it was co-sponsoring 
a draft resolution for submission to the Committee 
of the Whole, aimed at improved procedures. [12] 

75. His country had recently extended its 
interests to embrace also the possibilities 
offered by nuclear power for the production of 
energy. Given the fourfold increase in petrol 
prices, accompanied by the rapid growth in the 
demand for electricity in the country, plans were 
afoot for the building of Thailand's first nuclear 
power plant in the early 1980s. Bidding for its 
construction could start within the next two 
years. The establishment of a nuclear fuel 
cycle centre in the region would be complementary 
to the said construction, 

76. In conclusion, he stressed the central role 
which the Agency played in assisting the 
developing countries in their nuclear 
programmes. That positive aspect had long been 
recognized by his country and, as in the past, it 
had therefore paid its full assessed contributions 
to both the Regular Budget and the General Fund 
at an early date. 
77. Mr. PAK (Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea) congratulated Qatar, the United Arab 
Emirates and the United Republic of Tanzania 
on their admission to the Agency. The people of 
South Viet-Nam also deserved congratulations, 
since the representatives of the Provisional 
Revolutionary Government of the Republic of 
South Viet-Nam were for the first time 
participating in the General Conference. 
78. The past year had seen many countries 
achieve national independence and begin to 
strive for self-sustenance, prosperity and peace. 
That was an irresistible historical trend which 
could be supported significantly by the Agency, 
and which created favourable conditions for its 
work. 
79. His country's independent national economy 
had been further consolidated and was rapidly 
developing. The industrial output of 1974 had 
been 57. 5 times that of 1948, and great successes 
had been achieved in socialist cultural con[
11] See documents INFCIRC/167 and Add. 2. [12] GC(XIX)/COM. 5/2. 
-9 

GC(XIX)/OR. 182 


struction. Among other things, the Government 
of the Republic had paid much attention to the 
development of science and technology, with the 
result that progress had been made in the major 
tasks of technical revolution: to diminish the 
distinctions between heavy and light labour and 
between agricultural and industrial work and to 
free women from household chores. 

80. Progress had also been made in the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. His country had paid much 
attention to the use of nuclear techniques in 
solving the various problems of the national 
economy, and extensively used radiation and 
radioisotopes in industry, agriculture, medicine, 
biology, hydrology and construction, and also for 
scientific and technical management of production 
processes in the mining industry, metallurgy and 
the chemical industry. 
81. In order to celebrate the thirtieth anniversary 
of the founding of the Workers' Party of 
Korea, the Korean people were successfully 
carrying out the tasks of developing and 
consolidating the socialist system and accelerating 
the independence and peaceful reunification 
of their fatherland by bringing about the 
ideological, technical and cultural revolutions 
recommended by the Fifth Congress of the 
Workers' Party. 
82. His Government had done everything in its 
power to promote national reunification during 
the past year in accordance with the three 
principles and the five-point policy of national 
reunification. In the General Assembly of the 
United Nations and elsewhere a number of 
countries had supported that policy of national 
reunification and helped to create favourable 
conditions for the reunification of Korea without 
foreign intervention. 
83. His Government was grateful for that 
support from the socialist countries, the 
countries of the third world and the non-aligned 
countries, but considered it necessary to draw 
attention to the serious situation that was 
developing on the Korean peninsula, where the 
United States of America was the cause of 
increasing tension and the fundamental obstacle 
to the independence and peaceful reunification 
of Korea. 
84. The United States of America was 
continuing its illegal introduction into South 
Korea of modern weapons and military equipment 
including various kinds of atomic weapons and 
guided missiles and large numbers of other 
nuclear weapons. Many of those weapons were 
deployed near the military demarcation line 
bordering on North Korea and the ruling circles 
in the United States were increasingly threatening 
that they would use nuclear arms in Korea, Thus, 
on 25 June 1975, President Ford had said that the 
deterrent forces of the United States would be 
used flexibly in the interests of that country, 
while the Secretary of Defence of the United 
States had openly stated that he would not 
hesitate to use nuclear weapons in Korea. 

85. The armies of the United States and South 
Korea frequently staged ostentatious war 
exercises, launching tactical nuclear weapons 
everywhere in South Korea, and constantly 
perpetrating acts of provocation consisting of 
missile launching exercises, even in the 
vicinity of the Demilitarized Zone. That state of 
affairs constituted the main obstacle to the 
independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. 
His Government therefore resolutely demanded 
that United States troops should withdraw from 
South Korea without delay, taking with them their 
lethal weapons, including the nuclear ones, so 
that the reunification of Korea could go ahead 
without any foreign interference. 
86. He was confident that the Governments and 
peoples of the countries friendly to Korea would 
show deep concern at the violation of the Agency's 
Statute by the Government of the United States 
and at the serious situation created by that 
Government in Korea, and that they would firmly 
support his urgent demand, 
87. The Agency still faced much work in 
promoting the peaceful use of nuclear power, 
though it had done a great deal already. It was 
now confronted with such tasks as the application 
of radioisotopes, radiological protection, 
nuclear power and reactors, safeguards, 
technical co-operation and training, and drawing 
up and supplementing a series of regulations, 
including technical regulations. He considered 
that the Agency should vigorously follow the 
197 5-80 programme in order to bring the great 
tasks confronting it to a successful conclusion. 
His Government approved of the annual report 
for 1974-75. 

. The meeting rose at 1. 5 p, m. 

- 10 



GC 


GC(XIX)/OR. 183 

International Atomic Energy Agency 26 February 1976* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

NINETEENTH REGULAR SESSION: 22-26 SEPTEMBER 1975 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 26 September 1975, at 3. 20 p.m. 

President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
14 Election of Members to the Board of 1 - 17 
Governors (continued) 
6 General debate and report for 1974-75 18 - 50 
(continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Chile 18 - 25 
Indonesia 26 - 36 
Saudi Arabia 37 - 47 
Uruguay 48 - 50 
5 Closing date of the session and opening date 51 - 52 
of the next session (continued) 
-The work of the Committee of the Whole 53 
7 The Agency's accounts for 1974 54 
8 The Agency's budget for 1975 55 
9 The Agency's budget for 1976 56 - 57 
10 Scale of assessment of Members' 58 
contributions for 197 6 
11 The Agency's relations with intergovernmental 59 - 66 
organizations 
12 The Agency's relations with non-governmental 67 
organizations 
15 68 - 70 

Appointment of the External Auditor 
16 71 - 72 

Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 
17 73 

Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 
for 1976 

Closing of the session 74 - 88 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 6 October 1975. 
** GC(XIX)/559. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XIX)/INF/157/Rev. 2. 
75-9546 


GC(XK)/OR. 183 

THE RECORD 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (continued) 

1. The PRESIDENT said he would announce the 
results of the voting at the preceding meeting to 
elect Members to the Board of Governors[l], 
. 2. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Latin America was as follows: 

Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 22 
Valid votes: 146 
Required majority: 37 
Votes obtained: 
Colombia 79 
Chile 53 
Mexico 14 

. 3. Having obtained the required majority, 
Colombia and Chile were elected to the Board. 

. 4. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Western Europe was as follows: 

Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 166 
Required majority: 42 
Votes obtained: 

Denmark 83 
Netherlands 81 
Belgium 1 
Ireland 1 

. 5, Having obtained the required majority, 
Denmark and the Netherlands were elected to the 
Board. 

. 6. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Eastern Europe was as follows: 

Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 8 
Valid votes: 161 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 

Yugoslavia 81 
Poland 80 

. 7. Having obtained the required majority, 
Yugoslavia and Poland were elected to the Board. 

. 8. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Africa was as follows: 

Invalid votes: 3 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 161 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 

Senegal 81 
Libyan Arab Republic 80 

[1] See document GC(XIX)/OR. 182, paras 40-43.
. 9. Having obtained the required majority, 
Senegal and the Libyan Arab Republic were elected 
to the Board. 

. 10. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia 
was as follows: 

Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 80 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 

Bangladesh 80 

. 11. Having obtained the required majority, 
Bangladesh was elected to the Board. 

. 12. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of the Far East was as follows: 

Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 82 
Required majority: 42 
Votes obtained: 

Philippines 45 
Republic of South Viet-Nam 37 

. 13. Having obtained the required majority, 
the Philippines was elected to the Board. 

. 14. The result of the election of one Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia, 
or South East Asia and the Pacific, or the Far East 
was as follows: 

Abstentions: 5 
Valid votes: 80 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 

Indonesia 43 
Pakistan 36 
Bangladesh 1 

. 15. Having obtained the required majority, 
Indonesia was elected to the Board. 

16. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 
11 Members so elected, recalled that under 
Article VI. D of the Statute they would hold office 
from the end of the current session until the end 
of the second regular session of the Conference 
thereafter, in other words for a period of two 
years. 
17. He thanked the Austrian and Swedish delegations 
which have provided tellers, the two tellers 
themselves and their Secretariat assistants. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1974-75 
(GC(XDC)/544, 544/Corr. 1, 554) (continued[2]) 

18. Mr. VALDES (Chile) said he was pleased to 
be able to report the results achieved by his 
[2] GC(XIX)/OR. 182, paras 44-87. 
-2 

GC(XDC)/OR. 183 


country during the past year in the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. 

19. On 13 October 1974 the 5-MW research 
reactor at the "La Reina" Centre had become 
critical, thus marking the beginning of a new stage 
in Chile's nuclear development. In accordance 
with the plan of work, the reactor had reached its 
rated output of 5 MW in mid-June 197 5. There had 
also been an associated programme of personnel 
training and of applications, including the production 
of radioisotopes most commonly used in 
medicine. Chile had set a number of priority 
objectives in an effort to improve the country's 
capacity in all scientific and technical fields and 
in the different areas of nuclear technology. To 
that end, the Chilean Atomic Energy Commission 
had, during 1975, worked out a personnel training 
programme in Chile and abroad. That programme 
covered the following subjects: elements of 
nuclear engineering; prospecting for radioactive 
minerals; activation analysis; rudiments of 
nuclear science in secondary education; agronomic 
and veterinary applications; applications of nuclear 
energy; applications in hydrology; industrial 
applications; dosimetry in radiotherapy; techniques 
used in nuclear medicine; elementary radioprotection; 
radiotherapy physics techniques; and 
basic radiotherapy techniques. 

20. The national plan for radioactive resources 
had been prepared in 1974 so as to permit, under 
the exclusive direction of the Chilean Atomic 
Energy Commission, aerial and ground prospecting 
and laboratory testing of seven of 21 previously 
selected sectors of the national territory, which 
covered a total area of 300 000 km2. The Chilean 
delegation wished to thank the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Agency 
for their co-operation in that programme under the 
agreement signed in Santiago on 18 February 1975. 
In an effort to speed up prospecting for and mining 
of radioactive minerals, the Chilean Government 
was preparing special legislation to enable participation 
by national and foreign firms, 
21. With the co-operation of the Agency, the 
Chilean Atomic Energy Commission and the 
Empresa Nacional de Electricidad S. A, (ENDESA) 
had successfully carried out a preliminary study 
connnected with decision-taking on the matter of 
putting nuclear power stations into service. That 
project was in response to the need to supplement 
hydroelectric power production by the introduction 
of nuclear power stations; that course had been 
advocated by the Agency in 1972 and today it was 
of extraordinary importance for Chile because of 
the oil market situation. The study aimed at 
putting a first nuclear power station of approximately 
500 MW into service as from 1985. The 
Chilean Government would take a decision some 
time in 1975. 
22. The Commission had decided to concentrate 
on the technologies of certain applications of 
nuclear energy which were of particular interest 
to the country and suited to its technical and 
economic capabilities. As a result, work relating 
to copper mining had been undertaken, isotope 
techniques were beginning to be used for water 
prospecting in the north of the country and considerable 
progress had been made in the irradiation 
of potatoes so as to improve their shelf life. 
The construction of a multipurpose irradiation 
facility which would enable those techniques to be 
applied on a semi-industrial scale was planned for 

1976. 

23. The Institute of Nuclear Medicine, organized 
by the Commission under the sponsorship of the 
Ministry of Health, had been instrumental in 
bringing about an appreciable improvement in the 
quality and effectiveness of radiotherapy and 
nuclear medicine, for which pilot centres had been 
set up so as to introduce advanced techniques and 
standardize their application and control. In 
addition, a whole-body counter designed and 
installed by the Commission with the Agency's 
collaboration was in service at the hospital of the 
Chilean Catholic University. 
24. At the preceding session he had forecast his 
Government's ratification of the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America[3]; the instrument of ratification had been 
deposited with the Mexican Government on 
19 October 1974. The Chilean delegation once 
again thanked the international organizations, UNDP 
and the Agency in particular and friendly countries, 
for their co-operation. It was particularly 
grateful to the Agency for having provided a large 
number of experts, fellowships and items of equipment 
for different projects and for attaching great 
importance to a feasibility study on a nuclear 
power station. 
25. He had pleasure in confirming that Chile 
would maintain its contribution to the Agency's 
General Fund, In another connection, he was 
particularly pleased to welcome the accession of 
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and the United 
Republic of Tanzania to the Agency. [4] With 
regard to the Cuban delegate's statement, his 
delegation was likewise of the view that the benefits 
the Helsinki Conference was bringing to the peoples 
of the old continent should be extended to the 
peoples of other continents which were still suffering 
from colonialism and from aggressive and inhuman 
manifestations of imperialism. It was 
clear that in holding that view his delegation considered 
that those benefits should be extended to 
those peoples who were suffering from the 
aggressive, inhuman and tyrannical actions of neoimperialism 
and neo-colonialism. In that connection, 
the Agency's co-operation was based neither 
on ideologies nor on political philosophies that 
were completely foreign to its Statute. The 
united Chilean people had been liberated two years 
before from oppression and terror and had been 
able to resume their traditional habits of orderliness, 
tranquillity, work and social peace, free 
[3] See document GC(XVIII)/OR. 175, para. 31. 
The Treaty is reproduced in the United Nations 
Treaty Series, Vol. 634, No, 9068. 
[4] See document GC(XIX)/OR, 176, paras 14-16. 
3 


GC(XIX)/OR. 183 

from destructive hatred and from the personalized 
totalitarianism which was crushing other less 
fortunate people. 

26. Mr. KAMIL (Indonesia) congratulated the 
President on his election. He also wished to 
congratule Miss Lim, leader of the Malaysian 
delegation, whose election as Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole was most fitting in 
International Women's Year. His delegation welcomed 
the admission to the Agency of Qatar, the 
United Arab Emirates and the United Republic of 
Tanzania. 
27. In recent months more countries than ever 
before had expressed a desire to install nuclear 
power plants, Indonesia planned to put one into 
service in 1985 and had already commenced preparatory 
studies with the Agency's assistance. The 
National Atomic Energy Agency had carried out 
surveys on the siting of the plant and a feasibility 
study would be conducted in 197 6. In addition it 
was continuing its search for nuclear materials 
commenced several years ago in Sumatra and was 
also carrying out prospection work in Kalimantan 
in co-operation with the French Atomic Energy 
Commission. Attention was also being paid to 
matters of health and safety and it was planned to 
open a training school for health physicists and 
technicians, set up a production unit for radiation 
meters and establish a calibration laboratory. 
Indonesian laboratories were working on the application 
of isotopes and radiation in agriculture and 
industry, and nuclear techniques were being used 
on a wide scale in the petroleum industry and in 
hydrology for irrigation and harbour dredging 
projects. 
28. The Indonesian delegation congratulated the 
Director General and his staff on all the work they 
had done during the period 1974-75 and on the 
standard of presentation of the Agency's annual 
report (GC(XIX)/544 and Corr. 1); it noted with 
satisfaction that that document would henceforth 
be issued on a calendar year basis, making it 
more up to date and, consequently, more useful. 
29. The Indonesian delegation had taken note of 
the increase in the Agency's budget for 1976[5], 
It strongly urged that the Agency, which was of 
course also affected by inflation, should maintain 
stringent economies, particularly in regard to 
recruitment. His delegation wondered whether 
expansions in the Agency's activities could not be 
covered with existing manpower, at any rate until 
the world economy showed signs of definite 
improvement. 
30. The allocation in the Regular Budget for 
safeguards activities and the amount allocated for 
technical assistance from sources outside the 
Regular Budget had been the subject of lengthy 
discussion in the past and many Members of the 
Agency, including Indonesia, had advocated a 
healthy and reasonable balance between those two 
types of expenditure. However, the budget for 
[5] See document GC(XK)/550. 
1976 showed a greater increase for safeguards 
than for technical assistance. From 1971 to 1976 
the increase would be 260% for safeguards and only 
120% for technical assistance and that in a period 
when the number of developing countries joining the 
Agency and in need of its assistance had increased 
considerably. 

31. A sum of $ 5. 5 million had been proposed as 
the target for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund. While his delegation was very 
grateful to those who contributed generously to 
that Fund, it wondered whether that sum would be 
sufficient to meet the technical assistance requirements 
of an increasing number of Member States. 
The need for assistance had grown, as the requests 
made to the Agency in recent years showed. If 
it was too late to increase the target of $ 5. 5 million, 
his delegation hoped that the donor countries 
would make a greater effort in the years to come. 
The Indonesian Government would continue to make 
a financial contribution to the General Fund within 
its very limited means. 

32. He expressed satisfaction at the research 
and assistance activities the Agency was conducting 
which were of direct interest to the developing 
countries, especially in the matter of food and 
agriculture. He recalled that the seventh special 
session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations had adopted a number of decisions relating 
to the establishment of the New International 
Economic Order, A chapter of the final document 
of that session dealt with food and agriculture, 
with special reference to the acceleration of food 
production, the preservation of grain and the 
maintenance of national and world grain reserves. 
His delegation was convinced that the Agency 
would have an ever increasing role to play in 
those areas and it looked forward to the time when 
the Agency would work out a programme designed 
to make the New International Economic Order a 
reality. 
33. He stressed the need to maintain impartiality 
in the selection of countries to receive technical 
assistance. His delegation had no doubts regarding 
the technical considerations on which decisions 
were based but it sincerely hoped that all Member 
States in need of and requesting technical assistance 
would be eligible to receive it without discrimination. 
34. It fully approved the inauguration of cooperation 
between the Agency and the Council for 
Mutual Economic Assistance. It was through such 
co-operation, on which the developing countries set 
great store, that the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy would be advanced. He hoped that 
it would not be very long before such co-operation 
was established with kindred organizations of 
developing countries in Latin America, Africa and 
Asia. 
35. The delegate of the Philippines had presented 
facts and figures showing the very high cost of 
constructing nuclear power stations. [6] It would 
[6] See document GC(XK)/OR. 178, para. 93. 

GC(XIX)/OR. 183 


be very interesting to know the reasons why the 
cost of introducing nuclear power to the less 
prosperous countries had increased so much. Was 
it due to inflation, which was now showing signs of 
abating? Could the increase in prices in 197 5 
still be blamed on the increase in oil prices in 
1973? Or, was it just a case of the developing 
countries like Indonesia having to pay for the 
scientific knowledge and technological know-how 
possessed by a very few countries? 

36. In conclusion, his delegation expressed the 
hope that in the years to come the Agency would 
continue to play its vital role in maintaining world 
peace and providing assistance to the developing 
countries. While the application of nuclear 
energy in those countries might have been merely 
fashionable in the fifties and sixties, it had become 
a necessity in the seventies. The Agency 
must not be found wanting in fulfilling its assigned 
role in the nuclear era. 
37. Mr. KABBANI (Saudi Arabia), after congratulating 
the President and the officers of the 
Conference on their election, welcomed the 
representatives of Qatar, the United Arab 
Emirates and the United Republic of Tanzania, 
whose joining the Agency was evidence of the 
interest of the developing countries in the organization's 
activities. 
38. The focus of their interest in the Agency's 
programme was technical assistance, which offered 
them tangible advantages from which they could 
benefit for many years. For that reason Saudi 
Arabia welcomed the recent decision of the Board 
of Governors to recommend to the General 
Conference that the target for voluntary contributions 
should be increased. 
39. He believed, however, that unless the Agency 
reconsidered the entire question of financing 
technical assistance it could not accomplish the 
target objectives. With regard to the financing of 
the International Centre for Theoretical Physics 
at Trieste, the Director General had drawn attention 
to a. review in November 1974 by a group of 
eminent scientists which had advocated that the 
budget should be stabilized, as it was at present 
too dependent on occasional contributions. [7] 
Saudi Arabia shared that view, as it considered 
that many of the Trieste Centre's activities might 
be financed under the heading of technical assistance. 
40. The same argument was applicable to the 
technical assistance programme as a whole. 
Saudi Arabia had informed the Secretariat that for 
197 6 it was pledging as a voluntary contribution to 
the General Fund twenty times the amount it should 
pay as its assessed contribution to the Regular 
Budget. Indeed, Saudi Arabia's contributions had 
for many years exceeded the normal share calculated 
on that basis. 
41. It was also participating in other international 
aid programmes. For example, it had undertaken 
[7] GC(XIX)/OR. 176, para. 52. 
to provide assistance worth more than $1000 million 
on a bilateral basis or through international 
banks and organizations, taking due account of the 
recipients' wishes. 

42. While meeting its international obligations, 
Saudi Arabia also had to consider its own development. 
In its next five-year plan Saudi Arabia 
would have to allocate over $7000 million to a desalination 
programme designed to satisfy its most 
urgent needs. It was paying several times more 
for a litre of imported mineral water than a litre 
of oil would cost at current prices. 
43. In that context, there was another Agency 
activity of great interest, namely, the study of 
dual-purpose nuclear plants for electricity 
production and water desalination. For an arid 
country like Saudi Arabia, the establishment of 
agro-industrial complexes might well be 
economically feasible. 
44. Saudi Arabia's immediate plans in the matter 
of nuclear energy were nevertheless very modest. 
Studies would be undertaken shortly on the feasibility 
of a nuclear research centre. At present a 
large number of radioactive sources were in use 
for various purposes, but mainly by the oil industry 
for well logging and pipeline monitoring. 
45. The Ministry of Agriculture was using radioisotope 
techniques for various hydrological studies 
and was conducting experiments designed to bring 
about improvements in certain local crops, such as 
rice, by radiation-induced mutations. 
46. A new nuclear medicine centre, which would 
be one of the best in the Middle East, would shortly 
be opened in Riyadh. It would have a 10-MeV 
linear accelerator, a cyclotron for short-lived 
isotope production, cobalt-60 and radioactive 
caesium sources and a full range of radioisotopes 
for diagnosis and therapy. 
47. In implementing those programmes, Saudi 
Arabia looked forward to fruitful co-operation 
with the Agency and other Member States. 
48. Mr. DI LANDRO (Uruguay) said that, being 
mindful of the time in which final decisions had to 
be taken, he would keep his statement short. He 
congratulated the President on his nomination, the 
new States on their admission to the Agency, and 
the Director General on his eloquent, statement on 
the Agency's activities[8], 
49. As far as peaceful nuclear activities were 
concerned, Uruguay, within the limits of its capabilities 
and as its own offset to the technical assistance 
provided by the Agency, was engaged in a 
variety of activities, such as uranium prospecting, 
food irradiation, nuclear medicine, and the application 
of radioisotopes in agriculture; it was likewise 
completing the establishment of a nuclear 
research centre and studying a plan for the introduction 
of nuclear power. The present statement 
[8] Ibid., paras 21-59. 
-5 

GC(XIX)/OR. 183 

was an appropriate occasion for his country to 
express particular gratitude to the Argentine 
National Atomic Energy Commission, the Brazilian 
Nuclear Energy Commission, the Spanish Nuclear 
Energy Board and the French Atomic Energy 
Commission for the assistance they have given in 
the form of scientific missions, visits by experts, 
equipment, and so forth. 

50. Following a policy of supporting any action 
that might contribute to an overall improvement of 
Uruguay's economy and intellectual heritage, and 
to the building of a new Uruguay, his Government 
associated itself with the success which the present 
Conference was bound to achieve and which would 
embody the joint efforts of all Member States in 
furthering the progress of nuclear science in all 
scientific and technological areas in the best 
interests of mankind. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING 
DATE OF THE NEXT SESStON (GC(XIX)/558) 
(continued! 9]) 

51. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee recommended that it 
should accept with gratitude the invitation of the 
Brazilian Government to hold the next regular 
session in Rio de Janeiro (GC(XIX)/558); the 
Committee further recommended that the session 
should begin on 21 September 1976. He accordingly 
proposed that the Conference: 
(a) 
Accept the invitation of the Brazilian 
Government to hold its twentieth regular 
session in Rio de Janeiro and to fix the 
opening date as Tuesday, 21 September 1976; 
and 
(b) 
Request the Director General to inform the 
Brazilian authorities accordingly, to conclude 
with the Government the necessary 
agreement on behalf of the Agency and to 
convey to it the Conference's appreciation of 
its offer to act as host to the Conference. 
. 
52. It was so decided. 

THE WORK OF THE COMMITTEE 
OF THE WHOLE 

53. Miss LIM (Malaysia), Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole, reported on her committee's 
consideration of the agenda items that 
had been referred to it: item 7 - The Agency's 
accounts for 1974, item 8 - The Agency's budget 
for 1975, item 9 - The Agency's budget for 1976, 
item 10 - Scale of assessment of Members' contributions 
for 1976, item 11 - The Agency's 
relations with intergovernmental organizations 
and item 12 - The Agency's relations with nongovernmental 
organizations. 
[9] 
GC(XK)/OR. 180, paras 87-89. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1974 
(GC(XIX)/549) 

. 54, The draft resolution in document 
GC(XIX)/549 on the Agency's accounts for 1974 was 
adopted. 

THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1975 (GC(XIX)/548) 


. 55. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XIX)/548 on a supplementary Regular Budget 
appropriation for 1975 was adopted. 

THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1976 (GC(XIX)/550 
and 560) 

. 56. Draft resolution A (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1976), draft resolution B 
(Operational Budget allocations for 1976) and draft 
resolution C (The Working Capital Fund in 1976) 
set forth in document GC(XDX)/550, Annex V, were 
adopted. 

. 57. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XIX)/560 on the physical protection of nuclear 
material was adopted. 

SCALE OF ASSESSMENT OF MEMBERS' 
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1976 (GC(XIX)/551) 

. 58. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XIX)/551 on the scale of assessment of 
Members' contributions for 1976 was adopted. 

THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH INTERGOVERNMENTAL 
ORGANIZATIONS (GC(XIX)/545 
and 5 56) 

. 59. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XIX)/545 on the co-operation agreement 
between the Agency and the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance was adopted. 

60. Mr. FADDEEV (Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance), thanking the President for affording 
him the opportunity to speak, said he was gratified 
to learn that Governors on the Board of Governors 
and delegates to the Conference thought highly of 
the agreement which was thus to be concluded 
between the Agency and the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA). The agreement 
was part of the general effort towards detente and 
embodied some of the recommendations of the 
Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation'in 
Europe. His organization, which was 
already co-operating with more than 20 international 
organizations, greatly appreciated the 
Agency's work, in which it had been taking part 
for the past ten years. CMEA shared the interests 
of the Agency and its Member States and had, 
incidentally, been among the first to ratify NPT. 

61. CMEA was implementing a programme aimed 
at step-by-step socialist integration in all fields 
over the next 15 or 20 years. At its 29th session, 
-6 



GC(XIX)/OR. 183 

in June 1975, CMEA had approved a joint plan by 
which it would be possible to carry out socialist 
integration between 1976 and 1980. The bulk of 
the planned activities related to the development of 
fuel and energy resources. Member States of 
CMEA were already making efficient use of all 
types of energy and were therefore beyond the 
reach of the energy crisis. CMEA projects now 
under way or planned for the future included construction 
of a gas pipeline 27 50 km long between 
Orenburg and the border of the Soviet Union, a 
750-kV power transmission line and a consolidated 
power network, and co-operation in matters of 
nuclear energy. CMEA attributed vital importance 
to nuclear matters. Nuclear power plants had 
already been built or were under construction in 
Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic, 
Hungary, Poland and Romania, and another would 
shortly be completed in Cuba. The total installed 
capacity of CMEA countries would attain 
30 000 MW(e) by 1980. In order to promote 
nuclear power in industry, CMEA had set up two 
bodies known as Interatominstrument and 
Interatomenergo, It was interested in the applications 
of isotopes and ionizing radiation in 
numerous fields, and more especially in environmental 
protection. 

62. As regards relations with the Agency, CMEA 
had participated in the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS) since 1974, and in the 
work of the power plant safety group. In 1976, 
a symposium organized by CMEA and the Agency 
on stable isotopes would be held in the German 
Democratic Republic. 
63. He trusted that the collaboration between the 
two organizations would be successful. He wished 
to thank the Director General and the Board for 
having facilitated the drafting of the agreement, 
which had been concluded in an atmosphere of 
frankness and friendly contact. The agreement 
would help to consolidate peace and to attain the 
goals set in the Final Act of the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe. 
. 64. The draft resolution on the co-operation 
agreement between the Agency and the European 
Atomic Energy Community in document 
GC(XK}/556 was adopted. 

65. Mr. AMORY (Commission of the European 
Communities) said that the Communities were 
highly satisfied with the co-operation agreement 
with the Agency. The agreement would not only 
open up new prospects for very fruitful cooperation 
but also provide a legal basis for joint 
activities which had been going on since the 
establishment of the two organizations. The 
Agency and the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) were already collaborating 
in numerous areas, particularly in reactor 
research, nuclear fuel technology, dissemination 
of known-how, reactor safety, biology, radiation 
protection, radioisotopes, food irradiation, 
training of personnel and nuclear information. 
As regards co-operation in safeguards, an agreement 
had been concluded between EURATOM, the 
seven non-nuclear-weapon States Members of 
EURATOM and the Agency in connection with 

NPT. [10] EURATOM would also sign in the near 

future a tripartite safeguards agreement with the 
Agency and the United Kingdom. 

66. In conclusion, he said that the two organizations 
could look to the future of their co-operation 
with confidence and optimism. 
THE AGENCY'S RELATIONS WITH NONGOVERNMENTAL 
ORGANIZATIONS (GC(XIX)/546) 

. 67. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XDC)/546 on the representation of certain nongovernmental 
organizations at the Conference's 
regular sessions was adopted. 

APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

68. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference 
that the Agency's External Auditor had been 
appointed to audit the Agency's accounts for the 
years 1974 and 1975. [11] It was therefore necessary 
to appoint an External Auditor to audit the 
accounts for subsequent years. Under Financial 
Regulation 12. 01[12] the External Auditor was to 
be appointed from among the Auditors General of 
Member States, and it was customary for the 
President to put before the Conference a specific 
proposal for such an appointment. In the light of 
the consultations which had been held, he accordingly 
proposed that the Auditor General of the 
Netherlands be appointed to audit the Agency's 
accounts for the years 1976 and 1977. 
. 69. The President's proposal was accepted. 

70. The PRESIDENT said he took it that the 
Conference would wish him to convey its gratitude 
to the Czechoslovak Government, which had since 
1968 placed at the Agency's disposal the services 
of its Auditor General. The fact that the latter 
had been re-appointed three times bore evidence 
to the high esteem in which he was held by the 
Conference. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 

71. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members 
and two alternates elected by the Conference. 
The members were at present Mr. Belacik 
(Czechoslovakia) and Mr. von Schenck 
(Switzerland), the alternates being Mr. Aden 
(Argentina) and Mr. Fell (United Kingdom). Since 
[10] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/193. 
[11] By the decision set forth in the booklet 
GC(XVII)/RESOLUTIONS(1973), Other Decisions, 
decision number GC(XVII)/DEC/8. 
[12] INFCIRC/8/Rev. 1. 
7 


GC(XIX)/OR. 183 

Mr. Fell was unable to continue serving on the 
Committee, the Conference had to elect one new 
alternate member, He suggested that Mr. Jenkins 
(United Kingdom) be elected as an alternate 
member, 

. 72. Mr. Jenkins (United Kingdom) was 
elected an alternate member of the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee. 

VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL 
FUND FOR 1976 (GC(XIX)/555/Rev. 4) 

73. The PRESIDENT referred the Conference to 
document GC(XIX)/555/Rev. 4, in which the 
Director General had stated that, by 6 p.m. on 
25 September, pledges of voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund for 1976 had been made by 
60 Members in an amount equivalent to approximately 
$3 320 000. In the meantime, two more 
Members, Algeria and Bangladesh, had informed 
the Director General that they undertook to make 
contributions of $4400 and $5500 respectively. 
Sixty-two Member States were therefore pledged 
to contribute a total amount of around $3. 3 million, 
which was well short of the target of $ 5. 5 million 
the Conference had just set[13]. However, it was 
to be noted that several Members which had made 
generous contributions to the General Fund in 
previous years were not yet able to make known 
their contributions for 1976, so there was good 
reason to believe that the amount pledged would 
soon be significantly increased. Nevertheless, 
contributions were still likely to fall short of the 
target by $500 000 to $750 000 or 9 to 14%. He 
personally felt it was the duty of every Member 
State to make an effort towards remedying that 
situation. He therefore asked every delegate to 
urge his Government to increase its contribution 
to the General Fund so that in 1976 the Agency 
might have at its disposal enough funds to respond 
to the requests for technical assistance that would 
be made by its developing Member States. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

74. Mr. DEMENTHON (France) congratulated 
the President on behalf of the group of Western 
European Members for the understanding and 
efficiency with which he had conducted the work of 
the Conference. Thanks to his competence, the 
Conference had been able to consider the numerous 
questions on its agenda and finish its work within 
the prescribed time limits. He also wanted to 
thank the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
for the mastery and charm she had shown in conducting 
the work of that Committee. 
75. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic 
Republic), speaking on behalf of Bulgaria, the 
Byelorussian SSR, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, the 
[13] By para. 1 of the resolution on Operational 
Budget allocations for 1976 which is the subject of 
para. 56 above. 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Mongolia, 
Poland, the Republic of South Viet-Nam, Romania, 
the Ukrainian SSR, the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics and his own delegation, thanked the 
President for the way in which he had conducted 
the work of the Conference. The results achieved 
were of decisive importance for the future work 
of the Agency. 

76. He also thanked the Director General and 
the Agency's Secretariat for the excellent preparatory 
work for the Conference, and the host country 
for its' traditional hospitality. 
77. Mr. CHERIF (Algeria) paid a tribute to the 
President for the outstanding manner in which he 
had conducted the work. It was gratifying to confirm 
that the unanimous expressions of confidence 
in the President voiced at the time of his election 
had been justified. 
78. In a statement drawn up by a number of 
countries, which was to be distributed to Member 
States, an urgent appeal had been made to the 
principal organ of the Agency that the criteria for 
regional representation should be adjusted in the 
light of present developments. He hoped that that 
appeal would be listened to, since it was in the 
interests of universality and, consequently, of the 
effectiveness of the Agency. 
79. He also thanked the Director General and 
his collaborators who had so successfully organized 
the work of the Conference. 
80. Mr. DI LANDRO (Uruguay), speaking on 
behalf of the group of Latin-American countries, 
thanked the authorities of the host country for the 
excellent arrangements made for the Conference. 
He also thanked the Director General, the administrative 
and technical staff and all those who had 
contributed to the success of the nineteenth 
session of the Conference. 
81. Miss LIM (Malaysia), speaking on behalf of 
the countries of the Pacific and Far East region, 
said she wished to join those who had preceded her 
in congratulating the President. The task of the 
Chair had been brilliantly performed at a critical 
moment for the Agency - i. e. the twentieth 
anniversary of the first Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy - when the rapidly developing 
use of nuclear energy made research and 
achievements relating to peaceful and practical 
applications more important than ever. 
82. She was happy to have had the privilege of 
presiding over the Committee of the Whole and, 
as a result, to have been able to collaborate with 
the President in the success of the Conference. 
83. The PRESIDENT expressed his gratitude to 
all the delegates who, on behalf of their countries 
or regions, had thanked him; his function as 
President had enabled him to reflect at length on all 
the problems which had been dealt with and on the 
excellent documents prepared by the Secretariat. 

GC(XIX)/OR. 183 


84. The Conference enabled all delegates from 
Member States to deal with the problems concerning 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. At present, 
the energy crisis, linked with the shortage of oil, 
had accelerated the rhythm of development of 
nuclear power. As a result, several problems 
arose with regard to the standards of safety to be 
created, the physical protection of nuclear 
materials, the storage of those materials, 
environmental protection and so forth. The 
solution of those problems called for new forms of 
international co-operation. The Agency must 
therefore play an important role in the coming 
years and it was only when that was recognized 
that it would have the feeling that it was fulfilling 
its obligations. 
85. Once again, he thanked all the delegates for 
their attention, 
86. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he then invited delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
. 87. All present rose and stood in silence 
for one minute. 

88. The PRESIDENT declared the nineteenth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
. The meeting rose at 5. 35 p.m. 

9 



