GC(XX)/OR.184 

International Atomic Energy Agency 18 March 1977* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 21-28 SEPTEMBER 1976 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Conference Centre, Hotel Nacional-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, 
on Tuesday, 21 September 1976, at 3. 30 p.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. FELICKI (Poland) 
President: Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
Opening of the session 1 3 
Election of officers and appointment of 
the General Committee 
4 23 
Statement by the Director General 24 62 
Address of welcome by the Vice-President 
of the Federative Republic of Brazil 
63 69 
Statement by the Representative of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations 
70 73 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 October 1976, 
** GC(XX)/562 and Add. 1. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XX)/INF/163/Rev. 3. 
77-0193 


GC(XX)/OR. 184 

THE RECORD 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared 
the twentieth regular session of the General 
Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure he invited the delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. 
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, after 
welcoming those present, warmly thanked the 
Government of Brazil for so generously inviting 
the General Conference to hold its twentieth 
regular session in Rio de Janeiro and for making 
such excellent facilities available to the Agency. 
The year since the previous regular session had 
been marked by a continuation of detente, by 
progress in the field of disarmament and by 
further advances in science and technology. As 
regards the Agency's activities, the treaty of 
28 May 1976 between the United States of America 
and the Soviet Union on underground explosions 
for peaceful purposes deserved special mention. 
The past year had also been marked by a 
strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system. 
There was every reason to be satisfied with the 
efforts of the countries exporting nuclear 
materials to ensure that those materials were 
subject to safeguards. Moreover, progress had 
been made in the developing countries. Lastly, 
there had been two important achievements in 
nuclear science; elements with atomic numbers 
124 and 126 had been produced and major advances 
had been made in accelerator technology. That 
might have a considerable influence on the future 
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. 

ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT 
OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President of the 
Conference. 
5. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina) said 
that the group consisting of the delegates of the 
Latin American countries had the honour of 
including among its members Mr. de Carvalho, 
the delegate of Brazil, who would be particularly 
well qualified to exercise the functions of 
President of the Conference at its twentieth 
regular session. Mr, de Carvalho, a doctor of 
chemistry and nuclear sciences, was a member 
of several Brazilian and other scientific bodies 
and had been honoured by a number of countries. 
Since 1969 he had been Chairman of Brazil's 
National Atomic Energy Commission and the 
Governor from Brazil on the Agency's Board. 
In addition, he was a member of the Agency's 
Scientific Advisory Committee and had published 


many articles in specialist journals. 
Mr. de Carvalho would therefore be especially 
suited for presiding over the session. 

6. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) said he had great pleasure in supporting 
the nomination. 
7. Mr. KATORI (Japan) also supported the 
nomination. 
• 8. Mr, de Carvalho (Brazil) was elected 
President of the General Conference for its 
twentieth regular session by acclamation. 
• Mr. de Carvalho (Brazil) took the Chair. 
9. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for 
the great honour which they had accorded him. 
He regarded his election as a tribute to Brazil, 
which was engaged in promoting the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy. He appealed to all 
delegates to help him to carry out his task 
successfully and paid tribute to the Director 
General and the Secretariat for the professional 
skill which they had once more demonstrated in 
expediting the Agency's work. 
10. There were a number of points which he 
wished to draw to the Conference's attention. 
Since the Second World War, the world had been 
divided into two distinct categories: rich countries 
and poor countries. The gap between rich and 
poor countries was bound to increase unless an 
effort was made to revise the principles governing 
international co-operation and assistance. 
For the majority of the Agency's Member States, 
the provision of technical assistance was by far 
the most important function of the Agency. From 
the outset, however, it had been felt that the 
financial resources available to the Agency for 
that purpose were insufficient, and that was now 
truer than ever. 
11. The fact was that the Agency's Member 
States did not agree on what should be regarded 
as the primary task of the Agency. The developing 
countries were demanding more technical 
assistance so as to become independent in the 
field of nuclear technology, while the advanced 
countries were interested mainly in establishing 
an increasingly rigid, world-wide safeguards 
system, for they considered that safeguards were 
an essential element of world peace; paradoxically, 
however, they assigned few resources for technical 
assistance, even though technical assistance was 
the starting point of safeguards. He did not wish 
to question the validity of safeguards, but it was 
important to establish a proper balance between 
technical assistance activities on one hand and 
safeguards activities on the other. Nevertheless, 
the Director General was to be congratulated on 
the way he distributed the meagre resources at 
the Agency's disposal for the provision of 
technical assistance. 

12. The general debate was very important, for 
it yielded information of value for the planning of 
the Agency's future activities. 
-2 



GC(XX)/OR. 184 


13. Once more nuclear power was at the crossroads; 
on the present occasion, the crucial 
question was that of public acceptance, the main 
stumbling-block being the ultimate disposal of 
waste. The opponents of atomic energy were 
finding it easy to put forward arguments because 
of the lack of decision on certain important 
questions. For example, there was a lack of 
decision regarding uranium reserves. A 
decisive factor in the adoption of nuclear power 
programmes was the certainty that there would 
be sufficient uranium reserves for implementing 
them. To assure the necessary reserves it was 
necessary to intensify uranium prospecting 
throughout the world. Unfortunately, the situation 
was a vicious circle: public acceptance could not 
be relied on and hence not enough drilling was 
being done; consequently, the proven reserves 
of uranium were insufficient, and that in turn was 
hindering governmental decision and public 
acceptance. 

14. Another aspect of the public acceptance of 
nuclear energy was the assurance that fissile 
material would not be diverted and used by 
terrorists. Actually, the most likely threat was 
the diversion of one of the 80 000 nuclear weapons 
located at various points around the world or the 
diversion of weapon-grade material from a 
military enrichment plant. However, the safeguards 
system currently in operation was satisfactory, 
as demonstrated by the present situation, 
15. The amount of concentrated fissionable 
material produced and processed as a by-product 
of civil nuclear power generation would take 
15-20 years to approach the amount already 
produced for military purposes; with recycling 
in light-water reactors or breeders, in fact, it 
would remain less. All the same, it was 
necessary to intensify physical protection for all 
types of nuclear facility. 
16. Public reluctance stemmed largely from 
the fear of a nuclear arms race, and public 
opinion - if ill-informed - might constitute an 
obstacle to the development of nuclear power. 
That fear was unfounded, however, for two 
reasons: a good nuclear programme was undoubtedly 
an essential element in progress and in 
improving the living conditions of mankind; and 
the Agency's safeguards system had undoubtedly 
functioned effectively since the outset. The Agency 
should try in particular to impress on the public 
that its safeguards system was perfectly capable 
of preventing the diversion for military purposes 
of nuclear materials and information transferred 
from one State to another. 

17. The Agency had been in existence for 
20 years. During that time it had done much to 
help ensure world peace' and to promote the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy. He 
earnestly hoped that it would continue rendering 
such important services to mankind. The fact 
that the twentieth regular session was taking 
place in a Latin American country whose people 
and Government were firmly convinced that 
atomic energy should be used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes augured well for the success 
of the session. 

18. Turning to the election of officers, the 
PRESIDENT said that his understanding was that 
the developing countries felt they should have one 
additional seat in the General Committee, a view 
with which he, as a representative of a developing 
country, was in sympathy. He referred to the 
long and extensive consultations that had taken 
place with many Governments in Vienna about 
the composition of the General Committee. The 
question arose as to whether it was now possible 
to proceed with the elections or whether more 
time was required for consultations. 

19. Mr. ADENIJI (Nigeria) and Mr. SIRRY 
(Egypt) requested clarification as to what 
procedure the President had in mind. 
20. The PRESIDENT said that instead of 
proceeding with the election of officers it would 
be possible, if the Conference so wished, to begin 
with the general debate so that further informal 
consultations could take place on the question of 
the composition of the General Committee. 
21. Mr. SATTAR (Pakistan) requested, on 
behalf of a large number of countries from the 
Asian region, that the appointment of the General 
Committee be postponed until such consultations 
had been completed. 
22. Mr. SIRRY (Egypt) said that any implication 
that agreement on the composition of the General 
Committee had been reached in Vienna was 
incorrect. He pointed out that, as head of the 
African group, he had not been consulted. He 
therefore strongly associated himslef with the 
proposal of the delegate of Pakistan. 
23. The PRESIDENT stated that, in view of what 
had been said, informal consultations would continue 
and he would proceed with item 4 - Statement 
by the Director General. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

24. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that the 
fact that the Agency's General Conference was 
meeting in a developing country would contribute 
to a better understanding both of the problems 
with which such countries were faced when 
deciding to introduce nuclear technology on a 
large scale and of the reasons why they considered 
it essential to do so. 
25. It was now almost exactly 20 years since 
the Agency had been established. Since then, the 
number of Member States had increased from 60 
to 109; the executive organ, the Board of 
Governors, now had 34 Members, compared with 
23 in 1957; the Regular Budget had increased as 
a result of growing activities, inflation and 
exchange rate fluctuations - from a little over 
$4 million in 1958 to $37 million in 1976; the 
staff of the Agency had increased from 400 in 
1958 to 1200 now. However, despite the con-
3 



GC (XX) /OR. 184 

siderable increase in the scale of its operations, 
the Agency's main objectives were still governed 
by the unchanged provisions of Article II of the 
Statute. Moreover, the constructive spirit which 
now prevailed in the deliberations of the policymaking 
organs was quite remarkable. 

26. The Agency was a scientific and technical 
organization, and both the General Conference 
and the Board of Governors had endeavoured over 
the years to concentrate on the technical aspects 
of the Agency's work. He hoped that tradition 
would continue. It was inevitable, however, that 
during the past 20 years the Agency should have 
felt the effects of economic, political and social 
factors and of the developments in disarmament 
talks. 
27. On the technical side, very great progress 
had been made by Member States in the field of 
research and development relating to certain 
power reactor types and nuclear fuel technologies. 
That progress reflected the growing importance 
which most industrialized countries attached to 
nuclear power generation; by the end of 1975, 
the installed and operational nuclear power 
capacity in the world was some 70 000 MW. The 
role of the Agency with regard to nuclear energy 
and the different phases of the fuel cycle had 
increased and its safeguards system had grown in 
importance. Those were some of the factors 
which had influenced the work of the Agency 
during the past 20 years. In that connection it 
should not be forgotten that several developing 
countries had embarked on major nuclear power 
programmes in order to solve their energy problems, 
which had been aggravated by the fossil 
fuel situation. 

28. The present, twentieth regular session of 
the General Conference presented an excellent 
opportunity for consulting the crystal ball about 
the future while keeping in mind the lessons of 
the past. The annual report for 1975 contained 
in document GC(XX)/565 and the programme in 
document GC(XX)/567 gave details of what had 
been achieved during the past year and what was 
intended to be done the following year and the 
five subsequent years, due regard being had to 
the various constraints, above all of a financial 
nature, within which the Agency had to operate. 
He would therefore confine himself to commenting 
on nuclear power, safeguards and technical 
assistance as constituting major sectors of the 
Agency's work. 
Nuclear power 

29. Since the beginning of the present decade 
the question of energy had been arousing rapidly 
increasing interest. The views put forward on 
the subject varied widely. On the one hand the 
need was being stressed for the availability of 
cheap energy, an increasing proportion of which 
should be electricity, in order to maintain the 
industrialized society in its present state or to 
ensure its further development, and to enable the 
developing countries to improve their standard 
of living. On the other hand, there were those 
who maintained that the continuous increase in 
energy consumption should be halted as soon as 
possible and that even a reduction should be 
aimed at. In each country it was for the politicians 
to determine what options were to be taken up. 
At the present juncture the Agency's role should 
consist of putting forward nuclear energy as the 
only alternative to other sources immediately 
available, and of contributing, as efficiently as 
it could, to the installation and the safe and 
economic operation of nuclear power reactors and 
associated facilities. 

30. A comparative analysis of the costs of 
nuclear and conventional power showed that, in 
most cases, the economic advantages of nuclear 
power stations emerged clearly only when the 
prices of fossil fuel exceeded a certain level, 
and the paradox of only limited expansion of 
nuclear programmes in spite of the cost advantage 
had to a large extent to be sought beyond the field 
of economics. That stemmed particularly from 
the compounding of uncertainties. The future of 
commercial reprocessing was fraught with doubt, 
and power companies had difficulties in deciding 
whether they should reprocess spent fuel or 
store it. Public acceptance was likewise the 
cause of substantial delays and cost increases as 
a result of safety and environmental considerations 
involving the development of additional safety 
features, greater engineering design costs, 
longer construction periods and increased investment 
costs. As more and more reactors 
came into service and proved to be safe, public 
opposition seemed to be shifting towards the 
various environmental aspects of nuclear power. 
However, as recently pointed out by the International 
Labour Organisation (ILO), no industry 
had proved to be so environmentally conscious 
as the nuclear power industry. 

31. The Agency had launched the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS), which was 
already recognized as the main channel for the 
exchange of nuclear information and had served 
as a model for similar undertakings by other 
organizations. The Agency had also decided to 
set up a computerized data bank which would 
collect the relevant data on nuclear energy and 
other forms of primary energy and would also 
act as a bank for data on cost and other economic 
parameters. 
32. In order to be able to provide sound and well 
based advice to its Member States, especially 
developing countries, the Agency needed to have 
a thorough knowledge of conventional and 
emerging alternative power sources having 
genuine prospects of utilization. The expansion 
of activity in that field, which would be based on 
temporary assistance by competent specialists, 
would scarcely divert attention from the Agency's 
primary tasks, which already included the 
question of nuclear fusion. On the contrary, it 
would enable the Agency better to serve its 
Member States, above all the developing 
countries. Furthermore, it would thus be 
possible to avoid the establishment of further 
international organizations in related fields, 
-4 



GC(XX)/OR.184 


with the accompanying inevitable overlapping 
of functions. 

33. In the public debate on the acceptance of 
nuclear power the Agency had hitherto confined 
itself to presenting the conclusions reached by 
experts recruited to analyse specific questions. 
Nevertheless, the time appeared to have come 
when more effort should be devoted to following 
and understanding activities of that type. 
Valuable contributions in that respect could be 
expected from the International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) study on the 
environment, in which the Agency and also the 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
and the World Health Organization (WHO) were 
co-operating, and from the risk comparison 
project referred to in the Agency's programme. 
34. A year before there had been grave concern 
about the adequacy of the world uranium resources, 
enrichment capacity and reprocessing capacity. 
Recent large discoveries and the rapid rise in the 
price of uranium - six- or sevenfold increases in 
certain cases - had greatly changed the basic 
features of the problem and would improve 
prospects for the early phases of the fuel cycle, 
particularly when those new resources came on 
the market. Uranium prospection, therefore, 
continued to be one of the main features of the 
Agency's technical assistance programme. 
35. It should not be forgotten, moreover, that 
the uranium reserves used in present thermal 
reactors only corresponded to an amount of 
energy equal to that contained in present known 
oil reserves. Only by the transition from 
thermal to breeder reactors would the content 
of energy in uranium become roughly of the same 
order as the energy contained in total fossil fuel 
reserves (coal, oil and natural gas). Some 
regional co-operation existed for sharing the 
enormous cost of developing the breeder reactor 
concept from the pilot stage to the full-scale 
industrial reactor. He wished to appeal to 
Member States to use the good offices of the 
Agency in achieving more effective international 
co-operation in that sphere. 
36. Earlier anxiety concerning enrichment 
capacity seemed to have been largely dissipated 
due in part to the establishment of a common 
diffusion enrichment undertaking, Eurodif, and 
the development of the centrifuge process by 
Eurenco, Unfortunately, the same could not be 
said about the reprocessing of irradiated fuel. 
The appeal he had made in favour of joint regional 
undertakings in the field of reprocessing had led 
to generous support for the Agency's continuing 
study of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres, the 
results of which would be presented at Salzburg 
in May 1977. The Secretariat's study tended to 
indicate that such projects would be advantageous 
from an economic, safety, physical security and 
safeguards point of view. It should however be 
recognized that thus far it had not been possible 
to define with certainty the economic advantage 
of reprocessing plant fuel rather than simply 
storing it. 

37. During the following 10-20 years, the 
possible accumulation of plutonium in the world 
would constitute an ever more serious problem. 
However, Article XII. A. 5 of the Statute foresaw 
the possibility of additional measures such as 
the deposit of surplus plutonium with the Agency 
in Agency-operated storage facilities. Hitherto 
there had been little need to make use of those 
provisions of the Statute, but the need to do so 
was now becoming apparent. The Secretariat had 
therefore begun an internal study on international 
plutonium management. 
38. In the field of thermal reactors, safety 
questions would remain a focal point for some 
time to come. The consolidated effort which had 
been undertaken in the Agency to develop safety 
codes and guides would be vigorously pursued, 
39. The end of the fuel cycle, namely the safe 
disposal and management of radioactive waste, 
still raised a number of problems, the solutions 
of which - already found at experimental level would 
have to be extended to industrial conditions 
during the next decade or so. 
Nuclear liability 

40. It was his wish that Member States should 
consider signing or ratifying the 1963 Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear 
Damage[l]; it was regrettable that only slight 
progress had been registered in that direction. 
Furthermore, in the light of the leakage recently 
detected in the oceans at points where wastes 
had been dumped decades before, it was important 
to take specific action in connection with the 
Agency's liabilities arising under the Convention 
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping 
of Wastes and Other Matter (the London 
Convention)[2], 
Safeguards 

41. The recent expansion in the use of nuclear 
power had greatly increased the Agency's responsibilities 
with regard to safeguards. Consequently, 
activities in that domain had developed 
faster than in any other. Supported by experts 
from Member States the Agency had taken the 
lead in the development of safeguards, and the 
newly established Standing Advisory Group on 
Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) should have 
an important role to play in that respect. 
42. The shift in emphasis from plant to 
material had led to the establishment of a trigger 
list covering both equipment and material, and 
also to the start of discussions on the possibility 
of the Agency assuming responsibility for the 
storage of plutonium in all its forms. The initial 
[1] The text of the Convention is reproduced in 
Legal Series No. 4 (STI/PUB/430). 
[2] The text of the Convention is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/205. 
-5 



GC(XX)/OR. 184 

safeguards system, which dealt only with research 
reactors, had gradually been elaborated to cover 
all sizes and types of nuclear installation and 
material. For the first time in history, an 
international safeguarding system had been 
established and recognized. It might not be ideal 
but it could and would be improved if the 

supporters of the Agency and of the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[3] 
were prepared to give their assistance and wholehearted 
support to the Secretariat's endeavours. 
He would appeal to States which had accepted the 
Agency's safeguards system to extend that 
acceptance to include the Agency's inspectors, 
irrespective of their nationality, 

43. An important task for the Agency was to 
keep abreast of developments in new instrumentation 
designed for safeguards purposes and to promote 
work on apparatus and equipment which could be 
used to facilitate, and eventually automate, some 
elements of inspection work. 
44. In 1976, Japan had become the one-hundredth 
country to ratify NPT. Those 100 States included 
three nuclear-weapon States and more than 
70 developing States in the sense used by the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 
It would be seen from those figures that NPT was 
neither a pressure group of the industrial 
countries nor a developing country group. Nevertheless, 
a small group of countries possessing 
significant nuclear programmes still remained 
outside the scope of NPT. That group included 
nuclear- and non-nuclear-weapon States, developed 
and developing. The time might be ripe now for 
those countries to re-examine the grounds that 
five or six years before had militated against 
their participation in the NPT system. The fact 
that some of them were located in areas of 
political tension made formal renunciation of the 
"nuclear option" difficult, but that was precisely 
why their ratification of NPT would constitute 
an important contribution to regional and international 
security. 
45. There were now cases among developing 
countries in the United Nations sense which had 
progressed so far in the nuclear field as to be able 
to manufacture sophisticated equipment and 
material. It was to be hoped that deliveries from 
such a country of material or technological 
knowledge would take place only under the express 
condition that appropriate safeguards were applied. 
In making that suggestion to certain non-nuclearweapon 
countries, he felt bound once again to 
remind the nuclear-weapon States of the crucial 
importance of a complete cessation of all nuclearweapon 
tests. He announced that the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), which in 
1972 had approved the NPT Agreement between 
the Agency, EURATOM and the countries concerned, 
had now informed him that further progress in the 
matter was expected in the months ahead. 

[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
46. In June 1976, the Board had approved, and 
he himself had recently signed, an agreement 
with the United Kingdom and EURATOM to implement 
the offer made by the United Kingdom to 
accept Agency safeguards, subject to exclusions 
for national security reasons only, on its nuclear 
fuel cycle. A similar agreement with the United 
States had just been placed before the Board. 
47. In Article III. 2 of NPT the importance of 
nuclear supply policy was recognized. According 
to reports, the progress made in the London talks 
was heartening. The Agency itself was not 
directly involved in the current extensive discussions 
on nuclear export policy matters. 
Obviously, however, it would be helpful if the 
Agency were kept informed of decisions emanating 
from those discussions and affecting Agency safeguards 
to some extent, as had been done in the 
case of the "Zangger Committee". 
48. SAGSI was beginning to play a very valuable 
role. In view of the growing interest in the 
effectiveness of Agency safeguards, fuller reporting 
was essential to ensure a high degree of 
confidence in the operation. Accordingly, SAGSI 
was now focusing its attention on developing a 
more effective system for reporting the results 
of safeguards operations to the Board and to 
Member States. It was his intention to introduce 
the new reporting system in 1977. 
49. Questions had been raised about the ability 
of current Agency safeguards to deal with large 
reprocessing plants. Although any such question 
was at present academic, he had full confidence 
in the capacity of the Agency's safeguards procedures 
to apply effective safeguards to any 
nuclear plant with which the Agency was now 
dealing or was likely to be dealing within the 
coming few years. In that regard, it was 
important to avoid any misunderstanding of the 
Agency's role. The Agency could and should be 
in a position to detect diversion, and to do so 
promptly, but it was unable physically to prevent 
diversion either by individuals or by any 
Government bent on such action. 
50. As nuclear fuel cycles under safeguards 
became larger and more complete, the Agency 
would have to examine other questions going 
beyond those concerning the individual plant or 
materials balance area, and would have to devise 
techniques and approaches for evaluating the 
totality of the safeguarded fuel cycle, as also the 
activities coming close to nuclear explosive 
production. 
51. It was noteworthy that, in accordance with 
General Conference Resolution GC(XIX)/RES/328 
whereby Member States and the Director General 
of the Agency were called upon to consider ways 
and means of promoting the physical protection 
of nuclear facilities and materials, the Secretariat 
had entered into consultations with a number of 
Member States with the object of designing a 
realistic programme for the Agency. The Agency 
would continue with the formulation of recommendations 
on physical protection and would be 
-6 



GC(XX)/OR. 184 


prepared, at their request, to assist Member 
States in developing co-operation in various forms 
to solve problems of common interest. 

52. As for the present situation in regard to 
safeguards and how safeguards might develop 
over the coming ten years, those countries which 
had accepted NPT would have all their nuclear 
activity under Agency safeguards, w,hereas those 
which had not accepted it or had not placed all 
their activity under Agency safeguards would be 
in a position to develop a nuclear technique of 
their own, directed, if they so wished, toward 
the manufacture of nuclear explosives or weapons. 
That prospect was scarcely a satisfactory one. 
53. It should be recognized that NPT might be 
nearing the end of the line. If realization of the 
prospect in question was to be averted, the only 
alternative would be for the manufacturing States 
to stipulate, as an irrevocable condition for the 
delivery of nuclear material or equipment, that 
the receiving State accept the placing of Agency 
safeguards on its entire nuclear programme. 
54. In practice, Agency safeguards were already 
being applied to all nuclear plants in many 
countries that had not formally accepted fullscope 
safeguards. Such countries had much to 
gain by formalizing that situation. At the Board's 
request, the Secretariat was preparing the draft 
text of an agreement that could serve as a starting 
point for negotiations with any country now ready 
to accept full fuel cycle safeguards, and he would 
be interested to know how the Governments concerned 
regarded the matter. 
55. It was encouraging to find that many Member 
States had supported the Secretariat in its endeavours 
to maintain a proper balance between the 
promotional and the safeguarding activities of the 
Agency. At times, however, that dual role of 
the Agency had been called into question. All the 
activities involved were of interest and importance 
to the Member States as a whole, whether 
developed or developing, but their nature was 
such that within the Agency, no line could be 
drawn between their promotional and their 
regulatory aspects. 
Nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 

56. The possibility of using nuclear explosives 
for peaceful purposes had attracted much attention. 
The Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions 
for Peaceful Purposes, set up by the Board in 
1975, had already held two series of meetings and 
a third was to be convened later in the year. In 
that way, the Agency was discharging its obligations 
under the Statute as well as under 
Article V of NPT. The Agency's activity in that 
complex field was being closely followed by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations and would 
no doubt be thoroughly examined at the next NPT 
Review Conference in 1980. 
Technical assistance 

57. The Agency's activities in the field of 
technical assistance were directly affected by 
Member States' voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund, the target of which had increased 
from $1. 5 million in 1959 to $5. 5 million in 1976. 
In terms of purchasing power, however, the 
increase could not be regarded as large, and 
moreover the sum had to be spread over a wide 
field of activities and a large number of developing 
countries. 
58. The lack of funds had been hampering the 
technical assistance programme throughout its 
existence, but it was gratifying to note that in 
the past few years an increasing amount had been 
received from UNDP, due solely to Member 
States including more nuclear projects in their 
country programmes. 
59. In order to maintain and, if possible, 
expand the Agency's technical assistance programme, 
he would appeal to all Member States, 
including developing countries, to contribute in 
both cash and kind to that programme, since the 
end result should be a narrowing of the gap 
between the developed and the developing countries 
in the nuclear field. 
60. For developing countries, the problem lay 
in how to find the money for new plant and how to 
build up a nucleus of trained managers, engineers 
and safety personnel. With the generous help of 
a number of Member States, the Agency had 
initiated a major training effort. Four large 
training courses, especially designed to help 
Member States just embarking on nuclear power 
programmes, had been held since the beginning 
of 1975. 
Concluding ramarks 

61. If the Agency had been efficient, the credit 
was partly due to its ability to respond promptly 
to emerging new situations which required specific 
action. The existing organizational structure and 
comprehensive programme of the Agency, combined 
with the competence of its technical and 
scientific staff, had made it possible to bring 
together in so-called "project teams" staff 
members from a variety of Secretariat units, in 
order to deal with a specific problem. Cases in 
point included the market survey study, the 
regional nuclear fuel cycle centre study and the 
nuclear safety standards project. That "project 
approach" could be more widely used in the future. 
62. Lastly, the question that had to be asked 
was whether the trends in the Agency's activities, 
as outlined in the programme for 1977-82 now 
before the General Conference, were properly 
responsive to the role which the Agency was 
expected to play. Only the General Conference 
could furnish the answer. 
7 



GC(XX)/OR. 184 

ADDRESS OF WELCOME BY THE VICEPRESIDENT 
OF THE FEDERATIVE RE PUBLIC OF BRAZIL 

6 3. Mr. PEREIRA DOS SANTOS (Vice-
President of the Federative Republic of Brazil) 
said that it was a great pleasure for Brazil to 
welcome the President of the General Conference 
and the delegates attending the twentieth regular 
session, on what was the third occasion on which 
the General Conference had met outside Vienna. 
64. The Agency had enjoyed the support of 
Brazil from the moment of its inception, and 
from the very beginning his country had been a 
Member. Indeed, it was to a Brazilian, 
Mr. Joao Carlos Muniz, that the honour had 
fallen of presiding over the Conference convened 
in 1956 to draw up the Agency's Statute. In more 
specific terms, Brazil was helping the Agency in 
its work through the efforts made by its representatives 
and through its financial contributions 
to various programmes. 
65. It was Brazil's firm conviction that the 
international organizations were best placed to 
speed the process of development, by mobilizing 
resources and ensuring their equitable distribution. 
The Agency, in particular, had made great 
efforts toward fulfilling the hopes placed in it by 
the developing countries and already positive 
results were being obtained by its technical 
assistance programme. Given the present world 
shortage of conventional types of energy and the 
fact that an ever-increasing number of countries 
were turning to nuclear energy as a source of 
.power, 
at any rate while awaiting the discovery 
of new sources of energy, the Agency's role was 
taking on added importance. 

66. As to his own country, Brazil had only 
recently taken up its nuclear option but already 
had some success to record. In the research 
field, several research reactors were available 
and had been used for the training of Brazil's 
first teams of nuclear physicists and engineers, 
while other centres were engaged in work involving 
the medical and agricultural applications of 
nuclear energy. The Brazilian Government had 
now decided that nuclear power would best meet 
the country's growing energy requirements and 
the first power reactor in Brazil was due to be 
commissioned in 1978. 
67. An industrial infrastructure was needed if 
the nuclear programme was to be carried through 
to success, and Brazil was bending its efforts to 
providing that infrastructure, with the object, on 
the one hand, of speeding up implementation of 
the programme and, on the other, of intensifying 
national participation therein. In that connection 
Brazil was benefiting from co-operation with the 
Federal Republic of Germany, under an agreement 
signed in 1975 and supplemented very 
recently by commercial and financial contracts 
between undertakings in the two countries. The 
conclusion of a trilateral safeguards agreement 
between Brazil, the Federal Republic of Germany 
and the Agency had followed. 
68. As would be seen, Brazil's programme was 
broad in scope and, for its successful completion, 
would require a maximum of manpower and 
material of national origin since that, alone, 
would lead to autonomy in that high priority 
sector of the national development process. Thus, 
Brazil had chosen an arduous path but, counting 
on its human reserves, it could look forward to 
the future with confidence. Happily, the harvest 
of the efforts expended was already being reaped, 
and he hoped that Brazil's example would prove 
an encouragement to other countries. 

69. In conclusion, he conveyed to the Conference 
the Brazilian President's sincere hopes for its 
success and his good wishes to all the participants 
for a pleasant stay in Brazil. 
STATEMENT BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED 
NATIONS 

70. Mr. HYVARINEN (Representative of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations) recalled 
to the General Conference the great interest taken 
by the United Nations in the Agency and the evergrowing 
co-operation existing between the two 
organizations. 
71. At its twentieth session the Conference 
would undoubtedly focus its attention on the 
Agency's main objectives in the light of the 
present state of world affairs. As a result of 
the scientific and technological advances that had 
been made, the world had entered the nuclear era 
and nuclear power had become a reality. In that 
situation, there was need to maintain a balance 
between the development of research, production 
and utilization of nuclear energy as against a 
proper concern for safety and environmental 
protection. Moreover, the destructive potentialities 
of nuclear energy in the form of armaments 
or of ill-understood or ill-utilized techniques 
constituted a factor which could not be ignored. 
The Agency was therefore rightly devoting 
special attention to the question of nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes. 
72. The Review Conference of the Parties to 
NPT had endorsed application of effective and 
standardized safeguards by the Agency, regulation 
of exports, improvement of methods, techniques 
and instrumentation, and measures for the 
physical protection of nuclear material. The 
Agency's work in safeguards to be applied under 
agreements concluded inside or outside NPT and 
in ensuring the physical security of the evergrowing 
amounts of fissile material in the world 
could not be valued too highly. 
73. At the end of the second decade of its 
existence the Agency had an impressive record 
of achievement, as had been noted with appreciation 
in many General Assembly resolutions. 
He would like at that juncture to pay a tribute to 
Mr. Sigvard Eklund for his praiseworthy endeavours 
in guiding the work of the Agency. In 
conclusion, he proffered his warm wishes for the 
success of the General Conference. 
• The meeting rose at 5. 45 p.m. 
-8 



GC(XX)/OR.185 

International Atomic Energy Agency 21 March 1977* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 21-28 SEPTEMBER 1976 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Conference Centre, Hotel Nacional-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, 
on Wednesday, 22 September 1976, at 10.40 a.m. 

President: Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) 

Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

1 Election of officers and appointment of 1 
the General Committee (continued) 
7 General debate and report for 1975 2-13 4 
Statements by the delegates of: 

2 -27 


United States of America 

28 -46 


Canada 

47 -63 


United Kingdom 

64 -79 


Federal Republic of Germany 

80-99 


Italy 

100-120 


France 

121 -134 


Spain 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 14 October 1976. 
** GC(XX)/562 and Add. 1. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XX)/INF/163/Rev. 3. 
77-0197 


GC(XX)/OR. 185 

THE RECORD 

ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT 
OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (continued) [1] 

1. The PRESIDENT said he understood there 
had been further informal consultations during 
the course of the morning about the composition 
of the General Committee, but that a solution 
acceptable to all parties had not yet been achieved. 
More time would therefore be needed for consultations 
before the Conference could revert to 
the question of establishing the General Committee. 
That being so, he would ask the Conference to 
proceed, as he had suggested earlier, with the 
general debate. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1975 
(GC(XX)/565) 


2. Mr. SEAMANS (United States of America) 
started by reading out the following message from 
the President of the United States of America: 
(a) "Warmest greetings to all participants 
in the twentieth regular session of the 
General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. The United States 
appreciates the generous efforts of its 
southern neighbour, Brazil, in hosting this 
important meeting. 
(b) "The Agency has demonstrated 
repeatedly that nations gain more from 
co-operation in facing the challenges of 
nuclear energy than from isolation. Both 
industrialized and less developed nations 
have benefited from the many opportunities 
which the Agency has provided for working 
together. The United States intends to 
expand its own participation in Agency 
activities, which are of importance to all 
Members. 
(c) "The United States continues to look 
to the Agency for leadership in assuring 
the world that co-operation in peaceful 
uses of atomic energy will not contribute 
to the spread of nuclear explosives capability 
or to any military purpose of any 
State. I have requested and the Congress 
has authorized increased United States 
contributions in support of Agency safeguards; 
we urge other nations to make 
additional support available. The Agency 
needs the collective support of all its 
Members, in principle and in practice, in 
carrying out its safeguards mission, which 
is of vital importance to the peace of the 
world. 
(d) "The problem of strengthening our 
joint efforts to abate the spread of nuclear 
weapons is a continuing one, and I have 
[1] GC(XX)/184, paras 1-23. 
appointed a special task force to review 

United States policies and make appropriate 

recommendations to me concerning desir


able new directions. While the study is 

still under way, I anticipate that one of the 

major outcomes of our examination will be 

an enhanced United States commitment to 

the Agency and its programmes. 

(e) "The people of the United States 
extend their best wishes for continuing 
success in all future undertakings of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency. " 
3. He went on to express his own thanks to the 
Government of Brazil for its hospitality. 
4. As the Agency neared the end of its second 
decade of service to the cause of world peace, all 
Members could take satisfaction in its many 
notable accomplishments, some of them unique in 
international affairs. Its Members had achieved 
a remarkable degree of harmony, which had permitted 
the Board to act in most cases by consensus. 
The founders of the Agency had displayed 
great foresight in providing sufficient autonomy 
for the Agency to be effective while maintaining 
its special relationship with the United Nations. 
The Agency's Statute established a sound balance 
of interests in the Agency's governing bodies, 
which had enabled the Agency to operate with 
remarkable success. 
5. By attracting highly qualified personnel and 
frequently rotating most of its staff, the Agency had 
facilitated the introduction of fresh ideas and new 
techniques. It had thus kept abreast of its 
Members' advances in nuclear science and technology 
and was well prepared to help all nations 
share in the benefits of the peaceful atom, 
6. The Agency had developed universally 
recognized regulations for the safe transport of 
radioactive materials, established the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS) to keep the 
world abreast of advances in nuclear science and 
technology, developed computer codes and programs 
which had become powerful tools for 
assisting Member States in their energy planning, 
promulgated basic safety standards for radiation 
protection, recommended codes of practice and 
safety guides for the use of Member States in 
their nuclear programmes, provided invaluable 
technical assistance to developing Member States 
in such fields as agriculture, medicine and 
industry, put into operation an internationally 
accepted nuclear non-proliferation safeguards 
system and developed guidelines for the physical 
protection of nuclear materials and facilities. 
7. Major tasks still confronted the Agency, 
which his country was prepared to support 
vigorously. They included the provision of assistance 
to Members in taking decisions and drawing 
up plans in connection with nuclear power, seeking 
solutions to the problem of radioactive waste 
disposal, training technicians to operate nuclear 
power installations, expanding technical assistance 
in areas in which Member States had shown 
-2 



GC(XX)/OR. 185 


special interest, encouraging energy conservation, 
strengthening the international safeguards system 
in the light of its growing responsibilities and 
helping Member States to ensure the physical 
protection of nuclear materials and facilities. 

8. With increasing reliance on nuclear energy 
for electric power, the world had become sufficiently 
experienced to conclude that nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, particularly for the 
production of electric power, could help many 
nations to meet the continuing needs and the rising 
expectations of their peoples. In that connection, 
the Agency could play a central role is assisting 
its Members to reduce their dependence on costly 
and diminishing conventional energy sources in a 
balanced and rational manner. 
9. Countries making or debating the transition 
to nuclear power were considering a variety of 
methods to assure themselves adequate supplies 
of nuclear fuel in the future. The United States 
was taking steps to increase its enrichment 
capability so as to make enriched uranium available 
to all nations. 
10. The recycling of recovered plutonium and 
uranium could alleviate some of the growing 
pressure on world-wide uranium resources and 
enrichment services. However, it had become 
increasingly apparent that the economic implications 
were uncertain and, more importantly, 
that the separation of plutonium could increase the 
risk of diversion to nuclear weapons programmes 
and of terrorist activities. That was why his 
country was so strongly committed to finding safe 
alternatives to national fuel cycle capabilities. 
11. Accordingly, among the questions being 
examined in the United States was that of how the 
management of spent reactor fuel might be carried 
out internationally, so as to minimize the inherent 
risks and to maximize the potential benefits. It 
was important that nations which forswore national 
reprocessing in the interest of non-proliferation 
be accorded viable alternatives for the disposal 
of their spent fuel. In studies currently under 
way in the United States, a range of options was 
-being considered, with a view to achieving two 
closely related goals: prevention of the destructive 
uses of nuclear materials and the assurance that 
the legitimate need of all States for reliable and 
adequate sources of nuclear fuel would be fully 
met in the future. His country intended to discuss 
further, with the Director General and Members of 
the Agency, the results of those studies and possible 
joint action to achieve those goals. 

12. The Agency was already doing valuable work 
on the possibilities of international fuel cycle 
management. In particular, he welcomed the 
study of plutonium management and the examination 
of the potential advantages of regional nuclear 
fuel cycle centres. 
13. The Agency could provide important services 
to Member States by developing site criteria for 
radioactive waste disposal, and increased Agency 
attention to that aspect of waste management was 
highly desirable. 

14. Three decades of experience indicated that 
radioactive wastes could be handled, transported 
and disposed of in a safe manner. The Energy 
Research and Development Administration (ERDA) 
had issued a report explaining the alternative 
methods available. Radioactive wastes need not 
be a burden to anyone: they could be converted to 
stable, dry solids for indefinite storage in suitable 
sites underground. However, it was essential 
that interested nations intensify their efforts to 
establish sound handling methods. The Agency 
should play a central role in planning for radioactive 
waste disposal, including the possible 
establishement of international storage sites. 
15. Until technologies had been developed 
which could convert essentially enexhaustible 
energy into useful forms, and until those technologies 
had spread throughout the world, the 
United States and other advanced nations had a 
responsibility to economize with energy through 
conservation practices and by the development of 
more efficient energy systems. Top priority had 
been assigned in the United States to the development 
of conservation technologies, for both the 
short and the long term, which would be shared 
with the rest of the world as they became available. 
The Agency should incorporate energy 
conservation information in its planning and its 
assistance to Member States, 
16. The Agency had every reason to be proud 
of the widespread acceptance of its increasingly 
comprehensive system of international safeguards, 
which were now being applied in more than 
60 countries. It was important to continue striving 
for their universal acceptance, 
17. As indicated in President Ford's message, 
the United States would be making increased contributions 
to the Agency's safeguards programme 
in support of activities in such areas as training, 
the improvement of information systems, the 
development of new techniques and instrumentation, 
and the refinement of safeguards concepts 
and criteria, 
18. All could benefit from expanding trade in 
power reactors and reactor fuel if there continued 
to be an assurance that materials and 
technology would not be diverted for nuclear 
explosive devices; indeed, such an assurance was 
of fundamental importance in enabling the nations 
of the world to derive full benefit from nuclear 
energy. A key element in that assurance would 
be the effectiveness of the safeguards administered 
by the Agency. 
19. The Agency's authority to conduct safeguards 
inspections in Member States was 
unprecedented in the history of international 
relations and held great promise for the future 
peace of mankind. He therefore urged that 
Member States support moves to strengthen it. 
20. The United States also sought the cooperation 
of all countries in achieving increased 
-3 



GC(XX)/OR. 185 

physical security of nuclear materials and 
facilities world-wide on a bilateral basis and with 
Agency assistance. There was an international 
obligation to achieve increased physical security 
since the theft of nuclear materials or the sabotage 
of a nuclear facility in one country could have 
serious implications for others. 

21. He renewed his country's offer - made at the 
eighteenth regular session of the General Conference 
- to share its research and development 
information on physical security [2] and expanded 
the offer to include collaboration in projects. 
22. His country also wished to discuss, bilaterally 
and multilaterally, measures for strengthening 
both contingency planning for nuclear emergencies 
and the capability to deal with them. 
Countries facing emergencies needed to be able 
to share information, evaluate threats and coordinate 
action; swift and sure communications 
between national nuclear authorities were 
essential to such co-operation. 
23. The Agency had a key role to play in helping 
its Members to increase the world's total energy 
supply. In that context it would have to remain 
alert to non-nuclear research and development 
programmes and energy alternatives., avoiding 
the promotion of nuclear energy alone in situations 
where other options might also merit 
serious consideration. It should be in a position 
to assist its Members - whose needs would vary in 
balanced planning. 
24. His Government, which had assigned high 
priority to inaugurating a new era of abundant 
energy in the United States, recognized that 
increasing international competition for 
decreasing supplies of energy could take the 
world down a dangerous path. It therefore 
remained dedicated to helping other nations to 
establish and increase their own energy supplies. 
25. Certain actions by the United States 
deserved, in his opinion, to be highlighted: 
The United States had increased its cash 
and in-kind contributions for the 1976 
technical assistance programme by 
$ 1 million, to a total of $3. 5 million; 

The United States would contribute an 
additional $1 million annually, commencing 
in the current year, for such 
Agency safeguards activities as training, 
the improvement of information processing, 
and the development of new 
techniques and instrumentation; 

His Government would continue to make 
available to the Agency and to Member 
States specialized technical information 
and the services of experts in the field of 
safeguards application; 

[2] GC(XVIII)/OR. 169, para. 25. 
His Government would make available its 
technology for and expertise in the physical 
protection of nuclear materials; 

His Government offered continuing strong 

support for Agency training and advisory 

activities related to the safety and relia


bility of nuclear power plants; and 

The United States would in 1977 again 

donate special nuclear materials worth up 

to $50 000, preference being gives to States 

which were party to the Treaty on the Non-

Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[3]. 

26. He had noted with pleasure the past contributions 
of other Member States to the Agency and 
urged those countries not only to continue their 
support but to make additional contributions as the 
scope and importance of the Agency's activities 
increased. 
27. The Agency could be proud of its role in 
bringing the benefits of the atom to many millions 
of people, but further progress depended very 
much on the continued willingness of Member 
States to work together within the Agency. The 
remarkable harmony among Member States in the 
past demonstrated that the best results were 
achieved when political issues were left to the 
international bodies designed to handle them. 
The continued effectiveness of the Agency and the 
support and confidence of its Members might well 
depend on its determination to prevent the 
intrusion of extraneous political issues. 
28. Mr. BEESLEY (Canada) thanked the 
Brazilian authorities for their hospitality in 
hosting the Agency1 s twentieth General Conference. 
29. He welcomed the application for membership 
of the Agency by Nicaragua, whose admission 
would further the principle of universality of 
membership in the Agency. 
30. He paid tribute to the work of the Director 
General who had displayed vigour, ability and 
good judgement in meeting the challenges of his 
office in the last twelve months. He pledged 
Canada's full support to him as he led the Agency 
in its complex and often difficult duties. 
31. As in previous years, he wished to take the 
opportunity to touch on some of the key issues 
raised by the Director General in his statement. 
First, some general observations. The more than 
fourfold increase in the price of fossil fuels in the 
last'few years and the increasing urgency of 
finding alternatives continued to provide great 
impetus to the nuclear power generation programmes 
in both the industrialized and the developing 
nations of the world. 
32. Canada's own commitment to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, where it was the most 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-4 



GC(XX)/OR. 185 


appropriate alternative, remained undiminshed. 
It was tempered of course by the recognition of 
the special concerns inherent in nuclear technology, 
in particular the overriding need to 
ensure, firstly, that nuclear power was safe for 
the human environment and, secondly, that it 
contributed to stability in world affairs and not 
the reverse due to diversion of material for the 
production of nuclear weapons. 

33. Some of the factors which had to be considered 
in choosing the nuclear energy option, 
such as the need for economies of scale, applied 
to any energy decision involving massive capital 
outlays. The decision to adopt or expand the 
nuclear power alternative, however, involved 
additional consequences which required thorough 
analysis and planning. It was essential that 
decisions to embark upon or expand nuclear power 
programmes also took into account those additional 
issues. Nuclear programmes required secure 
sources of fuel, and more uranium - nowin 
short supply - would be necessary to satisfy 
increased demand. Skilled specialist technical 
personnel had to be trained to operate the plants, 
regulatory mechanisms had to be established to 
ensure their safety, and long-term waste 
management systems had to be devised to receive 
their by-products. 
34. In the analysis and the solution of those 
problems, Canada looked to the Agency for 
leadership. In his discussion of the Agency's 
future directions, the Director General had made 
special reference to the need for the Agency to 
take an active role in evaluating all energy alternatives. 
Canada fully supported the Director 
General's view that the Agency should have access 
to all available knowledge on non-nuclear convential 
and emerging alternative energy sources 
in its efforts to advise States in their decisionmaking 
process [4], His thoughts on additional 
competence for the Agency in those fields merited 
further detailed study. 
35. Canada had been gratified by the number and 
scope of the Agency's technical programmes 
dealing with power project planning which were of 
obvious benefit to those countries currently 
developing nuclear power programmes. 
36. He welcomed the attention given by the 
Agency in the past year to the areas of training 
of personnel and the provision of economic and 
advisory services to Member States, particularly 
developing countries. Total resources available 
for technical assistance continued to be considerably 
expanded and, as the annual report showed, 
there was a corresponding increase in largescale 
United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) projects undertaken by the Agency. It 
had become apparent that, as more nations made 
long-term commitments to nuclear power, the 
Agency would be called upon to provide the 
resources and training programmes needed to 
[4] GC(XX)/OR. 184, para. 32. 
ensure adequate and efficient management of 
their nuclear programmes. Canada fully 
supported the Agency's efforts in that direction 
and would continue to do so. He was pleased to 
be able to pledge that the Canadian Government 
would contribute to the General Fund at its 
assessed level again that year. 

37. Canada also welcomed the interest being 
shown by the Agency in the exploration, mining 
and development of uranium resources. 
Canada's expertise in uranium production could 
be of benefit to the Agency's programmes in that 
field. He hoped that the Agency would continue 
to work in close co-operation with other international 
agencies active in that field in order to 
maximize the effectiveness of its efforts. 
Canada had always sought to co-operate actively 
with the Agency in such programmes and would 
continue to do so. 
38. Canada was again pleased to note the 
Agency's intensified activity in the area of nuclear 
safety. The Agency would be required to send 
an increasing number of missions to Member 
States to advise on nuclear law, licensing, siting 
and other regulatory functions in the safety and 
environmental protection fields. It was happy to 
see that the draft codes and guides on reactor 
safety were progressing satisfactorily and hoped 
that in due course a comprehensive set of codes 
and guides with sufficient flexibility to be applied 
to all reactor systems would become available. 
It believed that internationally acceptable safety 
standards were imperative if national nuclear 
programmes were to be consistent with the 
developmental needs of a nation and grow within 
safe parameters. 
39. Canada was actively facing the problem of 
waste management. He wished to draw attention 
to Canada's continuing active participation in the 
meetings being held under the Convention on the 
Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of 
Wastes and Other Matter (the London 
Convention) [5], one of which was taking place 
that month. Canadian experts were also continuing 
to participate in the work of the Agency in 
that field. He stressed that Canada continued to 
believe in the long-term management of significant 
waste material rather than its disposal in 
the oceans. 
40. Canada actively supported the continuing 
Agency study of regional fuel cycle centres to 
which the Director General had made reference 
[6], It was also most interested in the 
Director General's comments concerning the 
Agency's role as set out in Article XII. A. 5 of the 
Statute, relating to the management of excess 
plutonium stocks [7]. The dangers inherent in the 
[5] The text of the Convention is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/205. 
[6] GC(XX)/OR. 184, para. 36. 
[7] Ibid. , para. 37. 
5 



GC(XX)/OR. 185 

unrestricted and uncontrolled availability of such 
stocks were obvious; equally obvious on the other 
hand were the benefits to world energy supply and 
international security of well-managed and internationally 
controlled stocks available as needed 
by the world community. Clearly many questions 
remained to be resolved, but it was Canada's 
belief that work in that area should continue at 
full speed. Canada was impressed with the 
thoroughness of the experts' work under Agency 
auspices on the question of regional centres, 
would examine their report with great care and 
would wish to explore fully any future analysis 
of international plutonium management. 

41. His delegation agreed with the Director 
General's view that one of the challenges facing 
the Agency was the current debate in some 
countries, including Canada, on the environmental 
implications of nuclear power. Last 
year he had called for continued Agency participation 
in the examination of the comprehensive 
environmental impact not only of nuclear power 
but also of alternative energy sources [8] and he 
was happy to note that the Agency had been very 
active in that field. The study being performed 
in conjunction with the International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) would be 
extremely useful in that connection. Canada 
continued to favour open discussions of that vital 
element in public acceptance of nuclear power and 
fully supported the Director General's efforts in 
that direction. 
42. Another, perhaps even more profound problem 
was posed by the potential of nuclear power 
programmes to produce the materials for nuclear 
explosives. The fear that diversion of nuclear 
materials would contribute to international confrontations 
had been a critical element of the 
"nuclear debate" in many countries and, in some 
instances, was threatening the public acceptability 
of nuclear power programmes and international 
co-operation. A basic requirement, as the 
Director General had noted, was that the Agency's 
safeguards mandate and its resources should 
always be adequate to the task. Expansion of the 
safeguards ispectorate was therefore essential 
and Canada welcomed the forthcoming establishment 
of a second Division of Safeguards 
Operations. The concept of regional field offices 
was a good one and would contribute markedly to 
the efficiency of safeguards administration. His 
delegation agreed with the Director General that 
the work of the Standing Advisory Group on 
Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) was vital [9] 
and Canada was looking to that group to play an 
important role in advising the Director General 
on a wide range of issues. Canada was actively 
participating with the Agency in the further 
development of safeguards techniques and would 
continue to do so. It wished to congratulate the 
Director General for drawing attention to a 
shortcoming in the present international safe[
8] GC(XDC)/OR. 180, para. 78. 
[9] GC(XX)/OR. 184, para. 41. 
guards system whereby the scope of application 
of safeguards was limited in certain countries. 
It believed that the international community 
should review means open for Members of the 
Agency working together to move towards a 
comprehensive, universal and effective international 
safeguards structure. 

43. The Director General had made reference 
to the universality of NPT and the urgent need for 
those countries which had not done so, to reconsider 
their decision not to adhere to that 
Treaty [10], Canada wished to congratulate Japan 
on its crucial decision earlier that year to ratify 
NPT. The decision of the United Kingdom and the 
United States to implement their voluntary offer 
to accept Agency safeguards on their civil nuclear 
programme was an important step and Canada 
hoped that similar offers would be made by other 
nuclear-weapon States. 
44. He also wished to echo the Director 
General's call to nuclear-weapon States to cease 
nuclear-weapon tests [11]. The Treaty between 
the United States of America and the Soviet Union 
on Underground Explosions for Peaceful Purposes 
(the PNE Treaty), recently concluded, was a 
modest but encouraging step in that direction. 
Canada had long called for an end to all nuclearweapons 
testing. Much more determined efforts 
should be made by the nuclear-weapon States to 
overcome the obstacles to a comprehensive test 
ban. Canada continued to hope that achievement 
of such a treaty would not have to await the participation 
of all nuclear-weapon States. It hoped 
that the two super-Powers and as many other 
nuclear-weapon States as possible could enter 
into a formal interim agreement, open to all 
States and adequately verifiable, to halt their 
testing for a specific period. At the end of that 
period, the interim agreement could be reviewed 
to determine whether it could be continued or be 
replaced by an agreement to which all nuclearweapon 
States would adhere. 
45. Canada was participating fully in the 
Agency's intensified study of the technical, legal, 
safety and environmental aspects of the application 
of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
and of the possibilities of devising international 
arrangements for regulating such explosions in 
conformity with NPT and hoped that that work 
would bear fruit in the not too distant future. 
46. The task of promoting international collaboration 
between so many nations in such a complex 
field as nuclear energy was indeed a difficult one 
and of course political issues were bound to crop 
up. None the less, while one should not shrink 
away from those problems, one should not allow 
the good work of the past to be undone by becoming 
embroiled in non-nuclear issues that were 
divisive in nature and counter-productive in 
effect. International co-operation was indis[
10] Ibid., para. 44. 
[11] Ibid. , para. 45. 
6 


GC(XX)/OR. 185 


pensable in solving the problems associated with 
the application of the atom. In that regard, the 
Agency had been a most effective international 
mechanism; yet to remain effective, it had to have 
the same co-operation from its Member States 
that it had had since its inception. Anything less 
than total co-operation would jeopardize the 
Agency's role as an instrument of the international 
community. Member States should not lose sight 
of the purpose for which they had come together. 
Finally, he pledged once again Canada's full 
support for the Agency's activities and its programme 
in the future. 

47. Mr. ALLEN (United Kingdom) observed that 
1976 in some respects represented a coming of 
age for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It 
was just 21 years since the first Geneva International 
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy had led to a freer exchange of 
information and the start of international cooperation 
and it was 20 years since the first civil 
nuclear power station had been commissioned at 
Calder Hall in the United Kingdom. 
48. It was most appropriate that the twentieth 
regular session of the General Conference was 
being held in Brazil, at a time when that country 
was embarking on an ambitious nuclear power programme. 
None would dispute the great benefit 
that had been gained from nuclear power. But 
equally, none would dispute that it had carried 
with it, from the outset, two major problems the 
danger of proliferation of nuclear explosive 
devices, and potential dangers to health and the 
environment. 
49. The more important problem was that of 
proliferation. The United Kingdom Government 
continued to attach the greatest possible importance 
to NPT, regarding it as the best available 
means for preventing the spread of nuclear 
explosive devices. His Government warmly 
welcomed the recent ratification by Japan, and 
hoped that that example would soon be followed 
by those few Members of the Agency which had 
not yet acceded to the Treaty. 
50. While not sharing them, the United Kingdom 
respected the political objections of certain States 
to acceding to the Treaty. At the February 1976 
series of meetings of the Board of Governors, the 
United Kingdom had co-sponsored a resolution 
requesting the Secretariat to study the form of an 
agreement whereby States not party to NPT might 
put all their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
By accepting Agency safeguards on their 
full fuel cycle such countries could show their 
commitment to non-proliferation and to the international 
safeguards system without in any way 
prejudicing their views on the Treaty. His 
Government, therefore, jointed the Director 
General in urging States which did not wish to 
adhere to the Treaty to accept those full fuelcycle 
safeguards. 
51. To demonstrate its own steadfast commitment 
to NPT, the United Kingdom had, in 1967, 
made a voluntary offer to accept safeguards on 
its own civil nuclear programme. In June of the 
present year the Board of Governors had approved 
the trilateral UK/Agency/EURATOM agreement 
and it had been signed in Vienna on 6 September. 
On 17 September the Board had considered and 
approved the voluntary offer made by the United 
States. He hoped that both those initiatives would 
encourage other nuclear-weapon States to follow 
suit. 

52. The United Kingdom had offered full cooperation 
with the Agency's study on the concept 
of multinational fuel cycle centres, and the study 
would be extremely valuable as a guide to how the 
numerous practical problems involved might be 
tackled. It had also learnt with interest of the 
Secretariat's study of the possibility of establishing 
plutonium storage centres under Agency 
control; such centres could well remove some of 
the more important of the fears currently 
expressed about the dangers of plutonium, but, 
as with multinational fuel centres, there were 
bound to be practical difficulties. Another study 
in which the United Kingdom had taken a full part 
was that carried out by the Ad Hoc Advisory 
Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful 
Purposes. 

53. A further major Agency responsibility in 
the area of non-proliferation continued to rest 
with the Secretariat's Department of Safeguards 
and Inspection. He welcomed the efforts being 
made to strengthen its resources, and his 
Government would continue to offer all possible 
support to the safeguards activities which had been 
entrusted to the Agency. 
54. As regards the suggested separation of the 
Agency's regulatory functions from its promotional 
activities, his Government shared the view 
expressed by the Director General that at international 
level it was both desirable and more 
efficient to continue to combine both functions 
within the Agency [12], 
55. Apart from the Agency's activities in the 
field of non-proliferation, the obligation to search 
for a solution to the problems of non-proliferation 
also rested on national shoulders, including those 
of the United Kingdom as a supplier of and custpmer 
for nuclear material, equipment and 
technology. The framework of his Government's 
policy on nuclear exports was based upon the 
realization that those who could supply nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology had a duty to 
act responsibly and with caution. For that reason 
the United Kingdom would ensure that its nuclear 
exports (and items derived therefrom) were 
covered by Agency safeguards. It would also 
require assurances that anything exported would 
not be used to manufacture any nuclear explosive 
device, would be properly protected within the 
recipient country, and would not be transferred 
to a third country without the application of 
equally strict provisions. 

[12] Ibid., para. 55. 
7 



GC(XX)/OR.185 


56. The other main probLem that the world 
community faced was the environmental safety 
aspect of the growth of nuclear power. The 
problems of reprocessing and radioactive waste 
management were already the subject of important 
studies by the Agency and other organizations 
including the Nuclear Energy Agency of the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (NEA) and EURATOM. The amount 
of high activity waste arising from even a large 
nuclear programme would fortunately be 
relatively small. It would be possible to store it 
and from a safety and environmental standpoint 
there was good time - provided the necessary 
effort was made - to reach decisions on a sound 
and acceptable regime for long-term treatment. 
57. The United Kingdom envisaged that, in the 
new reprocessing plant being planned, combustible 
low-level solid waste would be incinerated, 
and plutonium, where present, would be recovered 
from the ash. Highly active wastes in the United 
Kingdom were at present stored in liquid form, 
and it would much improve the conditions of their 
containment and transport if they were converted 
into a solid and unleachable form. Development 
was therefore proceeding on a vitrification process 
on which work had been in progress for some 
time, and it was hoped to have an industrial-scale 
demonstration plant in operation by the mid-1980s. 
The perfecting of that process was important in 
the context of the recent Government approval 
given for British Nuclear Fuels Limited to accept 
further reprocessing business from overseas. 
58. In the United Kingdom, the past year had 
been a period of progress in implementation of 
the country's nuclear programme. In February 
1976 the first reactors of the Advanced 
Gas-cooled Reactor power stations at Hinkley 
Point and Hunterston had been synchronized with 
the national grid. Both reactors had since been 
brought up to the maximum output level planned 
for the first period of operation. They were now 
operating satisfactorily at 500 MW(e), and the 
commissioning of the second reactor at each 
station was proceeding. 
59. The prototype Fast Reactor at Dounreay 
in Scotland had been generating 150 MW(e) for 
some time past and would soon be stepped up to 
its designed power output of 250 MW(e). Good 
progress had been made on the reconstruction of 
the fast reactor fuel reprocessing plant, originally 
built to reprocess the enriched uranium fuel 
from the experimental fast reactor that had been 
operating at Dounreay since 1959. The reconstructed 
plant would handle the plutonium fuel 
from the new reactor. When the rebuilding had 
been completed the United Kingdom would not only 
have in full operation an industrial-sized fast 
reactor burning plutonium fuel, but would also be 
operating the whole fast reactor fuel cycle from 
manufacture, through reprocessing, to fabrication. 
60. The reference design for the Steam 
Generating Heavy Water Reactor had been completed 
during the summer of 1976 and the United. 
Kingdom Government, on the advice of the Atomic 
Energy Authority, was treating that as a suitable 
point for taking stock of the situation in the light 
of current, and much lower, forecasts of electricity 
demand, 

61. Government approval had been given for a 
very substantial programme of development of 
the reprocessing facilities of British Nuclear 
Fuels Limited, involving the extension, 
refurbishing or replacement of the existing 
Magnox reprocessing plant complex, the construction 
of a new oxide reprocessing complex, 
and the construction of additional research and 
development facilities. Also, British Nuclear 
Fuels Limited were now building a gas centrifuge 
uranium enrichment plant on a commercial scale 
and, in order to meet existing contractual 
commitments, joint British, Netherlands and 
Federal German capacity would be expanded 
gradually to 2000 tonnes of separative work by 
1982. Further substantial expansion was 
envisaged thereafter. Work had also started on 
a new major site at Cardiff in South Wales for the 
Radiochemical Centre Ltd. The new facilities 
would provide for a growth in sales volume which, 
on present expectations, should double in the 
following five years. 

62. His Government considered that the Director 
General was to be congratulated on the improved 
layout for the Agency's programme for 1977-82, 
believing that it struck broadly the right balance. 
It also strongly supported the Agency's technical 
assistance programme and pledged its full contribution 
for the coming year. An additional 
sum to be used by the Agency to provide fellowships 
for scientists from Member States party to 
NPT would continue to be provided. 
63. In conclusion, he wished to pay tribute to 
Dr. Eklund and the Secretariat on the way they 
had built up the Agency into an efficient international 
scientific and technical organization 
whose reputation stood unrivalled. The United 
Kingdom was confident that in the coming decades 
the international community could continue to 
rely on the Agency to provide an excellent service, 
and to maintain its responsibility for identifying 
salient problems and furnishing guidance towards 
finding the correct solutions. 
64. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany) said that the decision to hold the 
- 
twentieth regular session of the General 
Conference in Rio de Janeiro was particularly 
fortunate, for in Brazil one could see how a 
country of the Third World, based on an old 
civilization and traditions, was making dynamic 
use of modern technologies, including nuclear 
energy. 
65. The year past had seen further progress in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Those 
countries already engaged in the field had developed 
their capacities, even though interested in 
other new sources of energy too, and several 
countries had for the first time decided to introduce 
nuclear energy. An opportunity to take stock 

GC(XX)/OR. 185 


of the situation throughout the world would be 
given by the International Conference on Nuclear 
Power and Its Fuel Cycle to be held in Salzburg 
in May 1977 (the Salzburg Conference). 

66. In the Federal Republic of Germany, nuclear 
research and development, which had begun over 
20 years previously, was yielding practical 
results of increasing scope and importance. 
In 1976, the installed nuclear capacity would 
amount to more than 6000 MW(e), thus accounting 
for 12 to 15% of the country's power supply. 
Even if the growth rate of aggregate power producing 
capacity proved to be somewhat lower than 
originally planned, it was nevertheless expected 
that by the middle of the 1980s about 40% of 
electricity production would be of nuclear origin. 
67. The closing of the nuclear fuel cycle was 
taking on special importance in view of the 
increasing number of nuclear power stations. 
The supply of natural uranium was being secured 
through the joint efforts of industry and government, 
in particular by international co-operation 
in the prospecting and development of new 
deposits. The need for enrichment capacity was 
covered up to 1985, largely, and to an increasing 
extent, by facilities using the centrifuge technique 
developed jointly with the Netherlands and 
the United Kingdom. 
68. Detailed plans for an integrated nuclear 
fuel cycle centre had been drawn up. All the 
steps required after the unloading of fuel elements 
from the reactor, viz. reprocessing, waste 
treatment and storage, retrieval of re-usable 
fuels and their refabrication into fuel elements, 
would be carried out at a single site. Reprocessing 
was a task for industry, but responsibility 
for the final disposal of waste had been 
entrusted by Parliament to the Federal Government. 
At present a suitable site was being 
sought for the facility, which was to be built on 
top of a geological salt formation. 
69. The intensified use of nuclear energy in 
Germany could rely on a reactor technology 
which, in respect of both economics and safety, 
was highly developed. That was evident from 
several recent orders for the building of nuclear 
power stations in foreign countries. Work was' 
continuing on the development of new reactor 
systems, with substantial support from public 
funds. During the past year the ties of collaboration 
between the Federal Republic of Germany 
and other countries had been considerably 
strengthened. In the field of fast breeder reactors 
close partnership had already existed for many 
years with Belgium, Luxembourg and the 
Netherlands; now comprehensive co-operation, 
involving industry, had also been agreed upon 
with France. With ERDA in the United States 
there likewise existed an agreement to intensify 
the exchange of information on breeder development. 
Similar agreements with those two 
partners concerning high-temperature reactors 
had either been signed or were in preparation. 
His country was deliberately seeking such 
arrangements with other countries in order to 
lessen the risk involved in such major technological 
developments, to reduce Government 
expenditure, and to accelerate the introduction 
of the new technologies. 

70. Work on nuclear ship propulsion was continuing. 
The N. S. Otto Hahn, the sole nuclear 
merchant vessel at present in operation, had 
cruised 460 000 miles over a period of more 
than eight years and had called at 29 ports. The 
ship was docked in Rio de Janeiro and could be 
visited by the delegates to the General 
Conference. 
71. The plans for a nuclear fuel cycle centre, 
as well as the construction of nuclear power 
stations, had given rise to heated public discussion 
in the Federal Republic. His Government 
had agreed to answer publicly the sometimes 
very critical questions from the population 
because it considered the demand for an airing 
of the benefits and hazards of the new energy 
source to be legitimate. Accordingly, a large 
variety of detailed information on the subject of 
nuclear energy had been provided. A readily 
understandable pocket-book had been distributed 
in 250 000 copies, informatory meetings attended 
by many thousands of people had been held, and 
comprehensive scientific and technical documentation 
on all issues related to nuclear energy had 
been compiled. It appeared now that the first 
phase of the dialogue had in fact contributed to a 
more objective approach, and it also seemed that 
nuclear energy had far more supporters than 
opponents. In Parliament, all political parties 
were in favour of nuclear energy. 
72. The increased utilization of nuclear energy 
in many countries had of late led to an intensification 
of the international debate on the need to 
prevent the misuse of nuclear energy. Numerous 
problems of implementing and supplementing 
NPT were being discussed with great urgency, 
not only by Governments but also by the public. 
Indeed, one could well regard that complex of 
problems as one of the most important political 
topics, since peace and the lives of many people 
were at stake. Therefore, the Government of 
the Federal Republic of Germany was pursuing an 
active non-proliferation policy, prompted on the 
one hand by its desire to contribute to the safeguarding 
of peace, and on the other hand by its 
special responsibility as a supplier of nuclear 
technology. 
73. NPT- constituted the most important tool of 
any non-proliferation policy, and his Government 
noted with satisfaction that the parties to the 
Treaty now numbered one hundred. For the 
Federal Republic of Germany it would be a welcome 
development if those still standing aside 
acceded to the Treaty, the more so as most of 
them already supported the principle of nonproliferation. 
The nuclear-weapon States bore, 
in his Government's view, a particular responsibility 
for the future of non-proliferation policy. 
The commitments resulting from NPT were often 
criticized for a lack of balance, but that could be 
mitigated if all nuclear-weapon States were to 
-9 



GC(XX)/OR.185 

follow the example of the United Kingdom and the 
United States and submit their non-military 
nuclear energy activities to [AEA safeguards. 
The inherent inequality between nuclear-weapon 
States and non-nuclear-weapon States would in 
that way be largely eliminated from the technical 
and industrial sectors. The Review 
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT 
Review Conference) [13] had rightly demanded that 
common requirements be established for the 
export of nuclear material and equipment in 
order to avoid a distortion of competition on 
political grounds. His Government had adopted 
appropriate regulations which it applied in the 
interests of an effective non-proliferation policy. 

74. In February 1976, the Agency's Board of 
Governors had approved the trilateral safeguards 
agreement between Brazil, the Federal Republic 
of Germany and the Agency. The agreement laid 
down strict mutual obligations with regard to the 
exclusively peaceful uses of the nuclear material 
supplied and manufactured, of equipment and, 
in addition, of technological information. Every 
nuclear facility and all equipment of essentially 
the same kind developed or operated within a 
period of twenty years was likewise subject to 
safeguards. By that rule, as well as by provisions 
on the physical protection of nuclear 
material and on re-exportation procedures, gaps 
in the non-proliferation system were closed. 
75. His country's experience indicated that 
there were two topics which deserved special 
attention. One was the physical protection of 
nuclear material and nuclear facilities, in 
particular against diversion and sabotage, a 
matter which could not be handled by each 
individual State on its own. Some international 
instrument embracing as many countries as 
possible seemed to be indispensable. The legal 
form to be chosen for that purpose - a formal 
international convention or a more flexible 
procedure - was a question that would have to 
be examined more thoroughly. The recommendations 
elaborated by the Agency in 1975 might 
serve as a good basis. He accordingly suggested 
that the Agency should soon take the initiative for 
further discusssions on that subject. 
76. Probably of even greater importance was 
a solution to the problem of reprocessing 
irradiated fuels. On grounds of economy and 
safety it would not be possible to store the 
material leaving a reactor in huge amounts, and 
for an unlimited period, in the receiving country. 
Transport of the irradiated material back to the 
country of origin would not provide a generally 
practicable solution either because of the 
additional risk entailed in transport - not to 
mention the unacceptable distortions of competitive 
position that might create for the 
supplying countries owing to their different 
geographical situations. Studies were under way 
[13] Held at Geneva in May 1975. 
to ascertain how reprocessing facilities could be 
set up most effectively and economically in the 
proximity of nuclear power stations - at regional 
level or with an even wider participation, 
including the suppliers - and what rules should 
govern the storage and use of the plutonium 
produced, but they were still at an early stage. 
They should, however, be pursued as vigorously 
as possible. 

77. In the opinion of the Government of the 
Federal Republic the treatment of those problems 
would be one of the most important of the Agency's 
future tasks. If the Agency did not succeed in 
dissipating doubts as to the efficacy of the safeguards 
already entrusted to it, and if the Agency 
were not capable of taking the lead in the elaboration 
of additional and supplementary concepts, 
then the universality and homogeneity of the safeguards 
system might be in danger, and a 
reversion to bilateralism might be the consequence. 
Discussing the vital questions within 
the Agency would also offer the decisive 
advantage that all Member States could participate 
in elaborating solutions. His Government 
believed firmly that solutions could be found only 
within the framework of a comprehensive policy 
which gave equal attention to the principle of nonproliferation 
and to the necessity of allowing the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy to develop 
unhampered in all countries. It wished to 
promote co-operation on the basis of mutual 
trust between all interested parties, a type of 
co-operation which would have to put both 
supplier and recipient countries on an equal 
footing. 
78. The fact that there was too little time in the 
general debate to discuss other topics in detail 
did not mean that the Federal Republic was less 
interested in them. In the Committee of the 
Whole his delegation would present its comments 
on the draft programme and budget. However, he 
would emphasize that the Federal Republic of 
Germany welcomed the Agency's efforts to 
promote the utilization of nuclear energy in the 
developing countries. The Federal Republic 
would be increasing its contribution to the General 
Fund for 1977 to US $440 000 and, in addition, 
would make available voluntary contributions 
worth more than $1 million for joint programmes 
as well as for experts, fellowships, scientific 
conferences and training courses. 
79. In that way, the Federal Republic would, 
among other things, be expressing its confidence 
in the work of the Agency and in the able management 
of Dr. Eklund, the Director General. It 
would continue to work for the success of the 
Agency. 
80. Mr. CLEMENTEL (Italy) said that the 
present regular session of the General Conference 
was a milestone in the life of the international 
community marking, as it did, the twentieth 
anniversary of the Agency's activities. The 
accomplishments of the last twenty years clearly 
demonstrated the great need for international 
collaboration in tackling the difficulties with which 
- 10 



GC(XX)/OR. 185 


modern society was confronted, and the role of 
the Agency had been a decisive factor, not only in 
developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
but also in the strengthening of international 
collaboration. 

81. The fact that atomic energy was now recognized 
everywhere as an indispensable element in 
man's development was due in great part to the 
competence with which the Agency's work had 
been performed. 
82. It was true, of course, that the development 
of nuclear energy created some delicate problems, 
owing to the constant diffusion of potentially 
dangerous materials, but over the past years the 
Agency had proved its ability to overcome those 
difficulties and he felt certain that the unjustifiable 
fears which might interfere with the further 
development of nuclear technology could be 
allayed. In that connection he wanted to repeat 
that his country was ready to co-operate in controlling 
and preventing any kind of proliferation 
and also in promoting the general policy of 
detente. In such a context his Government was 
hoping to see further reinforcement of NPT 
through new accessions. 
83. Referring to the Agency's activities, he 
said his country was in favour of: 
(a) Continuous improvement of the safeguards 
system, which should be of interest 
not only to countries party to NPT but also, 
and in particular, to non-parties; 
(b) Intensification of the activities of the 
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear 
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes; 
(c) Maximum promotion of the exchange of 
nuclear materials, equipment and technology 
for peaceful uses in the framework 
of Article IV of NPT, as called for by the 
Italian delegation to the NPT Review 
Conference; 
(d) Strengthening of international 
co-operation for the improvement of 
physical protection measures based on 
common guidelines but capable of adaptation 
to meet the specific objectives of each 
country and taking into account the need to 
prevent commercial discrimination. 
84. In regard to the more technical and 
scientific aspects of the Agency's activities, he 
wanted to express his Government's satisfaction 
with the accomplishments of previous years and 
with the programme for 1977-1982. It was, 
however, concerned with the increasing financial 
burdens and considered that every effort should 
be made to keep expenditure within reasonable 
limits without detracting from efficiency. 
85. Current activities deserving particular 
mention were those whose purpose was to assist 
Member States contemplating nuclear national 
programmes, by financing special projects, or 
by advising on the construction and operation of 
nuclear plants, or by facilitating the application 
of nuclear techniques. 


86. In regard to the Agency's future programme 
he wanted to pledge his Government's full 
support, especially for activities related to the 
management of radioactive waste, the evaluation 
of uranium resources, advanced reactor technology, 
and agricultural and medical research. 
Studies foreseen in physics were also viewed with 
favour by the Italian groups concerned. Activities 
in the latter two fields would be conducted mainly 
at the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste and his country would try to 
ensure the best possible conditions for the 
Centre's operation. 
87. In the field of safeguards his Government 
was somewhat bewildered by the excessive 
dividing of competences and the creation of new 
units. It also considered that more attention 
should be paid to the study of techniques and 
equipment for facilitating the task of nuclear 
plant utilities. A safeguards system that was too 
burdensome could, in the long run, restrain 
developments in the production of electricity. 
He believed, also, that greater authority should 
be entrusted to SAGSI, which had the best 
knowledge of the problems involved. 
88. Italy wanted to collaborate fully with the 
Agency and would host a number of meetings 
during the coming years; in addition, as in the 
past, the Italian Nuclear Energy Commission 
(CNEN) would supply all possible assistance 
required and would place at the Agency's disposal 
25 fellowships for students from developing 
countries. By an agreement concluded last year 
with the Trieste Centre, the National Nuclear 
Physics Institute offered to scientists having 
completed courses at the Centre the possibility of 
further training in its own laboratories. 
89. Of the nuclear activities carried out in Italy 
during the year elapsed, particular mention should 
be made of the first steps taken towards the 
implementation of the Italian Energy Plan. 
Approved in December 1975 by the Interministerial 
Committee on Economic Planning 
(CIPE), the Energy Plan indicated that nuclear 
energy offered a concrete possibility for gradually 
replacing imported oil in the production of 
electric power. The use of nuclear energy would 
give greater flexibility in the energy system and 
improve the balance of payments. 
90. In implementing the Energy Plan, the 
Ministry for Trade and Industry had instructed 
the National Electricity Board (ENEL.) to initiate 
the preparatory work for the construction of 
eight new nuclear power stations, each of which 
would employ PWR and BWR 1000-MW(e) reactor 
units. Those installations would supplement the 
four nuclear plants ordered in 1974, and the 
Caorso plant - a BWR reactor of 850 MW(e) 
nearing completion. 
11 


GC(XX)/OK. 185 


91. An ad hoc law, adopted in August 1975, 
laid down procedures for the siting of nuclear 
power plants; each Italian Region (Territorial 
Administration) proposed two areas for each 
nuclear plant, assisted technically by CNEN, the 
control body. ENEL studied the potential sites 
within those areas, and the definitive site was 
then chosen by the Region on the basis of the 
ENEL studies and CNEN advice. The control 
body also had the task of preparing a national 
map of potential sites in collaboration with the 
Regions and the National Electricity Board. 
92. Eight additional nuclear plants would 
probably be ordered by 1 977, giving a total 
installed capacity of over 21 000 MW(e) in 1985, 
by which time nuclear power could constitute 40% 
of the total production, a figure which would very 
likely reach 60-70% in 1990. The Italian Energy 
Plan also provided for a number of other 
initiatives, some of which were related to the 
fuel cycle and to the CNEN programmes. In 
regard to the fuel cycle, the constitution of the 
following joint companies was foreseen: 
ENI-ENEL, responsible for the supply of 
natural uranium; 

ENI-ENEL-CNEN,, responsible for all other 
phases of the fuel cycle, in particular for 
reprocessing activities and the supply of 
fuel elements for reloading; 

ENI-CNEN, responsible for work related 

to research and development for uranium 

enrichment, design and fabrication of fuel 

elements and reprocessing of irradiated 

fuel. 

93. Finally, the Energy Plan had stressed that 
the CNEN programmes should follow the lines of 
activity already laid down in the 1974-78 Five-
Year Plan. During 1976 CNEN had established 
links in the field of proven reactors with industrial 
operators and with ENEL. Other important 
activities were the development of the ESSOR 
reactor and the elaboration of a pluriannual 
experimental programme in connection with core 
and fuel safety. 
94. A contract for the construction of a 
40-MW(e) prototype heavy-water reactor had been 
given by CNEN and ENEL to the NIRA industrial 
group and according to the latest estimates the 
reactor should be ready for operation by 1981. 
95. All activities in the field of fast reactors 
were performed within the framework of an 
agreement between CNEN and the French 
Commissariat a l'energie atomique in two 
directions: construction of the PEC experimental 
reactor and work on the development of fast 
reactors. 
96. The planning of the PEC reactor had 
recently been thoroughly surveyed by the NIRA 
group, which had been entrusted with the construction 
of the plant, and it appeared that the 
reactor should become critical during the second 
half of 1979. Joint French-Italian experimental 
activities aimed at the development of fuels for 
fast reactors were expected to start in 1980. 

97. The fast-reactor development work had 
been carried out in preparation for the joint construction 
with France and the Federal Republic of 
Germany of the first 1200-MW(e) plant and for 
subsequent commercialization of fast reactors. 
In the fuel-cycle sector the work on uranium 
enrichment had been carried out with participation 
of the national industry in the construction of the 
EURODIF plant, while in fuel fabrication, 
negotiations had been undertaken between CNEN 
and AGIP Nucleare to achieve the co-ordinated 
action outlined in the Energy Plan. On the 
operational level, the necessary steps had been 
taken to ensure a supply of fuel for the CIRENE 
and PEC reactors. 
98. Finally, in the reprocessing field, the 
possibility of collaboration between CNEN and the 
industries concerned had been investigated, with 
a view to achieving commercial dimensions. In 
that field, the present operating experience of 
CNEN's two reprocessing plants, EUREX and 
ITREC, could offer a valid starting point for 
future atuonomous developments on an industrial 
level. 
99. Within the framework of the EUREX programme, 
an agreement had been drawn up between 
CNEN and the AECL for the treatment of 72 fuel 
elements irradiated in the Canadian CANDU-type 
reactor. That reprocessing campaign was 
intended to prove on an industrial pilot scale the 
technical feasibility of the simplified reprocessing 
system, drawn up jointly by CNEN and AECL, for 
CANDU-type fuels. 
100. Mr. GIRAUD (France) said that the 
hospitality of the Brazilian Government in 
inviting the Conference to Rio de Janeiro presented 
an excellent opportunity for the participants 
to acquaint themselves with the achievements 
of modern Brazil. It was not, incidentally, 
the first time that the representatives of countries 
interested in atomic energy had met on the 
American continent, for exactly twenty years 
previously the Conference on the Statute of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency had opened 
in New York, 
101. Atomic energy at that time had really 
been in its infancy, the number of operating 
power stations could easily be counted on the 
fingers of one hand, and the first contracts for 
the export of research reactors had only just been 
concluded. What a change had occurred since 
theni 
102. The 'sixties had seen the development and 
perfecting of thermal reactors, normally 
employing enriched uranium as fuel and light, 
water as moderator, while fast-breeder reactors 
were still at a point between the research and 
development phase and the pre-industrial stage. 
The first fast-breeder prototypes had gone into 
service in the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom 
- 12 

GC(XX)/OR. 185 


and France, where the performance of the 
250-MW(e) Phenix reactor continued to be a 
heartening factor. The French Government had, 
in fact, just authorized the building of 
Superphenix, the first full-size station. 

103. As regards uranium, the reversal of the 
attitude of purchasers following the oil crisis and 
the prolonged ban on exports in certain areas had 
led to a rise in the hitherto low level of prices, 
which provided the basis for a resumption of 
prospecting throughout the world. 
104. The importance of the fuel cycle had 
increased as time went by, the two main aspects 
- apart from the supply of uranium - being 
enrichment and irradiated fuel reprocessing. 
In the sphere of enrichment, fresh capacity had 
been or was being provided, some of it in the 
international context of EURODIF and URENCO, 
with gaseous diffusion remaining easily the most 
frequently used process. As regards reprocessing, 
although the solvent-extraction technique 
developed over twenty years previously 
remained fully valid in itself, industrial 
development on a world-wide scale had 
unfortunately tended to mark time: pilot plants 
were relatively easy to construct and operate, 
but full-size facilities presented numerous 
operational difficulties. However, he wished to 
call attention in that connection to the successful 
extension of the French plant at La Hague. 
105. The increase in the proportion of nuclear 
power in the prospective total French electricity 
output constituted an illustration of the growing 
recourse to the atom as a source of power. That 
proportion was about 10% in 1975, would be about 
30% in 1980 and over 65% in 1985, when 
45 000 MW(e) would be generated. Nuclear power 
was indeed vital for meeting growing energy 
needs, without any question of it competing with 
the equally essential conventional sources. 
106. That trend was irreversible, for there was 
far too much misery and underdevelopment in the 
world for it to be possible to maintain a zero 
growth rate, as advocated by certain opponents 
of the consumer society. Projections which had 
been carried out even indicated that there was no 
time to be lost in the introduction of fast-breeder 
reactors if a uranium shortage was to be averted. 
107. The evolution of the world energy picture 
implied international solidarity, if only because 
the countries of the world found themselves in 
totally different situations, with some of them 
lacking vital raw materials and others unable to 
call into being the necessary facilities without 
outside aid. The main problems arising in that 
connection were the training of technical staff, 
the planning of programmes, the building of 
reactors and the multifaceted fuel cycle problem. 
108. The international solidarity to which he had 
just referred was further based on the fact that 
progress in nuclear energy had to be accompanied 
by measures to prevent potential dangers. 
Those measures concerned the radiation safety 
of nuclear installations, questions of physical 
security and anti-terrorist precautions - which 
largely devolved on national authorities - and 
safeguards to ensure peaceful utilization and to 
prevent diversion to military ends. 

109. The mutual dependence of importing and 
supplier countries was also a feature of international 
nuclear exchanges. It was quite natural 
that importers of nuclear materials and equipment 
should desire the maximum stability and 
reliability on the part of their suppliers. The 
latter, equally naturally, were anxious that 
their assistance should be rendered under conditions 
guaranteeing nuclear safety, physical 
security and exclusively peaceful utilization. 
110. France was acutely conscious of those two 
points of view, and endeavoured to reconcile them 
in all its export operations. While respecting 
the independence of the customer, his Government 
attached special importance to measures ensuring 
that French sales of nuclear equipment could 
never lead to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
It was with that aim in view that the French 
Government had recently set up a "Council on 
Nuclear Foreign Policy", under the chairmanship 
of the President of the Republic himself, 
111. France believed that the international 
nature of world nuclear development was as 
inevitable as the actual expansion of nuclear 
power, and it was in that connection that, for 
twenty years past, the Agency had been making 
such a valuable contribution. 
112. It might be of interest to review the 
Agency's history and inquire to what extent its 
development had fulfilled the hopes of its 
creators. First of all, one could congratulate 
oneself that the Agency had retained its technical 
character and had escaped excessive 
influence by the great political confrontations of 
the present generation. On the other hand, there 
was no denying that the Agency had not assumed 
one of the principal roles which its founders including 
President Eisenhower - had forecast 
for it, namely that of a broker in nuclear 
materials. Instead, the uranium-producing 
countries had continued to export special 
fissionable materials on the basis of bilateral 
agreements, though at the same time relying 
ever more heavily on the Agency to provide the 
necessary safeguards. 
113. In the field of technical assistance, the 
training of specialists in nuclear science and 
technology, the introduction of nuclear energy 
and techniques into the developing countries and 
the use of radioisotopes and radiation in medicine, 
agriculture and hydrology, the Agency had 
made a valuable contribution to international 
solidarity. The fact that there were relatively 
few disputes on the way in which technical 
assistance funds were allocated showed that the 
Agency was applying the inevitably limited 
financial resources with skill and judgement. 
- 13 



GC(XX)/OR. 185 


114. The Agency had likewise registered 
successes in the sphere of information exchange, 
the most important forthcoming meeting for that 
purpose being the Salzburg Conference to be 
held in May 1977. Also to the Agency's credit 
was its work on the safety of nuclear installations 
and the preparation of codes and guides, 
particularly in connection with reactor safety. 
115. However, it was in the field of safeguards 
that the Agency had carried out its most original 
and constructive work. He recalled that the most 
controversial issue at the Conference on the 
Statue in 1956 had been the drafting of Article XII, 
difficulties in agreeing on which had almost 
brought the negotiations to a halt. 
116. It was interesting to note that the paragraph 
of Article XII which had given rise to the most 
serious difficulties had never yet been applied, 
although its topical importance was beyond 
doubt. The paragraph in question dealt with the 
fate of special fissionable materials produced in 
a facility under safeguards, and specified that the 
countries possessing the materials would decide 
on the amount to be retained on their territory for 
use in their reactors, in operation or under construction, 
the balance being*deposited with the 
Agency. The Agency was certainly not at present 
in a position to act as a depositary for special 
fissionable materials on those lines, but the 
problem might arise and should be accorded 
timely study. 
117. The Agency's success in the safeguards 
field was proved by the fact that, as the years 
had gone by, exporting countries, including 
France, had abandoned bilateral controls and had 
entrusted safeguards operations to the Agency, 
118. It was important to stress that the Agency 
could play its proper role in that domain only if 
it was secure against external pressure and only 
if its safeguards system was universally recognized 
as reliable and unaffected by political or 
commercial considerations. 
119. It was easy to imagine what would soon 
happen to that system were it to be used to cast 
doubt on the appositeness of a given nuclear 
operation. The French Government was convinced 
that, in approving safeguards agreements, 
the Board of Governors should refrain from 
assessing the merits or appropriateness of the 
activities to be safeguarded and should confine 
itself to ensuring that the terms of the agreement 
under discussion would in fact enable the Agency 
satisfactorily to carry out the safeguards 
functions. 
120. The success achieved by the Agency over 
the preceding twenty years was something so 
valuable that every effort should be made to 
protect it against potential political dangers. 
If the Agency had been able to remain a stranger 
to the political confrontations convulsing the 
modern world, the credit was largely due to the 
Director General and to the Secretariat which he 
had headed for the past fifteen years. 
121. Mr. OLIVARES BAQUE (Spain) said that in 
the period since the preceding General Conference 
his country had continued to develop the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. Its national plan for 
uranium exploration involving an investment of 
about 12 000 million pesetas over a period of 
ten years had gone into operation in 1975. It was 
being implemented in accordance with the programme 
but had not yielded any significant new 
information to date. Spain's estimated uranium 
reserves had remained unchanged. As regards 
uranium concentrates, the Andujar plant of the 
Spanish Nuclear Energy Board had attained a 
production of 82 tons of U3O8 during 1975 and the 
National Uranium Enterprise (ENUSA) 86 tons 
of U3O3 at its facilities at Ciudad Rodrigo, which 
had gone into operation in May 1975. 
122. ENUSA had initiated the necessary administrative 
action to obtain authorization for installing 
a plant for fabricating fuel elements for 
light-water reactors in the Salamanca province. 
It was designed for a capacity of 800 tons of 
enriched uranium to be attained in 1985 in 
successive stages of growth. 
123. The national energy plan provided for an 
installed nuclear power capacity of about 
25 000 MW(e)by 1985, which would account for 
56% of Spain's total power output at that date. 
124. In the case of the nuclear power plants in 
operation, the overall participation of Spanish 
industry was about 43% which represented almost 
the whole of construction and erection work, 
about 60% of engineering and a fairly high proportion 
of personnel training activities. Its 
contribution to capital equipment, however, was 
only 25%. 
125. For power plants under construction, which 
were planned to be put into operation by 1980, the 
Spanish participation was expected to be 66. 5%, 
rising to 80% for those to be commissioned after 
1980. 
126. In 1975 nuclear power accounted for 9.16% 
of the total power produced in Spain. 
127. During 1975-1976, authorization had been 
granted for the construction of the Cofrentes 
nuclear power plant while that for preliminary 
work prior to construction had been received for 
four other plants at Trillo, Sayago, 
Valdecaballeros and Vandellos. 
128. Because of shortage of space at the Juan 
Vigon National Nuclear Energy Centre in Madrid, 
the Nuclear Energy Board had felt the need to 
construct a second centre with sufficient capacity 
to carry out its research and development programmes 
in connection with national energy 
planning. It had obtained Government authorization 
in 1976 for the construction of that centre in 
the Soria province at a site some 200 km away 
from Madrid. 
129. The Nuclear Energy Board continued to be 
the only producer of radioisotopes in Spain for 
- 14 



GC(XX)/OR. 185 


applications in medicine, industry, agriculture, 
research, etc. The total volume of sales for 
those products was 11. 5 million pesetas in 1975 
and 5. 6 million pesetas in the first half of 197 6. 

130. The Nuclear Energy Board had a 
nitrogen-15 enrichment plant, to which it had 
added a second production unit in 1975. The 
sales of N-labelled molecules had amounted to 
1, 6 million pesetas in 1975 and 1.1 million 
pesetas in the first half of 1976. Almost the 
entire output was exported from Spain to customers 
in more than 40 countries. 
131. The Nuclear Energy Board distributed 
imported radioisotopes apart from those it 
produced itself. The sales of radioisotopes of 
both kinds amounted to 38. 5 million pesetas in 
1975. In 1976, the sale of imported products 
through the Board was being stopped and the 
overall figure for the first half of 1976 was 
therefore 16.8 million pesetas. Those figures 
did not include imports by private companies for 
authorized users. 
132. At the end of 1975 there were 12 000 users 
of isotopes and 400 authorized radioactive 
facilities in his country. 
133. Spain had always considered international 
co-operation to be the best method of promoting 
understanding between peoples and the progress 
of mankind. It therefore continued to attach 
great importance to co-operation agreements with 
other countries for the mutual development of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It maintained 
collaborative relations through agreements 
with Governments and national nuclear bodies in 
Brazil, Canada, Chile, France, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Korea, Peru, Portugal and 
the United Kingdom. The existing agreements 
with Argentina, Pakistan and the United States had 
been extended and those with Colombia and 
Venezuela were in an advanced stage of implementation. 
His Government hoped to intensify 
those contacts and make increasing use of the 
results of the collaboration with the sole objective 
of deriving mutual benefits from each other's 
experience and knowledge. 

134. The Spanish delegation wished to extend 
its fullest co-operation to the Agency, whose 
efforts to spread the benefits of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy on a universal basis 
deserved the support and gratitude of all nations. 
For its part, Spain would always make the 
greatest possible contribution to enable the Agency 
to fulfil its objectives. In that connection, he was 
pleased to state that the Nuclear Energy Board 
had offered to hold in Madrid an interregional 
training course in the planning and operation of 
nuclear power projects and to provide support 
and facilities for the meetings of the working 
group on storage sites for low- and mediumlevel 
radioactive waste and the working group on 
nuclear power plant instrumentation. 
• The meeting rose at 1.10 p. m. 
- 15 



GC(XX)/OR. 186 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
22 March 1977* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 21-28 SEPTEMBER 1976 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Conference Centre, Hotel Nacional-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, 
on Wednesday, 22 September 1976, at 3. 20 p.m. 

President: Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) 

Item of the 

provisional 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

7 
General debate and report for 1975 1-2 9 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Belgium 1 -7 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 8-2 9 

Election of officers and appointment of 30 - 32 
the General Committee (resumed) 

General debate and report for 1975 33 - 88 
(resumed) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

German Democratic Republic 33 - 42 
Australia 43 - 45 
India 46-55 
Senegal 56-63 
Cuba 64-72 
Argentina 73-77 
Nigeria 78 - 88 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 8 November 1976. 
** GC(XX)/562 and Add. 1. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XX)/INF/163/Rev. 3. 
77-0201 


GC(XX)/OR. 186 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1975 
(GC(XX)/565) (continued)[1] 

1. Mr. HOUARD (Belgium) thought there was 
every reason to be satisfied with the Agency's 
achievements during the first 20 years of its 
existence. Among its steadily growing responsibilities, 
those relating to safeguards under the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT)[2] were of special importance in 
view of the growing trade in nuclear equipment 
and materials. 
2. Belgium, which was in favour of an expansion 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
had no desire to see the number of nuclear-weapon 
States increase and had therefore acceded to NPT, 
which, in its opinion, represented a step in the 
direction of general nuclear disarmament. It 
had agreed to the Agency's verifying the results 
of the safeguards which the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM) had been applying 
to the whole fuel cycle in its territory since 1958. 
It was therefore well placed to give calm consideration 
to the various suggestions put forward 
to date on ways of preventing all proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
3. Pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article III of 
NPT, a number of States, including Belgium, 
had established a code of conduct for countries 
supplying materials and equipment, at the same 
time endeavouring to ensure that competition 
between suppliers did not become distorted as a 
result of variable safeguards requirements. 
Belgium had undertaken to comply with the code 
and, naturally, to continue meeting its prior 
obligations under the EURATOM Treaty. Possibly, 
the code was not yet sufficiently restrictive to 
eliminate with certainty the danger of proliferation 
in the case of commercial transactions with 
countries not party to NPT, for once a country 
had acquired the requisite techniques and skills 
there was little to stop it building a replica of a 
facility under international safeguards, which 
could escape such safeguards unless they had 
been prescribed at the time the transfer of 
equipment or technology took place. Although 
restrictive clauses were becoming common in 
new sales contracts, it would be much simpler 
and safer, especially from the point of view of 
the supplier State, to require that the receiving 
State place its whole nuclear fuel cycle under 
Agency safeguards; that would simplify formalities, 
reduce far more the dangers of diversion 
and gradually place all States on the same footing 
as regards the development of nuclear energy. 

4. There should be no discrimination against 
States party to NPT in the supply of nuclear 
materials and equipment. His country, while 
[1] GC(XX)/OR. 185, paras 2-134. 
[2] Reproduced in INFCIRC/140. 
appreciating some of the objectives underlying 
the suggestions made in a memorandum recently 
addressed to the Agency by the Resident 
Representative of Finland, was of the opinion that 
the method advocated was not the most effective 
way of strengthening non-proliferation. 

5. Regional nuclear fuel cycle centres, if set 
up, might facilitate the application of safeguards 
and prevent proliferation, but their establishment 
should not conflict with the economic and technical 
interests of the countries likely to make use of 
them. Furthermore, it should remain possible 
for a State which already possessed the requisite 
technology and in which the scale of nuclear 
power generation warranted the establishment of 
a national nuclear fuel cycle centre to establish 
one, provided, of course, that the State in 
question accepted Agency safeguards on all-its 
nuclear activities, thereby meeting the requirements 
of NPT. 

6. Lastly, it should be borne in mind that 
NPT was still the major legal instrument for 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
For it to have greater force, all States party to 
NPT should implement all the undertakings which 
had been entered into, including those concerning 
international co-operation and disarmament. The 
use of certain civilian nuclear techniques exclusively 
by nuclear-weapon States would be 
contrary to the spirit and letter of NPT. His 
country regarded NPT as just one stage on the 
way to full democracy - with the necessary and 
sufficient safeguards - in the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy; it should not be the starting 
point for fresh discrimination increasingly in 
favour of those who, in the past, had deemed it 
advisable to equip themselves with nuclear 
weapons. 
7. He hoped that the Agency would be able to 
play an increasingly constructive role in the 
maintenance of peace and that it would help as 
much as possible those Member States which 
looked to it for development assistance. He 
would like to see all Member States taking a positive 
part in the attainment of the Agency's 
objectives. 
8. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) read out the following message to the 
participants in the General Conference from 
Mr. Kosygin, Chairman of the Council of 
Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics: 
"Mr. President, 

"Permit me to transmit through you my 
wishes for a fruitful twentieth regular 
session to the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency - an 
important international organization whose 
activities are very directly linked with the 
maintenance of peace and the strengthening 
of co-operation between States. 

-2 



"In the present international situation, 
for those interested in the maintenance of 
peace there is no more urgent task than 
putting an end to the arms race and 
achieving disarmament. It is incumbent 
on the Agency to help in achieving these 
aims, and all people of good will wish the 
participants in the Conference every success 
in this noble cause. This is also the wish 
of all Soviet citizens. 

"The Agency is rightly regarded as the 
centre for co-ordinating the efforts of 
States in the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy - in the development of nuclear 
power generation, the exchange of scientific 
and technical information, the use of underground 
explosions for peaceful purposes, 
environmental protection and controlled 
thermonuclear fusion. 

"One should not forget for a moment, 
however, that the energy of the atomic 
nucleus can also be used as the most 
destructive weapon mankind has ever known. 
That is why the efforts deployed by the 
Agency to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons acquire special importance. 
Although the field of application of the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons has recently expanded, new and 
even more effective measures are necessary 
to stop the further spread of nuclear 
weapons on our planet. This is one of the 
most important tasks before the Agency. 

"The Soviet Union has rendered considerable 
and varied assistance to the 
Agency ever since it was established and I 
should like to assure the participants in the 
Conference that our country intends to continue 
contributing to the conduct of the work 
of this influential international organization, 
which is so valuable to the cause of peace. 

"Permit me to express the hope that the 
twentieth regular session of the Agency's 
General Conference will help in strengthening 
collaboration between States in the 
interests of maintaining peace. 

"A. Kosygin" 

9. Recalling that under Article II of its Statute 
the Agency was required to "seek to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world", he said that one of the Agency's primary 
tasks was to help in bringing about lasting peace. 
The twentieth session of the General Conference 
was taking place in a climate characterized by a 
continuation of detente, and the Soviet Union 
would continue to do its utmost in the interests of 
detente and disarmament. In that connection, the 
25th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party had 
announced that the Soviet Union was determined 
to strive for peace, for greater international cooperation 
and for the freedom and independence 
of all peoples. 
GC (XX)/OR. 186 


10. During the past year, the Soviet Union had 
concluded with several other States agreements 
aimed at checking the arms race; they included 
the Treaty between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on 
Underground Explosions for Peaceful Purposes 
(the PNE Treaty) and an agreement with France 
on the prevention of the accidental or unauthorized 
use of nuclear weapons. 
11. It should not, however, be forgotten that 
certain forces in the world were opposed to a 
normalization of international relations and were 
constantly seeking to intensify the arms race. If 
the latter was to be stopped and true disarmament 
initiated (objectives which determined the main 
lines of the Soviet Union's foreign policy), new 
measures had to be taken. Mr. Brezhnev, 
Secretary General of the Central Committee of the 
Soviet Communist Party, on the occasion of the 
signing of the PNE Treaty, had announced that 
the 25th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party 
had formulated a programme whose implementation 
would make it possible to stop the arms race and 
initiate true disarmament. 
12. In that context, great importance attached 
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The 
Soviet Union welcomed the widening of the scope 
of NPT resulting from the recent accession to it 
of the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy and 
Japan; nevertheless, further effective measures 
were needed if the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
was to be averted. NPT could play an even greater 
role if all States ratified it. As many States as 
possible should therefore be induced to ratify 
NPT and, at the same time, steps should be taken 
to ensure that those countries which did not 
accede to NPT were unable to manufacture 
nuclear weapons. The agreement reached by the 
Soviet Union and 21 other countries to the effect 
that all nuclear materials and equipment supplied 
by them should be subject to Agency safeguards 
was of great importance in that respect. The 
next step was to make as many countries as 
possible partners in that agreement and to expand 
the "trigger list". 

13. The exporting States had special responsibilities 
and, in his opinion, strict safeguards 
were necessary if the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons was to be prevented. The export of 
nuclear equipment and materials was not a 
simple commercial transaction; it was closely 
linked with the maintenance of peace. The 
Soviet Union's export policy was based on 
adherence to strict rules which precluded all 
possibility of proliferation. It was essential 
that the Agency's safeguards cover the whole 
fuel cycle of non-nuclear-weapon countries 
which were not parties to NPT, and no nuclear 
materials or equipment should be supplied to 
such countries unless they undertook not to use 
them in the production of nuclear explosive 
devices. 
14. The Soviet Union also attached great 
importance to the physical protection of nuclear 
materials, in which field there was a pressing 

GC(XX)/OR. 186 

need to strengthen current measures. It required 
from countries to which it supplied nuclear 
materials that they ensure the physical protection 
of those materials in accordance with Agency 
recommendations and was ready to participate in 
the drawing-up of an international agreement. 

15. Drawing attention to the risks, from the 
standpoint of proliferation, associated with the 
establishment of enrichment and reprocessing 
plants, he said his country supported the Agency's 
study of multinational nuclear fuel cycle centres; 
it believed that participants would benefit from 
such centres, in particular economically. 
Furthermore, safety would be greater and effective 
control by the Agency easier if radioactive 
wastes were concentrated at a few points. 
16. The Soviet Union was making a determined 
effort to achieve a total ban on nuclear weapon 
tests and in that spirit, it had in 1974 concluded 
the Treaty between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the 
Limitation of Underground Nuclear Weapons 
Tests. [3] Nevertheless, the need for an international 
agreement on the universal and complete 
banning of nuclear tests still remained, and the 
Soviet Union had, at the thirtieth session of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations, submitted 
a proposal and a draft treaty. The latter provided 
for the banning of nuclear weapons tests, and the 
idea was that it should be signed by all countries 
whether or not they possessed nuclear weapons. 
Such a treaty would do much to check the arms 
race and strengthen world peace and international 
co-operation. 
17. While continuing to strive for non-proliferation, 
the Soviet Union was in favour of 
maximum development of the constructive 
applications of nuclear energy, including nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes. In accordance 
with the PNE Treaty, concluded during the 
current year, underground nuclear explosions 
were to serve peaceful purposes only and to 
comply with the provisions both of the Treaty 
Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, 
in Outer Space and Under Water (The Partial 
Test Ban Treaty)[4] and of NPT. Compliance 
with the provisions of the PNE Treaty would be 
verified through national monitoring systems, 
the exchange of information and occasional onthe-
spot visits by observers, the PNE Treaty 
was of importance from the standpoint of arms 
limitation, and the Agency might well take 
advantage of its provisions in organizing international 
co-operation in the field of peaceful 
nuclear explosions pursuant to Article V of NPT. 
18. The Soviet Union was the only major 
industrial power which was meeting its energy 
needs from its own resources. Hydropower and 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/208. 
[4] United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 480, 
Treaty No. 6964. 
nuclear fuel would participate in the expansion of 
the country's installed electricity-generating 
capacity, accounting for 40% in the current fiveyear 
period, as against 22% in the 1970-75 
period. The 1976-80 nuclear power programme 
provided for the installation of 13-1500 MW of 
new generating capacity. In addition to the 
building of reactors with a unit capacity of 

1000 MW, the Soviet Union would be working on 
the development of reactors with a unit capacity 
of 1500 MW. It would be embarking on the con


struction of nuclear power stations with an 
installed capacity of 4-800 MW based on thermal 
reactors with unit capacities of 1000 MW and 

1500 MW. The Soviet Union would also be taking 

an interest in the use of nuclear energy for the 
production of industrial heat and intensifying its 
development work on fast reactors. 

19. In addition, the Soviet Union was engaged 
in building up a fleet of nuclear ice-breakers; a 
second vessel had already gone into service and 
a third one would be doing so shortly. 
20. A large nuclear power station construction 
programme was also being implemented in the 
Member States of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA) with the help of the Soviet 
Union. Enrichment services for uranium 
belonging to other countries were an important 
part of the Soviet Union's programme of international 
collaboration; they were being made 
available in accordance with the provisions of 
NPT. 
21. The Soviet Union attached great importance 
to research on controlled thermonuclear 
reactions, and the experimental results were 
promising. His country had always advocated the 
strengthening of international co-operation in that 
field and welcomed the efforts being made by the 
Agency. A meeting of Agency experts on the 
inertial confinement of plasmas had been held in 
the Soviet Union in July 1976 and an Agency conference 
on plasma physics and controlled thermonuclear 
fusion was expected to be held there in 
1978. 
22. The Soviet Union had concluded 40 international 
agreements for co-operation in the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy, and CMEA 
was playing an important role with regard to 
multilateral co-operation in that field. 
23. The Soviet delegation believed that the 
Agency's programme for 1977-82 generally 
corresponded to the needs of the Agency's 
Member States and would contribute to the 
achievement of the objectives laid down in the 
Statute. The programme was well balanced 
financially and priority was being given to 
assisting developing countries with the implementation 
of nuclear power programmes. He 
complimented the Secretariat on the elaboration 
of the programme and paid tribute to the Director 
General for the important personal role he had 
played. Recalling that his country had always 
supported the Agency's activities, he stressed 
the important work which the Agency had accom-
4 



GC(XX)/OR. 186 


plished in putting into practice the recommendations 
of the Review Conference of the Parties 
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT Review Conference)[5]. 

24. The number of safeguards agreements had 
now reached 130, of which about a hundred 
related to countries with nuclear programmes. 
The Agency should therefore aim -at automating 
the treatment of safeguards information. His 
delegation appreciated the Secretariat's work in 
the field of safeguards, but wished to stress the 
need for greater efficiency, especially in view of 
the fact that the volume of inspection work was 
about to increase due to the accession to NPT of 
five Member States of EURATOM and Japan. He 
trusted that in those countries too the Agency 
would discharge its responsibilities effectively 
by adhering to the essential principle - its right 
to carry out independent inspections. In that 
connection, the delay in the conclusion of safeguards 
agreements with the EURATOM countries 
was a matter of great concern to the Soviet Union. 
25. He thought that the Agency should, in 
practice, make fuller use of its rights, in 
particular as regards inspections, in order to 
ensure that nuclear materials were not diverted 
and used for the manufacture of explosive devices. 
To enhance the effectiveness of safeguards, efforts 
should be made to standardize control procedures 
and improve the instruments used, measures 
which should be feasible within the framework of 
the budget. Referring to the work of Soviet 
experts in developing safeguards methods, he 
mentioned the experimental verification activities 
in which Agency inspectors had participated at 
the Novovoronezh Nuclear Power Station. As a 
material contribution to the furtherance of Agency 
safeguards, his Government had decided to make 
a special gift of 250 000 roubles in 1977 for the 
development of safeguards techniques. The gift 
could be used to establish a school for Agency 
inspectors at the Novovoronezh Nuclear Power 
Station, where safeguards techniques could be 
devised and courses and meetings held. 

26. Recalling that, in the final declaration of 
the NPT Review Conference, the Agency was 
called upon to assist non-nuclear-weapon States 
in the utilization of nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes, he said that the Agency should 
give priority to a study of ways of carrying out 
such explosions safely and to the formulation of 
recommendations on radiological and seismic 
questions. 
27. While he acknolwedged the efforts which 
the Agency had been making during the past year 
to improve the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS), he felt it was important that the 
system embrace all pertinent publications. 
28. He stressed the importance of the Agency's 
technical assistance programme for developing 
[5] Held at Geneva in May 1975. 
countries. Referring to the assistance which the 
Soviet Union had already provided through the 
Agency, he mentioned the 14 study tours in the 
Soviet Union which the Agency had organized for 
specialists from developing countries. His 
Government had decided to raise its voluntary 

contribution to the General Fund in 1977 to 

600 000 roubles, for the purchase of Soviet 

equipment, instruments and materials and for 
the organization of study tours in the Soviet 

Union. 

29. He expressed the hope that the present 
session of the General Conference would contribute 
to the development of co-operation in the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT 
OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE (resumed)!6] 

30. The PRESIDENT recalled that the election 
of the Vice-Presidents of the General Conference 
and of the Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole had been deferred while certain delegations 
completed the consultations which they wanted to 
hold on the matter. Those consultations had led 
to the following consensus: for the present 
session, nine Vice-Presidents should be elected 
instead of the eight provided for in Rule 34 of the 
Rules of Procedure. It would accordingly be 
necessary to suspend the relevant parts of 
Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure during 
the present session. 
31. He proposed that the delegates of the 
following States be elected as the Vice-Presidents 
of the General Conference: Canada, France, 
India, Japan, Mexico, Nigeria, Romania, 
Thailand and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics He proposed Mr. Malu wa Kalenga 
(Zaire) as Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole. Lastly, as additional Members of the 
General Committee, he proposed the German 
Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of 
Germany, Kuwait, the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United 
States of America. 
• 32. The General Conference accepted the 
President's proposals. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1975 
(GC(XX)/565) (resumed)[7] 

33. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic 
Republic) said that, while the peaceful coexistence 
of States with different economic and 
social systems had become an important factor 
in international relations, one of mankind's most 
urgent tasks was to put a stop to the arms race. 
The PNE Treaty, signed in May by the Soviet 
Union and the United States of America, was a 
step in that direction. 
[6] GC(XX)/OR. 185, para. 1. 
[7] Ibid., paras 1-29. 
-5 



GC(XX)/OR. 186 

34. He was gratified to note that considerable 
progress had been made in the nuclear field, 
thanks largely to NPT to which one hundred 
States were parties, and he hoped that the number 
of corresponding safeguards agreements would 
increase rapidly. The Government of the German 
Democratic Republic fully supported the Agency's 
efforts to implement the provisions of NPT and 
considered one of the Agency's permanent tasks 
to be the improvement of conditions as regards 
staff, organization and techniques so that international 
safeguards could effectively meet 
increasingly exacting requirements. He appealed 
to all States which had a nuclear industry, or 
intended to create one in the near future, to accede 
to NPT, for its universality and the effective 
realization of its objectives were essential to the 
future safety of mankind. 
35. He encouraged the Agency to continue its 
efforts with regard to the physical protection of 
nuclear materials and the use of nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes. 
36. He said his delegation approved of the 
activities described in the annual report for 1975 
and noted that the programme for 1977-82 
embraced both traditional tasks and tasks 
associated with the large-scale utilization of 
nuclear energy. Many countries now attached 
great importance to nuclear power generation. 
In the German Democratic Republic, the proportion 
of electricity generation attributable to 
nuclear plants would increase from 17% in 
1971-75 to 27% in 1976-80. In that connection, 
co-operation between the German Democratic 
Republic and the other socialist countries, 
especially the Soviet Union, within CMEA had 
been particularly fruitful. 
37. With regard to the utilization of nuclear 
energy, the same vigour which had been applied 
in the preparation of nuclear power programmes 
should also go into activities relating to safety, 
in order to overcome the dangers associated with 
the widespread use of nuclear energy. The 
Agency1 s manifold activities in that field accordingly 
deserved particular support. 
38. The initiative which the Agency had taken 
in establishing INIS merited special mention. 
INIS had already yielded excellent results and 
should continue operating on the present scale. 
39. The German Democratic Republic was 
doing everything it could to support the technical 
assistance programme, especially in the field of 
training. 
40. With regard to the proposed increase in the 
budget, it was still necessary to exercise strict 
economy and to make the most efficient use 
possible of all resources in implementing the 
programme. 
41. In view of public attitudes towards the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, appropriate 
measures should be taken not only to ensure safety 
but also to demonstrate it and gain public confidence. 
One such measure was the separation of 
research, development and other promotional 
activities from regulatory and control activities; 
it had yielded excellent results in a number of 
countries. At the international level, however, 
such separation seemed neither appropriate nor 
necessary, as had been shown by the extremely 
fruitful efforts of the Agency, where the association 
of all aspects of the utilization of atomic 
energy had been found particularly advantageous. 

42. In conclusion, he said that the Director 
General's question as to whether one could be 
satisfied with the work done by the Agency during 
somewhat less than 20 years warranted an 
affirmative reply. 
43. Mr. GEORGE (Australia), noting that 
Australia had just undertaken its first full-scale 
environmental inquiry into the uranium industry, 
said that the Agency should make its voice heard 
in the nuclear controversy, which was becoming 
increasingly intense. The Agency would accordingly 
do well to disseminate more widely information 
on questions which were at present 
troubling the public. The environmental effects 
of the nuclear industry and the limits to be set 
with regard to the disposal of radioactive 
materials into the environment should be subjects 
of continuous study. 
44. Australia greatly appreciated the guidelines 
which the Agency was issuing for Member 
States embarking on nuclear programmes. The 
efficient transfer of technology to developing 
countries and the efficient safeguarding of that 
technology presented the Agency with a challenging 
problem. In the opinion of the Australian 
Government, it was essential that Member States 
be convinced that any diversion would be promptly 
detected and reported. Confidence that commitments 
would be honoured was the cornerstone of 
all anti-proliferation efforts. Unfortunately, the 
Agency's safeguards operations were of necessity 
highly secret. Consequently, Australia felt 
strongly that the Agency should consider the 
possibility of instituting an audit arrangement 
with a view to providing reassurance that the 
Agency's safeguards operations were being 
conducted effectively. 
45. He urged the Member States of EURATOM 
which were parties to NPT to complete as soon 
as possible the negotiations necessary for the 
entry into force of their safeguards agreements 
with the Agency. As a party to NPT, Australia 
was keen to support all measures aimed at 
strengthening the international application of 
safeguards. It did not share the view that "the 
end of the NPT line" was nearing; accession to 
NPT was the most effective and constructive 
contribution which any State could make to nonproliferation. 
It was not the time to abandon the 
hope of ultimately seeing it accepted by all 
countries. Australia looked forward to the 
accession of many other States to NPT as they 
realized that their interests would not thereby 
be jeopardized. Australia fully supported the 
efforts being made to strengthen the cause of 
-6 



GC(XX)/OR. 186 


non-proliferation through additional safeguards
conditions.


46. Mr. SETHNA (India), congratulating the 
President of the Conference on his election, said 
it was a privilege to serve with him on the Agency's 
Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC), where he 
had learned to appreciate his professional and 
human qualities. His guidance would undoubtedly 
help the Conference to solve the complex problems 
before it. The Brazilian Government was to be 
thanked for the preparations which it had made 
for the present session and for its warm hospitality, 
as was the Director General for his efforts 
to ensure that the Agency extended and intensified 
its activities in its various spheres of competence. 
47. Commenting on the progress made since the 
previous session of the Conference, he recalled, 
in connection with the study of regional nuclear 
fuel cycle centres, that his country had already 
provided an expert and intended to continue cooperating 
fully in the study, although the establishment 
of such centres would undoubtedly raise 
difficult legal, technical and political problems. 
With regard to the preparation of safety codes 
and guides, India, which had already carried out 
similar work at the national level, had submitted 
to the Agency the results of its experience and 
would continue to assist the Agency with a view to 
ensuring that the codes and guides dealt exclusively 
with pertinent matters. 
48. The participation of many countries in the 
work of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear 
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes showed that the 
possible applications of nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes (PNEs) were arousing considerable 
interest. Accordingly, the benefits of 
PNEs should not be relegated to the background 
because of extraneous considerations. For its 
part, India was prepared to make the benefits of 
its own experience available to the Agency. 
49. India was greatly concerned about the considerable 
budget increase as between 1976 and 
1977. It was, of course, right and proper that 
activities and programmes should develop from 
year to year, but the Agency should take care not 
to allow automatic increases where they were not 
absolutely necessary, for a sharp increase had 
particularly adverse consequences for the 
developing countries. 
50. On the other hand, the target for voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund was only 
$6 million for 1977, representing only a slight 
increase compared with the previous year. India 
hoped the target would be reached and that the 
Agency would be able to increase its assistance, 
in spite of the restrictive policies which a number 
of industrialized countries were applying with 
regard to - among other things - the award of 
fellowships and the organization of study tours. 
India felt strongly that technical assistance 
should continue to be granted without discrimination 
to all countries needing it. For its part, 
his country would continue to offer - through the 
Agency - fellowships and the services of experts 
to other developing countries, and for 1977 it 
would contribute $74 400 to the General Fund. 

51. Nuclear energy was being accepted more 
and more as an alternative to forms of energy 
which had become too expensive or insufficient, 
and many developing countries were embarking on 
nuclear power programmes. The Agency was 
going to have to adapt to such trends in the world 
energy situation; it would have to concern itself 
with their consequences and help in finding 
regional or international solutions to the problems 
of fuel supplies, facility siting, safety and radioactive 
waste management; it would have to 
reconcile progress with safety; and, at the same 
time, it would have to take care not to endorse 
principles or adopt procedures which might 
retard progress, especially if those principles 
or procedures derived from considerations not 
related to either technology or economics. 


52. In that connection, India was concerned 
about moves at recent meetings of the Board to 
introduce new safeguards principles which would 
only modify the Agency's safeguards system in a 
manner unacceptable to the Agency's membership. 
The interests of a group of States should not 
induce the Agency to impose new obligations or 
restrictions on all its Members. India had 
always urged that the Agency carry out its 
functions in conformity with the Statute and 
hoped that the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSI) would assess the 
effectiveness of safeguards without being 
influenced by extraneous considerations. 
53. India's most recent achievements in the 
nuclear field included the solving of difficulties 
in connection with the Rajasthan nuclear power 
station, the completion of 14 years of commercial 
production by the Nangal heavy-water plant, the 
commissioning of the Baroda heavy-water plant, 
the progress of construction work on the Kota, 
Talcher and Tuticorin heavy-water plants, the 
entry into full commercial production of the 
Hyderabad fuel fabrication plant, the fabrication 
of fuel for two nuclear power stations and the 
completion of the Tarapur fuel reprocessing 
plant, where it would be possible to effect considerable 
savings. 
54. Emphasizing the radioactive waste management 
efforts which India had made so as to 
protect man and his environment, he refuted the 
erroneous press reports on the subject which 
had appeared in various countries. India had 
started to study waste management problems 
over ten years before its first power reactors 
had gone into service, and the independent body 
now entrusted with waste management was 
responsible not to the reactor operators but to 
the health and safety authorities. The results 
of waste management operations demonstrated 
the effectiveness of the system used, even in 
places where conditions were very unfavourable, 
and India was endeavouring to limit radioactivity 
releases to the point where the natural radiation 
background was hardly modified. During the 
past year, his country had been working on the 
-7 



GC (XX)/OR. 186 

construction of a facility for the solar evaporation 
of liquid wastes which would probably be the 
first of its type in the world. It had been storing 
high-activity wastes for years and was at present 
constructing a plant which would make it possible 
to fix such wastes in glass matrices. In addition, 
his country was studying waste storage from the 
interim stage through to the disposal of solidified 
wastes in geological formations. 

55. India's manifold activities showed that the 
developing countries needed the assistance of 
the Agency in intensifying their efforts and 
accelerating their progress. The Agency had 
an important international responsibility in that 
respect, and India, for its part, would do all it 
could to help. 
56. Mr. CISSE (Senegal) said his delegation 
strongly supported the Board's recommendations 
regarding (a) better organization of assistance to 
developing countries, (b) changes in emphasis 
against a background of more ample technical 
assistance, with particular attention being paid to 
the "Food and agriculture" and "Life sciences" 
programmes, and (c) the establishment of a 
reserve fund to finance certain activities in 
medicine and agriculture and permit better 
development in those areas. 
57. The Agency needed additional resources in 
order to provide more substantial assistance to the 
developing countries. However, the Agency's 
assistance in the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy could have real significance only within 
the framework of safeguards preventing the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
58. Senegal had ratified NPT and believed that 
all Members of the Agency should submit to NPT 
safeguards, including those on the transfer of 
nuclear materials. Senegal was therefore 
following with great interest and supporting without 
reservation the Agency's efforts to acquire 
the means for establishing a rigorous and effective 
international safeguards system with a view to 
preventing a nuclear war. 
59. Agency assistance, centred mainly on the 
utilization of radioisotope s, had enabled Senegal 
to make encouraging progress in agricultural 
research, which had given rise to great hopes 
not only for Senegal but for all Sahelian countries 
with similar climatic and medical conditions. 
60. In that connection, the delegation of Senegal 
called for better co-ordination and quicker action 
in helping the developing countries under the 
joint Agency/FAO programmes relating to 
productivity and health protection, the urgency of 
which no longer needed explaining. 
61. The Government of Senegal would like to 
see the Agency in a position to extend its activities 
forthwith to cover solar energy, which was 
already being exploited to some extent in Senegal, 
and in possession of the funds necessary for an 
adequate programme of work on a form of energy 
complementary to the conventional ones which 
were lacking in many countries of the Third 
World. 

62. The delegation of Senegal was pleased by 
the favourable reaction of the competent Agency 
organs to the steps recently taken by Senegal with 
a view to obtaining further assistance in the form 
of materials and of specialists in radioisotope 
applications. 
63. The Government of Senegal welcomed the 
increased co-operation with the Agency's 
Secretariat which was enabling the University of 
Dakar and its research laboratories and institutes 
to obtain better equipment, to pursue research 
and to train scientific and technical staff to a high 
level. 
64. Mr. SAENZ SANCHEZ (Cuba) felt that a 
survey of the present international situation in 
the light of the Agency's basic objective - the 
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes - was called for. The Conference was 
meeting at a time when peoples and Governments, 
in their desire for peace, were making great 
efforts to strengthen international co-operation. 
The Conference on Security and Co-operation in 
Europe, concluded in Helsinki during 1975, had 
given fresh stimulus to those efforts. On the 
other hand, international conflicts persisted, 
imperialist aggression manifested itself every 
day in the Middle East, in Angola and on the 
Korean peninsula (to give but a few examples), 
and the arms race was intensifying. 
65. Within the Agency, the struggle for peace 
should be a constant concern and should receive 
the support of all delegations and of scientists 
and nuclear energy specialists from, all parts of 
the world. That was why his delegation was 
troubled by the sale of nuclear technology to the 
racist regime in South Africa, whose well-known 
crimes had aroused universal condemnation. It 
felt in duty bound to draw to the attention of the 
international community the danger implicit in 
the acquisition by imperialist regimes and their 
allies of nuclear equipment capable of enabling 
them to produce nuclear weapons. 
66. The Revolutionary Government of Cuba was 
participating in all activities designed to bring 
about international detente, the discontinuance 
of the testing of nuclear and other weapons and 
the conclusion of a world treaty on the renunciation 
of the use of force in international relations. 
67. His delegation supported Iraq's proposal 
that the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) 
be invited to attend General Conference sessions 
in the capacity of observer[8]. In that connection, 
he recalled that the General Assembly, in its 
Resolution 3237 (XXIX), had invited the PLO to 
participate in its work with observer status. 
68. It was well known that Cuba had embarked 
on an unrelenting struggle against underdevelop[
8] See document GC(XX)/572. 
-8 



GC(XX)/OR. 186 


ment, especially by endeavouring to promote 
scientific and technological progress in the light 
of the country's lofty economic and social aims. 
The use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
was an important factor in that struggle. The 
advances already made were due to the determination 
of the Cuban people and to the help 
received from the socialist countries. The rapid 
expansion of electric power generation was a 
prerequisite for Cuba's economic development. 
Since it lacked both oil and other energy sources, 
nuclear power was vital for his country. That 
was why Cuba would start building a nuclear 
power station in the course of the next five years 
and the Revolutionary Government had decided to 
conclude with the Agency an agreement for the 
application of Agency safeguards to the country1 s 
nuclear activities where that was necessary. 

69. Cuba attached great importance to the 
application of nuclear techniques in agriculture, 
industry and medicine and to the training of 
nuclear specialists in those fields, the aim being 
to create the necessary scientific and technical 
infrastructure with help from the Agency and the 
socialist countries. It was taking part in the 
scientific activities of the Joint Institute for 
Nuclear Research at Dubna, in the Soviet Union. 
70. There could not be significant progress in 
nuclear programmes in Latin America unless 
profound internal structural changes took place 
and unless an end was put to colonialist and neocolonialist 
relations between countries. The need 
to establish a new international economic order 
could not be over-emphasized. Cuba was ready 
to collaborate in every way its resources would 
permit with the other countries of Latin America, 
on either a bilateral or a multilateral basis, in 
nuclear research and training programmes. 
71. Cuba would continue making voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund in support of the 
Agency's programme of assistance to developing 
countries. It appreciated the impartiality with 
which the Director General employed the Agency's 
resources. 
72. Nuclear energy was capable of contributing 
to the well-being of mankind, but it was also 
capable of producing a world-wide cataclysm. 
The General Conference would do well to bear its 
dual nature in mind. 
73. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina) said 
that, in order to meet Argentina's power needs, 
about 15 000 MW(e) of nuclear capacity would 
have to be installed by the year 2000, involving 
an investment of some $30 000 million. The 
nuclear policy adopted in Argentina was a result 
of that situation and of the decision to achieve the 
greatest possible freedom of action in the nuclear 
field. Starting with the establishment of the 
National Atomic Energy Commission, the policy 
had been put into effect in two stages. During the 
first stage, lasting until 1966, the scientific and 
technical infrastructure necessary for the construction 
of nuclear power stations when the time 
came had been created. A synchro-cyclotron 
had been acquired and significant research in 
nuclear physics and chemistry carried out with it. 
The first irradiation reactor in Latin America 
had been built, followed by the construction of a 
second, around which had been erected radioisotope 
production laboratories and laboratories 
used for radiation protection studies. In addition, 
a start had been made with uranium prospecting 
and fuel elements had been fabricated for the 
irradiation reactors. Lastly, Argentina had 
purchased a pressurized-water natural uranium 
reactor under a turn-key contract. 

74. During the second stage, the main activities 
had been the construction and entry into service 
of the Atucha nuclear power station, which had 
the highest availability factor in the world (83% 
in 1975), and the start of construction work on a 
second nuclear power station, at C6rdoba. The 
decision had also been taken to build a CANDUtype 
reactor. Radioisotope production was 
meeting 90% of the national demand and an 
irradiation plant, designed and built with local 
resources, was serving 45 Argentine enterprises. 
75. On 24 May 1976, the new Government had 
initiated the third stage, in which new principles 
would apply. Instead of purchasing on a turn-key 
basis, Argentina would assume responsibility for 
the planning, construction, installation and entry 
into service of subsequent nuclear power stations 
and for the supply of nuclear components with the 
active participation of the Argentine engineering 
industry and of private companies - both Argentine 
and foreign. Such were the principles which 
would govern the building of the country's third 
nuclear power station, the planning of which 
formed part of a study to determine in what proportions 
thermal power, nuclear power and 
hydro power would have to be used in order to 
meet Argentina's needs economically. 
76. With regard to uranium supplies, Argentina 
had embarked on a programme which provided for 
intensive prospecting and an increase in the 
capacity of the country's uranium ore concentration 
plants. The reasonably assured reserves 
represented 24 000 tons of concentrate, which 
would be sufficient for the operation of five 
600 MW(e) nuclear power stations - in addition to 
the Atucha plant - over a period of 30 years. 
The probable reserves amounted to 135 000 tons. 
As from 1979, Argentina would be able to 
fabricate the fuel elements needed for the Atucha 
plant and, subsequently, for the other power 
stations as well. A pilot plant for heavy water 
production had been built with the help of the 
private sector. In pure and applied research, 
which would continue, the judicious use made of 
the available human resources was reflected in 
the results obtained. 
77. With regard to collaboration with international 
organizations, valuable support had been 
received from the Organization of American 
States (OAS), the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP), and - above all - the Agency. 
-9 



GC (XX)/OR. 186 

78. Mr. ADENIJI (Nigeria) congratulated the 
President of the Conference, whose election 
would undoubtedly contribute to a successful 
twentieth session of the General Conference, 
thanked Brazil for its warm hospitality, which 
was in keeping with its traditions, and recalled 
that his own country had both ethnic and historic 
ties with Brazil. 
79. It was to be hoped that the General 
Conference would soon be able to welcome the 
delegation of the PLO, thereby recognizing the 
role of national liberation movements. Although 
other organizations within the United Nations 
family had already followed the example set by 
the United Nations itself, the Agency had not yet 
enabled the PLO and the African national 
liberation movements to associate themselves 
with its work. However, no area of human 
activity could remain isolated from the struggle 
for human dignity. The Agency should therefore 
keep in touch with such movements, especially 
as many of their members would one day become 
the rulers of their countries. If the Agency 
remained aloof, it might find that newly independent 
countries were placing membership of 
the Agency low in their order of priorities. 
80. The developing countries, which represented 
two thirds of the Agency's present 
membership of 109 States, had joined the Agency 
in the belief that it would remain faithful to 
Article III, B of its Statute where, in paragraph 3, 
the Agency was enjoined to "Allocate its resources 
in such a manner as to secure efficient utilization 
and the greatest possible general benefit in all 
areas of the world, bearing in mind the special 
needs of the under-developed areas of the world;". 
Moreover, most of them had acceded to NPT. 
However, the growth of the Agency's membership 
had not been matched by a corresponding increase 
in the resources at its disposal for fulfilling its 
obligations toward the developing countries, with 
the result that the Agency, in neglecting those 
countries' needs, was acquiring the image of a 
club for rich countries. 
81. The Agency's budget - most of which was 
accounted for by regulatory activities, which 
were mainly of benefit to the developed countries had 
risen from $4 million in 1958 to $37 million 
in 1976, whereas voluntary contributions for the 
provision of technical assistance had risen from 
$1.5 million in 1959 to $ 5. 5 million in 1976, 
representing a ridiculously small increase in 
relation to the number of developing Member 
States. Moreover, one might reasonably ask why 
regulatory activities were financed from 
mandatory contributions while technical assistance 
depended on voluntary contributions. Such a 
situation was inevitably detrimental to the 
interests of the developing countries, and his 
delegation believed that part at least of the costs 
of technical assistance should be met from 
assessed contributions. 
82. His country recognized, however, that the 
Agency had done much good work, for which 
congratulations were due to the Director General 
and the Secretariat. The demand for energy in 
Nigeria, as in most developing countries, was 
growing at an annual rate of 15-25%, due to the 
country's rapid economic development. The 

1975-80 development plan, for example, envisaged 
the establishment of an iron and steel complex, of 
a petrochemical industry and of agriculture-based 
industries and also the expansion of existing 
industries. Such projects would require large 
amounts of energy. Extensive rural electrification 
was also planned, as a means not only of 
improving living conditions but also of promoting 

cottage industries and thereby arresting the 
population drift to the towns. 

83. By the turn of the century, even if all of 
the country's known hydro power resources had 
been harnessed, Nigeria would be faced with a 
severe energy shortage; that was why Nigeria 
was placing great hopes in nuclear power. The 
fact that the world's natural resources were 
being depleted and needed to be conserved made 
nuclear power even more interesting. His 
country had therefore to go beyond limited uses 
of nuclear techniques in medicine and agriculture, 
establishing a comprehensive nuclear energy 
programme based on a solid infrastructure and 
training the manpower needed for its implementation. 
That was where the collaboration of 
the Agency and of Member States willing to help 
would be of greatest use. 
84. His country, which attached great importance 
to world peace and security, was concerned about 
the threats to which mankind might be exposed 
through the unscrupulous use of nuclear energy. 
Safeguards agreements alone would not avert 
such threats; the Agency would have to take 
political decisions if it was to avoid becoming despite 
itself - an accomplice in possible nuclear 
blackmail. Referring to the Agency's relationship 
with South Africa and the effect of that 
relationship on the situation in Africa, he pointed 
out that South Africa had refused to accede to 
NPT and was now embarking on a gigantic nuclear 
programme which, ostensibly, was designed for 
peaceful purposes. 
85. A Government which could shoot down 
school children in cold blood while they were 
demonstrating peacefully against inhuman treatment 
and which could condemn 87% of the population 
to a life of misery so that the minority might live 
in luxury would, if it felt itself threatened, be 
capable of using nuclear technology to eliminate 
the majority. No trust could be placed in a 
regime which had no hesitation in violating the 
territory of neighbouring countries, and the 
peoples of Africa could not forget the invasion of 
Angola, the continued occupation of Namibia in 
defiance of all United Nations resolutions and the 
backing of the minority regime in Zimbabwe. 
86. Pointing out that the United Nations had 
repeatedly called for a total embargo against 
South Africa, he said his delegation was convinced 
that South Africa would divert to military uses 
nuclear equipment made available to it. Nigeria 
deeply regretted, therefore, that France -a 
- 10 



GC(XX)/OR.186 


permanent member of the Security Council - had 
agreed to help South Africa realize its nuclear 
ambitions; economic considerations had outweighed 
the desire for peace. It was even more 
regrettable that the Board had been willing to 
associate the Agency with such a deal, making 
the Agency a participant in something of which 
it did not know the true nature, when opposition 
on its part might have dissuaded France from 
proceeding with the deal. The safeguards to be 
applied offered no guarantee against diversion; 
they would merely serve as a cloak for nefarious 
designs. 

87. The Agency had no right to confine itself to 
a purely scientific role. The stand taken by the 
South African Government represented a challenge 
to mankind and a danger for the peoples of Africa. 
Obviously, South Africa was in no position to act 
in conformity with the Agency's objectives or with 
the provisions of Article IV. B of the Statute. 
Because of its present Government, South Africa 
had been excluded from many organizations (by 
no means all of them political) and it had no place 
in the General Conference - and even less in the 
Board of Governors. 

88. The Agency was the only international 
organization which continued to recognize a 
regime condemned by the United Nations for 
crimes against humanity and ought to rectify the 
situation. Firstly, the General Conference should 
refuse to recognize the present Government, which 
did not represent the people of South Africa. 
Secondly, it should direct the Board of Governors 
to desist in the future from designating South 
Africa to serve on the Board. Thirdly, it should 
direct the Board to consider whether South Africa 
should continue enjoying the privileges of Agency 
membership in view of its persistent violation of 
Article IV. B of the Statute and to report on the 
matter at the twenty-first regular session. 
• The meeting rose at 6. 5 p. m. 
- 11 



GC(XX)/OR. 187 

International Atomic Energy Agency 24 March 1977* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 21-28 SEPTEMBER 1976 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Conference Centre, Hotel Nacional-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, 
on Thursday, 23 September 1976, at 10.40 a.m. 

President: Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

5 Adoption of the agenda and allocation 1 -3 
of items for initial discussion 

2 Applications for membership of the Agency 4 -6 

3 Invitation to the Palestine Liberation 7 -28 
Organization to attend the sessions of the 
General Conference in the capacity of an 
observer 

7 General debate and report for 1975 (resumed) 29 - 99 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Indonesia 29 - 45 
Romania 46-68 
Netherlands 69-8 5 
Finland 86-99 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 18 October 1976. 
** GC(XX)/573. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XX)/INF/163/Rev. 3. 

77-0205 


GC(XX)/OR. 187 

THE RECORD 

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION 
OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION(GC(XX)/562) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee recommended it to 
approve an agenda for the session consisting of 
all the items on the provisional agenda in document 
GC(XX)/562, and also to allocate items for 
initial discussion as indicated in that document. 
2. The Committee had authorized him to report 
that one of its Members had entered reservations 
of a procedural nature concerning the inclusion in 
the agenda of item 3: Invitation to the Palestine 
Liberation Organization to attend the sessions of 
the General Conference in the capacity of an 
observer. Those reservations were related 
chiefly to the absence of procedures or precedents 
for the issuance by the General Conference itself 
of an invitation to an organization to be represented 
by an observer at its sessions other than to those 
organizations specifically referred to in Rule 32 of 
the Rules of Procedure. 
• 3. The Committee's recommendations were 
accepted. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE 
AGENCY (GC(XX)/563) 

4. Mr. NAVARRETE (Mexico) expressed his 
delegation's satisfaction that Nicaragua, a Latin 
American country, was applying for membership 
of the Agency and warmly supported that application. 
5. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference 
wished to adopt the draft resolution approving 
Nicaragua for membership of the Agency contained 
in document GC(XX)/563. 
• 6. It was so decided. 
INVITATION TO THE PALESTINE LIBERATION 
ORGANIZATION TO ATTEND THE SESSIONS OF 
THE GENERAL CONFERENCE IN THE CAPACITY 
OF AN OBSERVER (GC(XX)/568 and 572) 

7. Mr. AL-SHAWI (Iraq) said he wanted to 
introduce the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XX)/572 on behalf of its sponsors, India, 
Indonesia, Iraq, the Libyan Arab Republic, Niger, 
Nigeria, Pakistan, Senegal, Sudan, the United 
Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia. 
In his opinion, there were very good legal and 
procedural grounds to justify the invitation called 
for in the draft resolution. 
8. Article V of the Relationship Agreement 
between the United Nations and the International 
Atomic Energy Agencyfl] stipulated that "The 
Agency shall consider any resolution relating to 
the Agency adopted by the General Assembly or by 
a Council of the United Nations", and 
Article III, B. 1 of the Agency's Statute laid down 
[1] INFCIRC/11, part I. A. 
that "In carrying out its functions, the Agency 
shall conduct its activities in accordance with the 
purposes and principles of the United Nations to 
promote peace and international co-operation, and 
in conformity with policies of the United Nations . . . . " 

9. The Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) 
had been invited under the terms of Resolution 
3237 (XXIX) of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations to participate in the work of the 
General Assembly as an observer, and it was 
entitled to participate with the same status in the 
international conferences convened under the 
auspices of other organs of the United Nations. 
Many other United Nations agencies, for example 
the World Health Organization (WHO), the International 
Labour Organisation (ILO), the World 
Meteorological Organization (WMO), the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) and the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 
had already accorded observer status to the PLO, 
and a number of diplomatic conferences had done 
the same. There were no provisions in either 
the Agency's Statute or the Rules of Procedure of 
the General Conference to justify a refusal to 
invite the PLO to attend the present session and all 
future sessions as an observer. It might be 
argued that Rules 30-32 of the Rules of Procedure 
of the General Conference referred only to States, 
international organizations, and non-governmental 
organizations, but Rule 2 went much further, 
referring to ". . . . such other organizations as the 
General Conference or the Board of Governors 
may from time to time decide . . . . " 
10. Resolution 3236 (XXIX) of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations affirmed the rights 
of the Palestinian people in Palestine to national 
independence and sovereignty and appealed to all 
States and international organizations to support 
the Palestinian people in their struggle to regain 
their rights. As the recognized representative 
of the people of Palestine, the PLO was interested 
in the uses of atomic energy, and its special 
experience regarding the prospects for peaceful 
applications of atomic energy in the Middle East 
would make a significant contribution to the 
Agency's work. 

11. Mr. ALI (Bangladesh) said that his country 
regarded the PLO as the legitimate representative 
of the Palestinian people and recognized the right 
of that people to live in Palestine as an independent 
nation. He believed that the PLO should be 
entitled to participate, as an observer, in the work 
of the General Conference and of similar organs 
in all the other United Nations agencies. 
12. Mr. TAPE (United States of America) made 
the following statement[*]: 
(1) "The question before us is whether or 
not the Palestine Liberation Organization 
[*] This statement is reproduced verbatim at 
the speaker's request under Rule 89(b) of the 
Conference's Rules of Procedure. 

2 



should be invited to attend this session and 
future sessions of the IAEA's General 
Conference in the capacity of observer. 
The position of the United States Government 
is that an invitation to the PLO should not be 
extended. 

(2) "There is no provision in the Statute of 
the Agency or in the Rules of Procedure of 
the General Conference for an organization 
such as the PLO to attend the General 
Conference as an observer. Rule 30 of the 
Rules of Procedure provides for representation 
by States not members of the Agency, 
but the PLO is not, and does not claim to be 
a State. 
(3) "Rule 32(b) provides for attendance at 
the General Conference by representatives 
of 'non-governmental organizations enjoying 
consultative status with the Agency ... . in 
accordance with such rules as the General 
Conference has approved'. The PLO is not 
a non-governmental organization as thatterm 
is understood in international law, that is, 
an organization which may be consulted by 
an international body by virtue of the 
possession by the organization of some particular 
expertise or technical knowledge 
related to matters within the special competence 
of the international body. None of the 
rules of Chapter V apply to such an organization. 
(4) "Some would claim that the General 
Conference can, under Rule 2 of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference, decide 
to have the PLO notified by the Director 
General, ninety days in advance, of the 
opening date, place and expected duration of 
each regular session of the General 
Conference and thereby would cause the PLO 
to be invited to attend in some capacity. 
(5) "While Rule 2 does provide for notification 
by the Director General to such other 
organizations as the General Conference may, 
from time to time, decide, and while this 
could be read to include the PLO, it would 
be a painfully strained and thoroughly inappropriate 
interpretation to find the General 
Conference's power to grant observer status 
in a provision which merely instructs the 
Director General to perform a simple 
administrative function. Notification does 
not necessarily mean invitation, especially 
when elsewhere, the rules and procedures 
explicitly provide for non-member representation, 
and that of certain categories of 
organizations. Rule 2 thus cannot be considered 
to provide additional authority to 
invite. Any decision by the Board of 
Governors or the General Conference in the 
context of Rule 2 would properly be made 
only in accordance with the other relevant 
rules of procedure. 
(6) "There are no precedents to serve as a 
basis for issuing an invitation in this case. 
GC(XX)/OR. 187 

It is clear from this record that, in every 
instance in which the General Conference 
considered the question of invitations to 
organizations to be represented at the 
Conference by observers, other than those 
specifically addressed in Chapter V of the 
Rules of Procedure, the Conference 
authorized or requested the Board of 
Governors to decide which organizations 
should be invited, based upon criteria 
specified by the Conference. In the two 
most recent cases, in 1972 and 1975, the 
Conference included specific discretion to 
the Board to decide whether representation 
by an organization - even one meeting the 
criteria specified by the Conference - would 
be in the interest of the Agency. For the 
Conference to invite the PLO to participate 
as an observer in sessions of the General 
Conference would be an action completely 
contrary to all established precedents and 
procedures of the Conference. 

(7) "Since none of the existing procedures 
of the Agency would permit the General 
Conference to decide to invite as proposed in 
document GC(XX)/572 and since all the 
precedents concerning invitations to 
organizations whose work is related to that 
of the Agency and whose attendance is in the 
interest of the Agency, call for consideration 
by the Board of Governors, the General 
Conference should not adopt the resolution. 
The General Conference should at least have 
the benefit of consideration and a recommendation 
by the Board of Governors. To 
do otherwise, would establish a new precedent 
which may open the way to representation 
in the sessions of the General Conference 
by a host of organizations which could contribute 
in no way to the work of the Agency 
but which may, in fact, impede the effective 
functioning of the Agency. The procedures 
and precedents followed in the past were 
obviously designed to avoid such an undesirable 
situation and it would be well for 
the Agency to continue to act in the same 
wise manner. 
(8) "Examples of invitations to the PLO to 
attend or to participate in various conferences 
sponsored by other organizations 
have been cited. Such examples do not constitute 
an authoritative precedent for consideration 
by the General Conference of the 
question of an invitation to the PLO to 
attend its sessions as an observer. The 
Agency must act in accordance with its own 
principles and rules of procedure, 
(9) "A previous speaker has quoted from 
the Statute of the Agency. Let me read to 
you the complete text of Article III. B. 1. 
'B. In carrying out its functions, the 
Agency shall: 

' 1. Conduct its activities in accordance 
with the purposes and principles of 

-3 



GC(XX)/OR. 187 


the United Nations to promote peace 

and international co-operation, and 

in conformity with policies of the 

United Nations furthering the 

establishment of safeguarded world


wide disarmament and in conformity 

with any international agreements 

entered into pursuant to such 

policies;1 

(10) "Mr. President, the PLO has never 
claimed to be other than a political organization 
with frequently stated political 
objectives. Whatever privileges may be 
accorded to it in other international organizations, 
it is clear that this Agency whose 
mandate is specific and technical, cannot 
benefit from association with the PLO. 
(11) "These considerations lead inescapably 
to the conclusion that the proposal for 
observer status for this organization, far 
from having anything to do with the interests 
of the Agency and Member States, has the 
• 
sole purpose of enhancing this organization's 
international political prestige. In this 
connection, we have noted that the resolution 
document GC(XX)/572 and the explanation 
memorandum contained in document 
GC(XX)/568 lack any credible attempt to 
address the real merits of observer status 
for the PLO. 
(12) "Mr. President, I would like to repeat 
that decisions taken with respect to 
observer status in other international 
organizations are not applicable to this 
Agency. Over the years, Member States 
have generally agreed on the vital importance 
of maintaining the Agency's reputation 
for objectivity and a responsible approach 
to its mandated duties, and a recognition 
of the fact that should the Agency lend itself 
to political opportunism such as is now proposed, 
that reputation could be jeopardized, 
and with it the Agency's credibility in its 
role in the implementation of an effective 
non-proliferation regime. 

(13) "In conclusion, my Government opposes 
in its entirety the resolution proposed in 
document GC(XX)/572. Finally, 
Mr. Chairman, I wish to request that a vote 
be taken on the proposal now before us." 
13. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said there was no 
reason why the Agency should be guided, in all 
respects, by the action taken by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations. Indeed, that 
could involve the risk of compromising the 
Agency's entire efforts. In dealing with the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XX)/572 the 
General Conference had two courses of action open 
to it: if it acted in accordance with the principles 
embodied in the Agency's own Statute it would have 
to reject the draft resolution; by adopting it the 
Conference would be submitting to political 
pressures. Since it was clear that the PLO could 
neither help the Agency nor receive help from it, 
the draft resolution should be rejected. The draft 
resolution was in fact rooted in the polemics contained 
in the explanatory memorandum in document 
GC(XX)/568, which employed such offensive 
phrases as "the aggressive designs of Israel" 
The PLO was a terrorist group; to invite it to 
attend the sessions of the General Conference 
would involve the Agency in a loss of credibility 
and would jeopardize the security of the international 
community. 

14. His country was opposed to the draft resolution 
and hoped it would be rejected. 
15. Mr. EROFEEV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) said his Government supported the 
draft resolution. As had already been pointed 
out, Resolution 3237 (XXIX) of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations had invited the 
PLO to attend the meetings of the General 
Assembly as an observer and called upon other 
United Nations agencies to do the same. A 
number of other organizations such as UNESCO, 
ILO, WHO and so on, had already taken the action 
recommended in the resolution, thereby establishing 
a precedent which the Agency should follow. 
16. Mr. SATTAR (Pakistan), associating himself 
with the statements by the delegates of Iraq, 
Bangladesh and the Soviet Union, said that, as the 
PLO had been accorded observer status by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations and by 
several other organizations of the United Nations 
family, it would be a reactionary and negative 
step not to admit the PLO as an observer to the 
Agency's General Conference. He shared Iraq's 
view that there was nothing in the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference to preclude 
the Conference granting the PLO observer status. 
17. Mr. GHENEA (Romania) welcomed the move 
to invite the PLO to participate in the Conference, 
as that would constitute further acknowledgement 
of the right of the people of Palestine to selfdetermination 
as well as recognition of the PLO 
as the sole representative of that people. There 
was nothing in the Agency's Statute or the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference to prevent 
the PLO being invited; indeed the Agency was 
founded on the principle of universality and in 
accordance with Article II its prime objective 
was to "accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world". Inviting the PLO to attend 
the General Conference could only serve to 
promote that objective. 

18. Mr. OSREDKAR (Yugoslavia), supporting 
the draft resolution, said that the PLO should be 
given the opportunity to participate in the work of 
the Agency in view of the importance that nuclear 
energy would have in the future for Palestine. 
Although the Agency was a technical organization, 
no scientist or engineer could divorce himself 
from political issues, nor could the Agency as a 
body remain aloof from political reality. 
19. Mr. BASSOY (Turkey), recalling that his 
delegation had made its position clear at the June 
-4 



GC(XX)/OR. 187 


meetings of the Board of Governors, reiterated 
his support for the draft resolution. 

20. Mr. GEORGE (Australia) said his delegation 
would abstain from voting because his Government 
did not feel that the PLO constituted the type of 
organization that could properly be granted 
observer status according to the terms of 
Articles 30-32 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference. 
21. Mr. AMAT FLORES (Cuba), expressing 
support for the draft resolution, recalled that 
Cuba's position had been made quite clear in an 
intervention'the previous day. [2] Some delegates 
had claimed that the Agency was an organization 
removed from politics, but indeed the very nature 
of the Agency made deep political involvement 
inevitable. Article II of the Statute stated one of 
the Agency's objectives as being to contribute to 
peace. Peace was not an abstract concept any 
more than war, and both were dependent on 
politics. He did not see how the Agency could 
ignore Resolution 3237 (XXIX) of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations giving the PLO 
observer status "in the sessions and work of all 
international conferences convened under the 
auspices of other organs of the United Nations" 
Not to follow suit would be to adopt a political 
position contrary to the spirit of the Agency. 
22. The PRESIDENT proposed that, as it was 
clear that the Conference could not reach a consensus 
on the draft resolution before it, the matter 
should now be put to a vote as requested by the 
delegate of the United States of America. 
• 23. At the request of Mr. Al-Shawi (Iraq) a 
roll-call vote was taken. 
• 24. The Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea, having been drawn by lot by the President, 
was called upon to vote first. 
• 25. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, 

German Democratic Republic, Ghana, 

Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, 

Iraq, Japan, Kuwait, Libyan Arab 

Republic, Malaysia, Mexico, Niger, 

Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, 
Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian 

Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, 

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 

United Arab Emirates, United Republic 

of Tanzania, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, 

Zaire, Zambia, Algeria, Bangladesh, 

Brazil, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet 

Socialist Republic, Cuba, 

Czechoslovakia. 

Against: Israel, South Africa, United 
States of America, Costa Rica. 

[2] GC(XX)/OR. 186, para. 67. 
Abstaining: Denmark, France, Federal 

Republic of Germany, Iran, Ireland, 

Italy, Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, 

Netherlands, Norway, Panama, 

Portugal, Switzerland, United Kingdom 

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 

Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, 

Bolivia, Canada, Chile. 

• 26. There were 46 votes in favour and 
4 against, with 21 abstentions. The draft resolution 
was adopted. 
27. The PRESIDENT said that the Conference had 
thus agreed to invite the Palestine Liberation 
Organization to attend the sessions of the General 
Conference in the capacity of an observer, and 
that he, in his capacity as President, would like to 
exercise the privilege of welcoming the representative 
of that body. 
28. Mr. EILAM (Israel) said that, by adopting 
the resolution inviting the PLO to attend the 
sessions of the General Conference in the capacity 
of an observer, the Conference had forced the 
Agency to betray the trust of its Members and 
might well have initiated the disintegration of the 
Agency as an objective scientific organization. 
The fact of the matter was that the Agency had now 
officially accepted international terrorism into its 
bosom and had given the PLO the opportunity of 
exercising nuclear blackmail and jeopardizing 
international security. Moreover, it had happened 
at a time when nations were acutely sensitive about 
the physical protection of nuclear material and 
facilities. Acceptance of the resolution cast 
serious doubt on the future of the Agency and its 
inspection activities. His Government and perhaps 
others as well would have to reconsider their attitude 
to the Agency. In conclusion he recorded his 
country's appreciation for the ceaseless efforts 
made by the Agency and the Director General on 
behalf of the international community and expressed 
the hope that the present turn of events 
would not in fact prevent the Agency from continuing 
to function in the same way in the future as it 
had done in the past. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1975 
(GC(XX)/565) (resumed)[3] 

29. Mr. KAMIL (Indonesia), paying tribute to 
the Director General, said his delegation would 
continue to place its trust in him. He went on to 
congratulate Nicaragua and the PLO on the 
decisions taken in their favour by the General 
Conference. 
30. The delegations from Asia and Africa were 
particularly grateful to the Government of Brazil 
for its invitation to the General Conference to hold 
its twentieth regular session in Brazil, as they 
thus had an opportunity to witness the great strides 
made by the countries of Latin America in 
developing their economies and achieving greater 
social justice. 
[3] Ibid., paras 1-29 and 33-88. 
5 



GC(XX)/OR.187 

31. His delegation was on the whole well satisfied 
with the documents prepared by the Secretariat 
and was especially pleased that the annual report 
(GC(XX)/565) now covered one full calendar year. 
32. It was gratifying to note that in 1975 the 
financial resources available for technical assistance 
within the framework of the Agency and the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
had increased by 36% and 28% respectively. However, 
assistance in kind had decreased by some 
10%, which was somewhat discouraging as 
developing countries had hoped and expected that 
donor countries would increase their assistance 
in the form of equipment to meet technically sound 
and reasonable requests. 
33. Commending the Director General on having 
reduced by 26 the number of posts in the manning 
table proposed for 1977, thereby saving some 
$1 million, he expressed the hope that he would 
continue with his policy of stringent financial 
economy. Although further savings could be 
achieved with greater determination and cooperation 
on the part of everybody concerned, his 
delegation accepted the Regular Budget proposed 
for 1977[4]. 
34. His delegation was disappointed, however, 
that only a very small part of the budgetary 
increase of over $6 million was intended for 
activities in the field of food and agriculture. It 
hoped that research aimed at boosting food 
production would not receive low priority. 
35. Noting that Indonesia was very interested in 
food irradiation, he said that Indonesian scientists 
were carrying out research in that field under 
contracts with the Agency and participating in the 
radiation preservation of fish under the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology[5]. In that connection, he recalled the 
offer made by the Netherlands Government a few 
years previously to establish in the Netherlands 
an international facility which would provide 
reliable data on the scientific and economic feasibility 
of food irradiation and asked what had 
become of that offer. 
36. His delegation was pleased to note an 
increase in the budget of the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics (the Trieste Centre), 
which enjoyed great esteem in the scientific 
community and offered excellent training facilities 
for all scientists. 
37. On the other hand, the Regular Budget 
figures relating to technical assistance and 
training did not create a happy impression; there 
was to be an increase of only $198 000, compared 
with a proposed increase of more than $1.5 million 
in safeguards expenditure. 
[4] See document GC(XX)/567. 
[5] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/167. 
38. The target for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund was to be raised by $500 000 to 
$ 6 million. In the opinion of his delegation, that 
increase was insufficient to meet the growing need 
of developing countries for technical assistance. 
Like many other developing countries, Indonesia 
believed that the target should be $6|-7 million. 
In that connection he recalled that in 1974 the 
General Conference had adopted a resolution in 
which it was stated that in setting the target 
account should be taken of the need to compensate 
for such factors as inflation and currency fluctuations. 
39. In the preceding few years, far more Regular 
Budget funds had been spent on safeguards than on 
technical assistance and training, despite the 
fact that the framers of the Statute had placed 
equal emphasis on aiding developing countries and 
applying safeguards. In the annual race for 
appropriations between technical assistance and 
safeguards, technical assistance had always lost, 
even though the number of Member States in need 
of technical assistance had increased. 
40. Indonesia's requests for technical assistance 
had received a satisfactory response in recent 
years, and he wished to thank the Agency and all 
donor countries. In particular, he wished to 
thank France, the Federal Republic of Germany 
and the United States of America for the provision 
of training in the planning of nuclear power plants 
and looked forward to their also providing training 
in nuclear power plant construction and maintenance. 
41. The training abroad of university teachers 
so that they could provide instruction in atomic 
and related sciences was of great importance to 
Indonesia, and he appealed to the Agency and to 
donor countries to make fellowships available 
for that purpose. He added that his country would 
also welcome assistance in improving the teaching 
facilities at its universities. 
42. While Indonesia was satisfied with the progress 
which it had made in the use of nuclear 
energy, it would not for ever remain satisfied at 
being merely a consumer of nuclear technology 
created and developed abroad. In the declaration 
of the seventh special session of the United Nations 
on the creation of the New International Economic 
Order, all advanced countries and international 
organizations were called upon to take measures 
for the speedy transfer of technology to the 
developing countries. He was sure that the 
Agency would not turn a deaf ear to that call. 
43. The desire of some developing countries to 
acquire facilities and know-how relating to the 
more sophisticated part of the nuclear fuel cycle 
had given rise to misgivings on the part of some 
advanced countries, which were trying to persuade 
those developing countries to abandon their plans 
to achieve independence in peaceful nuclear applications. 
Thus, countries which had announced 
their commitment to Agency safeguards were 
being discouraged from advancing their peaceful 
nuclear technology, as if they had become objects 
-6 



GC(XX)/OR. 187 


of suspicion. For its part, Indonesia was not 
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[6], but it had put its 
research reactor under Agency safeguards, and 
urged other countries to make full use of the 
Agency's safeguards system. 


44. Reviewing the first 20 years of the Agency's 
existence, he remarked that brinkmanship had 
been replaced by detente, that more than two 
thirds of the countries of the "third world" were 
now Member States, that those Member States 
were demanding a greater share in the running 
of the Agency, that priority in the allocation of 
funds was being given increasingly to safeguards 
rather than technical assistance, and that more 
thought should be given to the relationship between 
the promotional and the regulatory activities of 
the Agency. In the light of the changes which had 
taken place since the establishment of the Agency, 
he felt that the time had come to contemplate a 
thorough review of the Statute and of the Rules of 
Procedure of the Agency's policy-making organs. 
45. Lastly, he expressed the hope that the 
motives of the developing countries demanding a 
change in the composition of the General Committee 
would not be misunderstood. His delegation was 
confident that the composition arrived at would 
bring the Agency closer to the situation where, as 
stated in Article IV. C of the Statute, "The Agency 
is based on the principle of the sovereign equality 
of all its members". 
46. Mr. GHENEA (Romania) said that he first 
wished to express heartfelt gratitude to the people 
and Government of Brazil and to the Rio de 
Janeiro authorities for the extremely cordial welcome 
they had given the Conference in their 
beautiful city and country. 
47. He also had the agreeable duty of telling the 
Director General, Sigvard Eklund, of the profound 
respect in which Romania held his constant 
devotion to the cause of the Agency. 
48. In the name of the Romanian Government he 
wished to express gratification at the invitation to 
the PLO to attend the sessions of the General 
Conference in the capacity of an observer, and 
also to utter a cordial welcome to that organization's 
representative. 
49. Likewise, he wished to congratulate 
Nicaragua on its admission to membership of the 
Agency. 
50. The Agency, founded two decades ago to 
"accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world", had been entrusted with 
highly responsible tasks expressly defined in the 
Statute, particularly in Article III concerned with 
functions. In the ensuing twenty years it had 
achieved remarkable things; however, there 
were still some shortcomings and imperfections. 
[6] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
51. The twentieth regular session of the General 
Conference offered an appropriate opportunity to 
pause and take stock of the Agency's position. 
That being so, his delegation wished to offer a 
number of observations on the activities pursued 
by the Agency thus far. 
52. Over the years the Agency had played a useful 
role in promoting the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy and fostering international cooperation 
in that field. It had provided technical 
assistance of value and thus contributed, despite 
its modest resources, towards a solution of the 
economic and social problems faced by Member 
States, particularly the developing countries. 
Much good work had been done in many different 
areas, notably nuclear power, and also in the 
applications of nuclear techniques in industry, 
agriculture, medicine, biology and hydrology. 
The help given developing countries in those areas 
had been valuable. The research contract programme, 
too, had provided the essential support 
which developing countries needed in order to 
embark on basic and applied research. The value 
of the Agency's training programme was also 
beyond dispute, and it was to be congratulated on 
the interregional courses it had organized and on 
its support for nuclear power projects. 
53. The forthcoming International Conference on 
Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle (the Salzburg 
Conference) to be held in 1977, was undoubtedly 
a valuable initiative, and the Director General was 
to be congratulated on it. 
54. The Agency's work aimed at preparing codes 
and guides for the construction and operation of 
nuclear power plants, its nuclear information 
system, its activities in the nuclear data field and 
in environmental protection - all those achievements 
deserved commendation. 
55. As the Agency entered its third decade, it 
behoved the General Conference to define - in the 
light of experience and in view of the new tasks 
lying ahead - the priority tasks the Agency should 
pursue and the practical modes of action it should 
choose in order to fulfil its statutory obligations 
completely and satisfy the requirements of Member 
States. Obviously, world events and the evolution 
of the world scene would have to be taken into account. 
56. In that context the increasing determination 
of peoples to be master of their own destiny and of 
their national wealth, to act as independent nations 
and participate in the solution of the great problems 
of humanity, was something that had to be respected. 
The role of small and medium-sized 
countries, of developing and non-aligned countries 
in international life should be enhanced. Part and 
parcel of that trend was the struggle to end misery, 
to achieve economic and social progress, to 
eliminate colonialism, racism, apartheid, neocolonialism 
and all forms of interference in the 
internal affairs of other people. Detente, peace, 
security, the democratization of international 
relations and the institution of a new economic 
order - of a better and fairer world - were the 
goals on which all should fix their gaze. 
-7 



GC(XX)/OR.187 

57. For an increasing number of countries the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy were entering a 
a new stage; they were no longer just a promising 
hope for the future but a present reality. 
58. Those, in brief, were the new political, 
economic and scientific realities which the Agency 
must consider in framing its future programmes, 
if it was to discharge effectively the weighty 
responsibilities its Members had entrusted to. it. 
It must be a true international forum, where all 
States, large and small, advanced or developing, 
possessors of nuclear weapons or not, would have 
the opportunity to decide together, on an equal 
footing, the destinies of the organization in which 
they placed so much hope and trust. 
59. That presupposed a substantial reinforcement 
of the Agency's activities and their continuous 
adaptation to the specific requirements of 
Member States. More resolute action to ensure 
the Agency's universality and to provide conditions 
favourable for participation by national liberation 
movements was likewise required. In that context 
the role of the General Conference should be 
enhanced. 
60. Romania believed that the Agency should 
deploy its whole strength in an effort to institute a 
new international economic order. A vital part 
of that effort would consist in facilitating untrammelled 
access by all peoples to the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy and the latest achievements of 
science and technology, in substantially increasing 
technical assistance, and generally in applying 
atomic energy so as to reduce the gap between the 
haves and have-nots. 
61. Special attention, together with the necessary 
funds, should be devoted in future years to the 
training of staff in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. 
62. Romania believed it essential that the Agency 
should accord priority to assisting countries to 
implement their national nuclear power programmes. 
That assistance should cover the 
various phases of the fuel cycle, fuel element 
fabrication, the technology of power station component 
manufacture, quality control, irradiated 
fuel reprocessing and waste management. 
63. The Romanian delegation believed that the 
Agency's Statute and NPT constituted a proper 
legal foundation for broad international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
as a whole. In the application of NPT, particular 
pains should be taken to ensure observance of 
Articles IV, V and VI. 
64. Similarly, a just balance had to be struck 
between the Agency's fundamental statutory 
function of accelerating and enlarging the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world, and its safeguards 
responsibilities. A corresponding balance should 
be maintained between the financial resources 
allocated to those two functions. 
65. If the peoples of the world were to benefit 
fully from the potential blessings of the atom, it 
was essential that atomic energy should never 
again be used for purposes of destruction. That 
was why the Romanian Government was resolutely 
opposed to the armaments race, and stood out in 
favour of general and complete disarmament, 
including nuclear disarmament. 
66. Romania was making substantial efforts to 
increase its industrial and agricultural output, a 
task calling for ever greater quantities of power. 
The country therefore intended to launch a programme 
of nuclear power station construction. 
At the same time, the extension and diversification 
of the use of isotopes in the usual fields was not 
being neglected, and substantial success had 
already been registered. 
67. True to the spirit of its foreign policy, 
Romania maintained close co-operation in the 
nuclear field with many countries, and was also 
grateful to the Agency and UNDP for the assistance 
it had received in the promotion of nuclear 
technology. 
68. In conclusion he wished to reiterate his 
Government's support for the Agency and its confidence 
in the Agency's ability to satisfy the 
important demands being made on it by all 
peoples. 
69. Mr. BOT (Netherlands) said he was happy to 
note that the three specific functions of the Agency, 
referred to by his country's delegate at the first 
General Conference, namely supervision of the 
use of fissionable materials, provision of 
technical assistance and co-ordination of all international 
efforts in the field of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, although considerably expanded 
and intensified over the preceding two decades, 
were still the prime concerns of the organization. 
During that period important results had been 
achieved, for which the Secretariat as well as the 
Member States deserved to be commended. The 
Netherlands would continue to render every assistance 
to the Agency in realizing its lofty ideals 
and in efficiently fulfilling its functions. 
70. The Agency had always operated in a 
businesslike manner and it was hoped that the 
practice would continue in the future without 
being hampered by extraneous political considerations, 
which only diverted attention from the 
complex and real problems associated with the 
use of nuclear energy. His delegation was convinced 
that the Agency, which was responsible in 
a field of human activity directly influencing the 
lives of people today and the lives of generations 
yet unborn, would remain an effective instrument 
for the progress and self-protection of mankind. 
In that connection, the Salzburg Conference to be 
held the following year had an important task. The 
Netherlands would actively participate in that 
major event. 
71. Although over the years the use of nuclear 
energy had rapidly expanded, it was regrettable 
that opposition to nuclear energy had also 
-8 



GC(XX)/OR. 187 


increased. There were indeed problems 
related mainly to the application of safeguards, 
which deserved continuous and serious attention 
especially because exports of nuclear material, 
equipment and technology were growing. 

72. The Director General's statement clearly 
indicated the Agency's awareness of the problems 
involved. The Netherlands delegation shared his 
opinion that nuclear energy was at present the only 
real alternative to the more traditional energy 
sources in spite of the fact that the Netherlands 
had huge reserves of natural gas. 
73. The need for nuclear energy in the face of 
growing opposition to it made it imperative for the 
Agency to contribute to the public acceptance of 
nuclear energy. In his Government's opinion, 
that could be achieved, among other things, by 
continuous Agency activities in the field of nuclear 
safety and environmental protection. It was 
therefore somewhat discouraging to note the 
comparatively modest increase in the budget for 
the relevant part of the programme amounting to 
only 6. 6% as compared to that for 1976. The 
Netherlands was highly interested in the Research 
Project on Risk Assessment jointly undertaken by 
the Agency and the International Institute of 
Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), to which it 
intended to second a scientist. 
74. His Government agreed with the Director 
General that nuclear energy should be considered 
in the broader context of energy policy in general. 
The reactor centre in the Netherlands had recently 
been given a wider scope and renamed 
Netherlands Energy Research Foundation. 
75. Although the possibilities of other nonconventional 
sources of energy should indeed be 
explpred by Member States, the Agency's 
involvement in that field, as well as excessive 
broadening of the scale of its activities, which 
could be seen in the new draft medium-term programme, 
might lead to fragmentation. It was 
therefore imperative that in defining the 
priorities of the Agency's activities clear emphasis 
should be laid on nuclear energy and not on the 
energy field as a whole. 
76. His Government approved the Agency's past 
activities and future programme in the area of 
energy production by nuclear fusion. Although 
many problems would have to be solved, that 
method appeared to be promising for the future. 
The huge outlays involved in fusion research made 
international co-operation desirable, in which the 
Agency should play a co-ordinating role. 
77. The Director General had rightly pointed out 
that, in view of the world-wide proliferation of 
nuclear energy facilities, it was all the more 
necessary to strike a proper balance between the 
Agency's regulatory and promotional activities. 
His Government considered those two activities to 
be inseparable and interconnected. 
78. The Netherlands had always held that the 
application of safeguards was the primary function 
of the Agency. It welcomed the policy trend 
calling for the extension of safeguards to 
technological information, since such technical 
know-how could also be used for manufacturing 
nuclear weapons. 

79. In that connection, the United Kingdom had 
taken a commendable initiative earlier in the year 
to provide an additional option for countries not 
party to NPT to place all their nuclear facilities 
and material under full Agency safeguards. It 
was to be hoped that those countries would avail 
themselves of the opportunity and thus contribute 
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It 
was gratifying to note that the relevant resolution 
had been adopted by the Board of Governors by 
consensus. 
80. Two nuclear-weapon States had taken a 
praiseworthy step by expressing their willingness 
to submit their civil nuclear facilities to the 
Agency's safeguards. His Government would 
urge the other nuclear-weapon States, whether or 
not party to NPT, to follow the example set by 
the United Kingdom and the United States. 
81. As regards regional fuel cycle centres, the 
Netherlands Government welcomed the Agency's 
study dealing with the institutional aspects of 
those centres, which it was studying in detail, 
and intended to use it in determining its final 
policy in that area. That study would gain in 
value when it was combined with the one, now 
under way, on nuclear waste management. 
82. The Netherlands wished to join the Director 
General in appealing to all countries which had not 
signed NPT to reconsider their position and to 
accede to the Treaty, since it firmly believed that 
placing a country's entire nuclear programme 
under the Agency's safeguards was an essential 
element in ensuring that nuclear material, equipment 
and information were being used only for 
peaceful purposes. 
83. As for the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, his delegation was in favour of the 
proposed re-evaluation of its focus, guiding 
principles and general operating rules. In view 
of the technological and political developments, it 
wo.uld be quite appropriate to review the programme, 
bearing in mind that transfer of highly 
sophisticated technology in the field of nuclear 
energy should fit into a country's overall infrastructure 
and its development plan. His Government 
had always considered technical co-operation 
with developing countries a major policy goal and 
attached particular importance to such cooperation 
within the framework of the Agency. 
84. In conclusion, the Netherlands delegation 
wished to express its satisfaction with the Agency's 
work. 
85. His Government considered the Agency's 
new programme to be in conformity with the role 
which the Agency was expected to play, and 
pledged its wholehearted support for that programme. 
-9 



GC(XX)/OR. 187 

86. Mr. MAKINEN (Finland) said that it was a 
particular pleasure to attend a session of the 
General Conference at Rio de Janeiro, in a country 
whose future was so full of promise owing to its 
great natural wealth and, above all, to the qualities 
of its people, a country, moreover, which had 
never known and never would know such a thing as 
racial discrimination. 
87. Since the creation of the Agency the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy had made rapid progress, 
and the same was true of world trade in nuclear 
materials. NPT had been concluded, one might 
well think, none too soon. As far as the practical 
application of NPT was concerned, it was quite 
possible that the stage which had now been reached 
would prove to be decisive. Decisions that needed 
to be taken at the present time would determine to 
what extent the system of security which NPT 
aimed at setting up merited the confidence of the 
world community and in what degree hopes were 
likely to be deceived. 
88. Hope had already been disappointed to some 
extent. It was regrettable that the application of 
NPT had not made it possible to establish among 
the contracting parties a vast zone of free trade 
in nuclear materials under the protection of a 
safeguards system such as the authors of the 
Treaty had had in mind. So far it had not been 
possible to extend the control systems to the whole 
of the nuclear fuel cycle - or, to put it another 
way, to require that importing countries adhere 
to the system set up under NPT as an absolute 
condition of delivery. 
89. Bilateral arrangements had of course done 
something to fill the gap. A situation was in fact 
emerging where those arrangements weighed upon 
parties to NPT but not upon third countries which 
had never wanted to accept effective controls; 
members of the NPT system on the other hand had 
to give accurate accounts of the nuclear materials 
used by them at all times, even when exporting to 
a country outside the Treaty. The system risked 
becoming less and less attractive to the States 
that had thus far remained outside it, and the 
establishment of a universal regime to replace the 
complex network of bilateral agreements was 
accordingly an urgent task. 
90. What was required, in the opinion of his 
Government, was a situation in which parties to 
NPT could be sure of receiving distinctly greater 
benefits than those that remained outside the 
Treaty. Finland had therefore asked the Director 
General to give the Board a summary of its ideas 
on how the Agency's safeguards could be strengthened 
in the form of an information document 
issued in June. That memorandum was not an 
official document of the General Conference, but 
he hoped that it would nevertheless be given careful 
study by delegates. 
91. Since the Agency's work as a supplier of 
technical assistance and other services appeared 
to be focused increasingly on fission technology 
and nuclear power, consideration might be given 
in future to enlarging the scope of the requests 
for application of safeguards envisaged in the 
Statute - in fact, requests for comprehensive 
controls should be possible. In sum, all 
Member States should do their best to support the 
extension of the safeguards system and make it 
more effective, 

92. The growth of nuclear power had also made 
people more aware of the stages in the fuel cycle 
which required stricter control measures. 
Differences between potential risks had been 
identified and their importance assessed. The 
task of careful differentiation should be pursued 
further to prevent the safeguards system from 
becoming unduly cumbersome. Special attention 
should be given to the last stage of the cycle. 
93. The situation was bound to change when 
reprocessing was carried out on a large scale. 
Measures aimed at preventing the growth of 
plutonium stocks were sensible and would remain 
so until it could be shown that that material would 
be needed in the near future. Concentration of 
fuel cycle installations in a few well protected 
places which lent themselves to ready surveillance 
would do much to improve security. 
94. His Government had noted with great satisfaction 
the Agency's decision to examine the 
possibilities offered by regional fuel cycle centres. 
Since Finland was constant in its desire to 
strengthen NPT, it saw in the Director General's 
initiative an additional step towards the goal of 
maintaining the number of reprocessing plants at 
a minimum - and that was equivalent to an effort 
to minimize the risks involved in the storage and 
management of plutonium. Different States might 
be interested in different problems, and there 
were many which naturally emerged in such a 
study: Finland, for example, was particularly 
interested in environmental protection and would 
accordingly focus attention on all problems 
related to the management of radioactive waste. 
95. Later on the Agency should play an active 
role in the elaboration of safety and environmental 
standards for regional centres. Bilateral safeguards 
arrangements should be broadened and 
put on a regional basis. In that way transfers 
of nuclear materials between States participating 
in a regional scheme could be made easily, without 
recourse to burdensome controls. 
96. In that way, too, solutions could probably be 
found to the problems presented by the establishment 
of regional fuel cycle centres. The concept 
of "denuclearized zones" designed to limit the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons had long been 
familiar, and Finland wished to suggest the 
establishment of "zones for the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy". 
97. Finland was a country which, to a large 
extent, was obliged to adapt its policies to the 
decisions of States possessing large nuclear 
resources. He wished therefore to appeal in the 
first instance to the nuclear-weapon States and 
the great Powers to strengthen the system that 
- 10 



GC(XX)/OR.187 


had been evolved to ensure that nuclear weapons 
would not proliferate further. 

98. He would not conclude without saying a few 
words about the special international problem of 
nuclear waste. In that sphere the ordinarytechnical 
problems of treatment and disposal 
were further complicated by a whole series of 
problems relating to liability, international 
security and so on. Since NPT and the arrangements 
associated with it imposed numerous 
obligations on other States, it was not unreasonable 
to suggest that the great nuclear Powers should 
seek model solutions to those problems. In that 
connection the Agency would naturally have an 
important role to play. 
99. Finland, obliged as it was to invest fairly 
sizable resources in the production of nuclear 
power, and desirous of pursuing a policy of strict 
neutrality, was well aware of the advantages to be 
gained from close collaboration with the Agency. 
It was a matter for satisfaction that the Agency had 
continued to improve and enhance the assistance of 
various kinds which it gave to Member States. 
His Government accordingly supported without 
reserve the Agency's efforts on behalf of peace and 
international co-operation. 
• The meeting rose at 1.15 p. m. 
- 11 



GC(XX)/OR. 188 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
24 May 1977* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 21-28 SEPTEMBER 1976 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Conference Centre, Hotel Nacional-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, 
on Friday, 24 September 1976, at 3. 15 p. m. 

President: Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

7 
General debate and report for 1975 1 - 77 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegate s of: 

Republic of Korea 
1 -5 

Brazil 
6-12 

Portugal 
13 - 18 

Bulgaria 
19 - 30 

Zambia 
31 - 37 

Bangladesh 
38 - 49 

Philippines 
50 - 60 

Japan 
61 - 69 

Thailand 
70 - 77 

Statement by the Palestine Liberation 78 
Organization 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 10 November 1976. 

** GC(XX)/573. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XX)/INF/163/Rev. 3. 
77-0209 


GC(XX)/OR. 188 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1975 
(GC(XX)/565) (continued)fl] 

1. Mr. CHOI (Republic of Korea) said his 
Government greatly appreciated the way in which 
the Director General and the Secretariat had met 
the challenges with which the Agency had been 
faced during its existence. His delegation was 
happy to welcome Nicaragua to membership of 
the Agency. The annual report (GC(XX)/565) for 
1975 had rightly focused attention on the problems 
which Member States - especially those of them 
which were developing countries - were experiencing. 
It was gratifying to note that the Agency, 
having identified financing problems and the 
shortage of trained manpower as the major constraints 
encountered by developing countries in 
implementing their nuclear power programmes, 
was organizing a series of seminars and training 
courses to help remedy the situation. In 
October 1975, his country had been host to an 
Agency regional workshop on laboratory technicians' 
training, which had been successful in 
identifying regional requirements and suggesting 
effective ways of training technicians. His 
Government looked forward with interest to the 
outcome of the Agency1 s study on ways and means 
of meeting the fuel cycle needs of groups of 
countries on a regional basis; the study would 
provide a frame of reference for developing 
countries. 
2. His Government had acceded to the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT)[2] on 23 April 1975 and subsequently concluded, 
on 31 October, an NPT safeguards agreement 
with the Agency. In February 1976, the 
subsidiary arrangements had entered into force. 
Also in 1976, a directorate of national safeguards 
and international co-operation had been established 
within the Ministry of Science and Technology, 
with responsibility for nuclear material accounting 
and safeguards. His country had thus fulfilled all 
the requirements laid down for an international 
as well as a national safeguards system. 

3. Although the Republic of Korea had acted on 
its own in acceding to NPT, it still believed in the 
merits of "package accession" covering the entire 
Korean peninsula. Simultaneous or concerted 
accession should be actively promoted as one of 
the best ways of achieving the universality of NPT. 
His Government hoped that strict observance of 
the provisions of NPT would further enhance 
international co-operation in the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy, with the special needs of the 
developing countries receiving due consideration. 
4. In the Republic of Korea, the KORI nuclear 
power station was expected to go critical about 
mid-1977 and commence full operation by the end 
of the same year. Because of uncertainty about 
[1] GC(XX)/OR. 187, paras 29-99. 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
supplies of enriched uranium in the early 1980s 
and the consequent need for a diversification of 
nuclear fuel sources, the Wolsung nuclear power 
station, the construction of which had already 
begun, would be based on a CANDU-type reactor. 
Financial constraints were affecting other nuclear 
projects; in fact, as a result of increased costs 
the entire nuclear power programme had had to 
be readjusted and somewhat curtailed. 

5. His delegation hoped that the Agency would 
establish machinery for promoting, with 
appropriate safeguards, the free flow of relevant 
nuclear power technology among Member States, 
The Agency should focus its programmes on 
activities likely to be of immediate benefit to the 
developing countries and promote closer cooperation 
among its Member States. 
6. Mr. BARBALHO (Brazil), after congratulating 
Nicaragua on its admission to the 
Agency and cordially welcoming to Rio de Janeiro 
the delegates of the States Members of the Agency, 
recalled that Brazil had, from the outset, 
correctly foreseen the important role which would 
devolve on the Agency. His country had been one 
of the group of twelve States responsible for 
drafting the Agency's Statute and had participated 
in the work of the Preparatory Commission, 
providing the chairmen for the meetings of both 
bodies. Brazil had always strongly supported the 
Agency in its task of providing technical assistance 
and preventing the diversion of fissile materials 
to military uses. 

7. With its population of over 110 million, 
Brazil urgently needed to raise the living 
standards and improve the quality of life of its 
people. The achievement of those aims required 
enormous amounts of energy and, with the 
economically exploitable hydro power resources 
near industrial centres already harnessed, the 
Government had decided to implement a vast 
nuclear programme. For that purpose it had 
created during the preceding two years new 
organizational arrangements for the administration 
of nuclear activities, the National Nuclear 
Energy Commission being responsible for regulatory 
and licensing functions and NUCLEBRAS a 
recently established holding company - being 
entrusted with the programme of plant construction 
in liaison with the private sector. 
8. As a further step in the development of a 
nuclear industry, Brazil had concluded an agreement 
with the Federal Republic of Germany in 
June 1975 for co-operation in the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy and an agreement with 
the Agency for safeguards covering all the goods 
and services to which the co-operation agreement 
related. 
9. A large-scale programme for the training 
of Brazilian personnel would be started during 
the coming weeks, the aim being to train all the 
persons directly or indirectly engaged in nuclear 
activities. Brazil was convinced that if, in the 
early 1960s, serious thought had been given to the 
consequences of unlimited recourse to fossil fuels, 
2 



GC(XX)/OR. 188 


especially petroleum, environmental contamination 
could have been largely avoided; much the same 
could be said as regards the use of chemical 
fertilizers, the dispo'sal of industrial wastes and 
so on. 

10. The expansion of nuclear generation posed 
extremely complex problems which could be 
solved only through close international collaboration. 
It was essential that all countries have 
the information necessary for weighing the 
advantages and drawbacks of nuclear power and 
securing its acceptance by the public. 
11. As had often been pointed out, the Agency's 
resources were not enough for it to meet all 
requests for technical assistance; however, the 
Agency had made a great effort to allocate those 
meagre resources in an equitable manner. 
12. In conclusion, his delegation sincerely 
hoped that the twentieth regular session of the 
General Conference would prove to be an important 
step along the path which the Agency was 
following in helping mankind to achieve peace and 
prosperity. 
13. Mr. de SACADURA CABRAL (Portugal) 
welcomed the admission of Nicaragua to membership 
of the Agency and thanked the Director 
General for his lucid statement at the inaugural 
meeting, in which he had clearly brought into 
focus the various aspects of the main problems 
at present facing the Agency. 
14. Certain directives in the "Programme of 
action" of the Portuguese Government reflected 
the growing importance being accorded to the 
utilization of nuclear energy in Portugal. As 
regards electric power generation, Portugal was 
very dependent on foreign countries, owing to the 
considerable volume of petroleum which had to 
be imported. It was expected, moreover, that 
recovery from the present economic crisis would 
mean a substantial increase in electricity consumption. 
In order to meet the demand, new 
hydroelectric and thermal power plants would be 
built; at the same time, the advisability of 
resorting to nuclear energy as a means of 
producing electricity would have to be considered. 
It was expected that the Government would take 
a decision on the matter before the end of the 
current year or at the beginning of 1977. Acquisition 
of the experience and know-how needed for 
licensing nuclear plants thus assumes special 
importance, particularly in so far as the aspects 
closely connected with public safety were concerned. 
A revision of the Legislative Decree on 
the licensing of nuclear power plants, which would 
permit more effective intervention by the 
Government departments concerned and fuller 
participation by the public, was under way<, 

15. As regards the nuclear fuel cycle, work had 
continued on the production of uranium concentrates 
in accordance with the previously defined 
policy, calling for maximum use of production 
capacity and the storage of nearly all the concentrates 
produced with a view to future needs. 
It was expected that about 110 tonnes of U3O8 
would be produced during the current year. 
Portugal's reasonably assured uranium ore 
reserves represented some 8000 tonnes of U3O8; 
about half of those reserves were located in the 
south of the country and were not yet being worked. 

The existence of considerable stocks of uranium 
concentrates and the deferment of a decision on 
nuclear power plant construction meant that 
Portugal was interested in the creation of a 
"uranium bank" which would make it possible to 
use immobilized stocks. Although the idea 
appeared to have been temporarily shelved, his 
Government continued to be interested in bilateral 
agreements leading to contracts for the loan of 
uranium concentrates. 

16. An effort had been made to re-orient 
research and development activities so as to 
take into account the most pressing economic 
and social needs of the country. At the Research 
Institute of the Nuclear Energy Board, for 
example, all activities and organizational methods 
had been subjected to a thorough reassessment. 
Priority had been given to applied research and to 
development, but the radiation protection and 
other services which lay within the competence 
of the laboratory were not being neglected. 
Action had also been contemplated in spheres 
outside nuclear energy. 

17. In accordance with the general foreign 
policy principles followed by Portugal since the 
Revolution of 25 April 1974, the country's 
relations with international organizations, and 
particularly with the Agency, were being so 
conducted as to strengthen international peace 
and co-operation among all countries of the world. 
The year 1976 assumed particular significance 
for Portugal in the nuclear field, since in June 
the Portuguese Government had given its approval 
for the country's accession to NPT. 
18. The Portuguese Government endorsed the 
Agency activities concerned with the application 
of safeguards, the physical protection of nuclear 
materials, nuclear safety and protection of the 
environment and also its efforts to expand its 
technical assistance programme. Portugal was 
moreover interested in carrying out more 
activities jointly with the Agency. During the 
present year a research contract had been 
awarded, and requests for fellowships and other 
forms of technical assistance were being considered 
by the Agency. 
19. Mr. KOSTADINOV (Bulgaria) welcomed 
Nicaragua to membership of the Agency and noted 
with satisfaction the presence at the Conference 
of a representative of the Palestine Liberation 
Organization (PLO). 
20. The year which had elapsed since the conclusion 
of the Conference on Security and 
Co-operation in Europe had confirmed his 
Government's conviction that the Final Act of 
that Conference created favourable conditions 
for strengthening collective security and international 
co-operation not only in Europe but 
throughout the world. 
-3 



GC(XX)/OR. 188 

* 

21. Under the competent management of its 
Director General the Agency was making a 
significant contribution to international cooperation 
in the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy, as could be seen from the report of the 
Board for 1975 and the Agency's programme 
for 1977-82. 
22. In view of the particular importance of 
safeguards, Bulgaria was following with the 
closest interest all Agency action in that field; 
it considered that the safeguards system should 
be extended to cover all the nuclear activities of 
non-nuclear-weapon States not party to NPT. 
His delegation approved the increase in the staff 
of the Department of Safeguards and Inspection 
and in the funds allocated to it; in that connection, 
he noted that it would be preferable for Agency 
safeguards activities to be undertaken by 
nationals of States party to KPT. 
23. His delegation was convinced that the 
prevention of the further spread of nuclear 
weapons depended chiefly on the manner in 
which the principal nuclear exporters conducted 
their transactions. In that context, he stressed 
the importance of the Agency1 s study of regional 
nuclear fuel cycle centres. In view of the prevailing 
international apprehension with regard to 
commercial dealings in nuclear equipment and 
materials, it was difficult to overestimate the 
positive contribution which the establishment of 
such centres would make to non-proliferation. 
24. The report of the Board for 1975 accorded 
relatively little space to the subject of nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes (PNE). However, 
that did not diminish the importance of the subject, 
nor the Agency's responsibilities. In that connection 
he drew attention to the Treaty between 
the United States of America and the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics on Underground 
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes (the PNE Treaty). 
25. Turning to the Agency's programme for 
1977-82, he observed that in preparing that 
document (GC(XX)/567) the Secretariat had 
clearly been guided by the rapid development and 
introduction of nuclear science and technology in 
many areas, and above all by the development of 
nuclear power as a promising method of meeting 
growing energy requirements. There appeared 
to be two main trends in the Agency's programme: 
firstly, promoting and facilitating the introduction 
of new nuclear techniques in the developing 
countries (mainly by the provision of technical 
assistance); and, secondly, ensuring that those 
techniques were used exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. As regards the allocation of technical 
assistance, the Bulgarian delegation considered 
that priority should be given to non-nuclearweapon 
States party to NPT. In view of the great 
importance of Agency technical assistance, 
Bulgaria regularly paid its contribution to the 
General Fund, and he was pleased to announce 
that in 1977 the amount of Bulgaria's voluntary 
contribution would be in accordance with the 
recommendations made at the present session 
of the Conference. 
26. Bulgaria's programme of nuclear power 
station construction was being implemented with 
the aid of the Soviet Union. The Kozloduj power 
station, with two water-moderated and -cooled 
reactors having a total capacity of 880 MW, was 
already in operation and a further power station 
of the same capacity was under construction at 
the same site. Bulgaria intended to continue 
building light-water reactors in the years 
immediately ahead, as they were the most 
economical and generally most practical type of 
reactor from Bulgaria's point of view. Under 
the reactor construction programme, the total 
installed nuclear capacity would attain about 
8000 MW by 1990. The development of nuclear 
power was to a great extent dependent on a 
country's industrial base. That also applied in 
the case of Bulgaria, where over the past four 
or five years a start had been made on the production 
of certain reactor components. 
27. There was no doubt that the development of 
nuclear power posed certain problems for Bulgaria, 
particularly as regards nuclear safety and 
environmental protection. That was why the 
Bulgarian Committee for Peaceful Uses of Atomic 
Energy had recently been given wider powers 
enabling it to exercise control in matters concerned 
with the safety of nuclear installations. 
The Agency's work on the preparation of codes 
and guides relating to nuclear safety and radioactive 
waste management had been of considerable 
value in that connection. Bulgaria had been 
receiving equally valuable assistance from the 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA), 
whose standing committee on the use of atomic 
energy for peaceful purposes furnished regulatory 
documentation frequently prepared in consultation 
with the Agency. 
28. A further important feature of the Agency's 
activities was its training course programme. 
Bulgaria had more than once made use of that 
programme and would continue to follow with 
interest the Agency's activities in the sphere of 
training. In November 1975, the Agency had 
organized a study tour to several socialist 
countries, including Bulgaria, in which 22 representatives 
of developing countries had taken part. 
A visit to the Kozloduj power station and a number 
of lectures had enabled the group to acquaint 
itself with Bulgaria's experience in the introduction 
of nuclear power. Bulgaria was ready to 
maintain its co-operation with the Agency in that 
sphere if required. 
29. His delegation welcomed the progress made 
in expanding and modernizing the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS), which represented 
a truly praiseworthy example of international 
co-operation in the handling of scientific 
and technical information. 
30. In conclusion, he said that Bulgaria approved 
of the Agency's programme and budget for 1977. 
The Bulgarian Government would continue to 
support fully the Agency's efforts in strengthening 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
-4 



GC(XX)/OR. 188 


atomic energy and preventing the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 

31. Mr. SILANGWA (Zambia) welcomed 
Nicaragua as a Member of the Agency. He also 
welcomed the PLO as an observer at the General 
Conference and expressed the hope that the Agency 
would accord similar recognition to African 
liberation movements in the future. 
32. It was gratifying to note that the Agency was 
conducting its activities in a spirit of economy. 
Even though more could have been accomplished, , 
the Agency's efforts in providing technical 
assistance and training in 1975 were undoubtedly 
commendable, and Zambia itself had benefited 
from a number of the Agency's activities in the 
past year. 
33. Turning to the Agency's programme for 
1977-82, he noted with satisfaction that the Agency 
was attaching great importance to activities which 
would further the economic and scientific development 
of the developing countries. Special 
attention should be paid to the effectiveness of 
technical assistance as a means of creating the 
requisite scientific infrastructure in those 
countries. Any constraints on the full realization 
of the technical assistance programme should be 
examined and removed. His delegation was concerned 
at the fact that the Secretariat had failed 
to take a firm line on the question of linking the 
provision of technical assistance with accession 
to NPT. Zambia looked forward to the implementation 
of proposals leading to an increase in 
the funds available for the technical assistance 
programme and in expert services under that 
programme in the coming years. 

34. Since 1968, Zambia, with the help of the 
Agency, had established facilities for the application 
of radioisotopes and for radiation protection. 
It was currently taking steps to ensure exploitation 
of the country's radioactive mineral resources and 
the peaceful application of atomic energy. To that 
end the Zambian Government was enacting a law 
for the establishment of an institution to be known 
as the Prescribed Minerals and Materials 
Commission, whose functions would include the 
regulation of all matters relating to certain 
specified minerals, nuclear energy, radioactive 
substances and research. 
35. With regard to non-proliferation, his 
delegation supported all efforts aimed at reducing 
the nuclear threat, but such efforts should be 
pursued in full cognizance of the views of all 
nations - regardless of whether they did or did 
not possess nuclear weapons - and without any 
selfish motives; lack of adequate consultations, 
the failure of some key nations to fulfil certain 
obligations under NPT and the encouragement 
given to "fascist, racist and belligerent" regimes 
could completely frustrate them. 
36. His delegation was well aware that the 
Agency was a scientific and technical organization. 
However, it held the strong conviction that science 
and technology should be closely related to the 
environment in which they were applied. In that 

connection, Zambia viewed with deep concern the 
Agency's approval of the draft safeguards agreement 
with the belligerent minority regime of 
South Africa and therefore remained opposed to 
the agreement which the Agency was to conclude 
with that regime. His delegation fully supported 
the proposals made the previous day by the 
delegate of Nigeria concerning South Africa and 
urged all peace-loving Member States to accept 
them. 

37. Safeguards agreements were important for 
the Agency's operations, and decisions authorizing 
the Secretariat to conclude such agreements should 
not be taken as a matter of administrative routine 
and a prerogative of the Board. Zambia proposed 
that the Board's decisions on such crucial 
matters, especially when they related to areas 
of tension, should be taken subject to ratification 
by the General Conference. 
38. Mr. ALI (Bangladesh) congratulated the 
President and the nine Vice-Presidents on their 
election and welcomed the representative of 
Nicaragua, on the occasion of his country's 
admission to membership of the Agency, and the 
representative of the PLO, attending in the 
capacity of observer. He thanked Brazil for the 
excellent facilities which it had provided for the 
twentieth regular session of the General 
Conference. 
39. During the first two decades of its existence, 
the Agency had done good work in promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Until recently, 
most developing countries had confined their 
nuclear programmes to the use of nuclear techniques 
in dealing with agricultural, food and 
health problems and in water resources development. 
Consequently, the Agency's activities had 
involved no significant transfer of technology 
from the advanced countries and not much risk 
of diversion to non-peaceful uses. With the 
growing demand for energy in the developing 
countries and the rising price of oil, however, 
nuclear energy had come to the fore as an 
alternative source of power. Many previously 
uninterested countries had begun to look to the 
Agency for help in establishing nuclear power 
programmes. There had been a consequent 
shift of emphasis in the technical assistance field, 
and for the past few years the Agency's main 
task had been to help Member States - particularly 
those which were developing countries - acquire 
the means of producing nuclear power and at the 
same time to ensure that its technical assistance 
was not diverted to military uses. 

40. As far as technical assistance was concerned, 
Bangladesh welcomed the broadening 
of the Agency's programme for the training of 
personnel to meet the future needs of the energy 
authorities and utilities in the developing countries. 
Unfortunately, however, more and more 
obstacles were obstructing the transfer of nuclear 
technology. Admittedly, whenever such a 
transfer took place under its auspices the Agency 
had to ensure that safeguards were applied. 
5 


GC(XX)/OR. 188 


Recently, the countries supplying nuclear technology 
had agreed that nuclear equipment, 

material and information would not be furnished 
to third countries in the absence of Agency safeguards 
to prevent diversion to military uses. 
Although Bangladesh had no objection to such a 
precaution, the Agency's safeguards should not 
give rise to discrimination between third countries 
and should not result in "technical imperialism"; 
also the supplier countries should not use those 
safeguards to put pressure on or exploit the 
developing countries. 

41. In the matter of safeguards, the Agency was, 
within the scope of its Statute, efficiently performing 
the function entrusted to it in connection 
with NPT, which provided for the application of 
Agency safeguards to all nuclear facilities and 
materials in non-nuclear-weapon States party to 
it. However, NPT made a distinction between 
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States, 
and unless the nuclear-weapon States took more 
effective steps to end the nuclear arms race and 
fulfil their NPT obligations, it might become 
ineffective. The qualitative improvement and 
stockpiling of nuclear weapons had given rise 
among the countries of the Third World to a feeling 
that they were being dominated or even threatened 
by the nuclear-weapon States, and some Third 
World countries might feel the need to acquire 
nuclear weapons for themselves. The so-called 
"threshold States" had remained outside NPT, 
and some of them might well join the nuclear 
Powers with or without their aid. In that context, 
his country strongly supported the plea for the 
application of Agency safeguards to all nuclear 
installations, materials and technology in every 
country, whether or not party to NPT. 

42. It was not enough for safeguards to be 
applied to only some of a country' s nuclear 
facilities. Moreover, his country believed 
that the principal danger lay in the spread of 
uranium enrichment and fuel reprocessing plants. 
In the case of such facilities, Agency safeguards 
were inadequate. Enrichment and reprocessing 
should therefore be carried out at regional 
nuclear fuel cycle centres under international 
control and management; they should not be 
carried out under the national control of any 
country, whether it possessed nuclear weapons 
or not. 
43. International efforts, based on NPT and 
Agency safeguards, to control the spread of 
nuclear weapons had not been fully successful. 
Thought thad therefore been given to the possibility 
of complementing those efforts by the 
creation of nuclear-free zones where the 
development or importation of nuclear weapons 
would be prohibited. However, such an approach 
was viable only if the countries involved had a 
common interest in security and full trust in 
each other, and those conditions were lacking 
in some regions of the world. With a view to 
overcoming that difficulty, at the 25th Pugwash 
Conference which had taken place during 
January 1976 in Madras, the idea of a world 
nuclear-free zone established by a treaty to 

which all nations could accede had been proposed. 
The States currently in possession of nuclear 
weapons would be urged to undertake not to use 
those weapons against countries which had 
acceded to the treaty. The areas encompassed 
by such a world nuclear-free zone need not be 
continuous, and the expectation was that its 
establishment would be feasible even if initiallyonly 
a few countries acceded to the treaty. The 
idea offered an opportunity of mobilizing the 
political and moral forces of all nations, and his 
delegation hoped that the Agency would examine 
it closely in liaison with the Pugwash Council. 

44. The nuclear-weapon States themselves 
should assume greater responsibility for combating 
proliferation. That they could do by 
accepting the same safeguards as the nonnuclear-
weapon States and, above all, by helping 
to create a world climate in which there was less 
pressure to acquire nuclear weapons. They 
should accordingly enter into genuine negotiations 
to bring about nuclear and general disarmament, 
first concluding an agreement on strategic arms 
limitation, then reducing their nuclear arsenals 
and finally destroying all nuclear weapons. The 
specific steps recommended at the 25th Pugwash 
Conference included: firstly, the cessation of 
the underground testing of nuclear weapons and 
then of all nuclear weapon tests irrespective of 
environment and country; and, secondly, the 
restriction and ultimately the discontinuation of 
the flight testing of nuclear weapon delivery 
systems. The Pugwash Conference had also 
advocated a ban on all development and production 
of nuclear weapon systems and of other 
weapons of mass destruction, a speeding-up of 
the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) and 
a halt to the production of fissile materials for 
nuclear weapon manufacture. All those proposals, 
and in particular the suggested prohibition of all 
testing of nuclear explosives, had the full support 
of his country. 
45. During the past year, the world situation 
had improved as a result of such positive 
developments as the signing in Helsinki of the 
Treaty on Security and Co-operation in Europe, 
the progress made in the SALT talks, the start 
of meaningful dialogues between the industrialized 
and the developing countries, and the consideration 
being given at the international level to ways of 
rectifying the inadequacies of NPT. Those 
developments had been accompanied by a slackening 
of political tension among the industralized 
countries, where there was growing confidence 
that a war involving them directly could be averted. 
Advantage should be taken of the opportunity thus 
offered, not only by the nuclear-weapon States 
but by all nations of the world, to put an end to 
the arms race and utilize all resources for the 
betterment of man' s condition. 
46. Passing to the Agency's programme and 
budget for 1977, he commended the Director 
General and the Secretariat on the reasonable 
size of the Regular Budget and on the fact that 
the programme was in accordance with the 
priorities set by the Scientific Advisory 
-6 



GC(XX)/OR. 188 


Committee (SAC). He was concerned, however, 
as the proposed budget was nearly 18% higher 
than the 1976 budget, whereas the technical 
assistance programme fell short of the developing 
countries' expectations. Substantial funds 
should be allocated under the Regular Budget to 
the Division of Technical Assistance for emergencyprovision 
to the developing countries of nucleonic 
and electronic spare parts and components. Such 
funds could be obtained through savings in other 
programmes. 

47. In its general programme of technical 
assistance, the Agency should lay stress on 
training intermediate and lower-grade technicians 
in the numbers required to meet the developing 
countries' needs. To that end it should strengthen 
the training programmes in individual developing 
countries, at the same time encouraging regional 
co-operation, and promote the establishment of 
national training centres, the best of which might 
then become regional training centres. It would 
be in the Agency's interest to co-operate in such 
activities with other members of the United Nations 
system, especially the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 
In addition, the Agency should take steps to 
create special funds for the financing of nuclear 
power plant projects in developing countries on 
favourable terms. 

48. Turning to his own country's activities in 
the nuclear field, he said that Bangladesh now 
had an indigenous scientific and technical 
community with the help of which it was hoping 
to harness nuclear energy for the welfare of the 
people. Since the General Conference last met, 
a number of projects had been completed, programmes 
in agriculture, biology and medicine 
had been intensified and a uranium prospecting 
programme had been initiated. Work in nuclear 
physics, solid-state physics, nuclear chemistry, 
radiation chemistry, electronics, theoretical and 
applied physics and environmental protection had 
continued, and a study was in progress for the 
construction at Rooppur of a nuclear power 
station whose target date for entry into service 
was 1985. 
49. In conclusion, he assured the Agency of his 
country's continued support. 
50. Mr. IBE (Philippines) said that the developing 
countries had gradually come to recognize that 
atomic energy could be of substantial benefit to 
them and that their realization of that fact had 
manifested itself in their recent efforts to increase 
their influence within the Agency and achieve 
better representation in the General Committee. 
That development was to be welcomed and encouraged, 
and the Agency's activities would 
accordingly have to reflect more and more the 
growing interest of the developing countries in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy; the Agency's 
technical assistance programme, which in the 
past had been able to meet less than 50% of 
requests, would have to be expanded. 

51. The provision of technical assistance was a 
primary function of the Agency and was, moreover, 
envisaged in NPT. Unfortunately, however, the 
technical assistance aspect of NPT and the corresponding 
function of the Agency had been subordinated 
to Agency safeguards. It would be 
possible to finance the Agency's technical assistance 
programme from an assured and predictable 
source - namely, assessed contributions - and 
his Government would be prepared to contribute 
its share on an equitable basis. As an indication 
of its support for the technical assistance programme, 
his country would be contributing to the 
General Fund an amount in excess of that corresponding 
to its base rate of assessment and 
providing three Type II fellowships. 

52. Like most Member States, his country 
regarded the application of international safeguards 
as an equally important function of the Agency 
and believed that assistance in the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy should always be 
subject to an undertaking by the recipient not to 
use such assistance for military purposes or for 
the production of a nuclear explosive device. It 
would support any action by the Agency to strengthen 
its safeguards system, including procedures for 
the physical protection of nuclear materials. It 
welcomed the fact that further countries had 
acceded to NPT, but regretted that the safeguards 
agreement between the Agency, the European 
Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) and the 
non-nuclear-weapon Member States of EURATOM 
had not yet entered into force. 
53. In the matter of a common policy on nuclear 
exports, his country was concerned about the 
secretive activities of the "London Club", which 
might be interpreted as an attempt to impose 
conditions not contained in NPT for the supply of 
nuclear, equipment and materials. Such an 
imposition would be unfair to importing countries 
which were parties to NPT. 
54. His country recognized the need for worldwide 
strengthening of the physical security of 
nuclear materials and facilities in view of the 
rapid expansion of the nuclear industry and the 
alarming increase in terrorist activities throughout 
the world; it was inevitable under the circumstances 
that the Agency's safeguards activities 
and the associated expenditures should grow. 
The Philippines nevertheless strongly favoured 
the establishment of a reasonable balance between 
the Agency's technical assistance and safeguards 
functions and a corresponding allotment of its 
funds. 
55. His Government attached particular 
importance to the Agency's activities in the field 
of nuclear power development. His country had 
recently embarked on its own nuclear power 
programme and was looking to the Agency for 
continued support, especially in connection with 
the safety analysis of nuclear power plants and 
the training of personnel. It also supported the 
idea of establishing regional nuclear fuel cycle 
centres, including one for Asia and the Far East. 
56. The Agency's success in promoting nuclear 
power had perhaps given rise to certain problems. 
-7 



GC(XX)/OR. 188 

including that of public acceptance, which could 
not be ignored in nuclear power planning. The 
Agency should help developing countries to overcome 
the distrust with which nuclear energy was 
sometimes regarded. 

57. Another problem was that of the availability 
of nuclear fuel for power reactors. Given the 
expansion of nuclear power programmes, the 
Agency should study the possibility of international 
uranium supply management designed to ensure 
that Member States with no indigenous uranium 
were not at an undue disadvantage. It could, for 
example, consult with uranium-supplying countries 
party to NPT regarding the possibility of preferential 
supply conditions for non-nuclear-weapon 
States party to NPT, in accordance with 
Article IV. 2 of that Treaty. That would further 
enhance the Agency's role in the promotion of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and strengthen 
NPT. With regard to uranium prospecting and 
exploitation, the Agency should provide more 
assistance to countries carrying out programmes 
in that area. 

58. His delegation agreed that the Agency should 
possess adequate knowledge regarding conventional 
and emerging alternative power sources such as 
solar, geothermal and tidal energy and wind power. 
It was to be hoped that the necessary funds would 
be made available on a voluntary basis by interested 
Governments and organizations. 
59. His country, which was greatly interested 
in the Agency's activities in the field of food 
irradiation, intended to establish an experimental 
pilot plant for food irradiation in the Manila area. 
Philippine laboratories were actively participating 
in the Agency-sponsored Asian regional project 
on the technical and economic feasibility of 
preserving fish by radiation. His delegation 
regarded the establishment of an international 
facility for the study of food irradiation technology 
and economics as an important aspect of the 
Agency' s work. The idea of such a facility had 
been put forward by the Netherlands Government 
at the seventeenth regular session of the General 
Conference, but no progress towards its realization 
appeared to have been made by the Agency. 
60. As a party to NPT, his country had placed 
all its nuclear activities under Agency safeguards. 
However, it feared that, unless there was a 
change in the established growth trends of its 
various activities, the Agency would ultimately 
be spending more on safeguards than on promoting 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
61. Mr. KATORI (Japan) congratulated the 
President on his election and thanked the 
Government of Brazil for its warm hospitality. 
His country and Brazil had close relations, which 
had recently been strengthened by the state visit 
of President Geisel to Japan. 
62. Since the founding of the Agency in 1957 
the world had witnessed remarkable advances in 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy in many 
fields and an increase in the importance of 
nuclear power. However, such developments 
were accompanied by problems which affected all 
countries; for example, as the utilization of 
nuclear energy expanded, the danger of diversion 
to military ends and of other abuses increased. 
The Agency had, therefore, both to encourage the 
development of applications of nuclear energy and 
to prevent diversion. His country would continue 
to support the Agency in its task. 

63. In Japan, the scale of nuclear power 
generation was now such that the establishment 
of a full nuclear fuel cycle had become a matter 
of urgency. His country had to ensure an adequate 
supply of nuclear fuel and increase the yield of 
such fuel by designing and building fast breeder 
reactors, establish a reprocessing system and 
cope with the problem of radioactive wastes. It 
was making every effort at the national level to 
find answers to those problems, but felt that some 
aspects could be dealt with effectively only through 
international co-operation. It was awaiting with 
particular interest the results of the Agency's 
study of multinational nuclear fuel cycle centres, 
and the Agency could count on Japan's continued 
co-operation in that connection. As to the question 
of waste management, the Director General had 
mentioned the desirability of expanding the 
Agency's present activities so as to include the 
co-ordination of research and development and 
studies of the possibility of establishing multinational 
depositories for radioactive wastes in 
places where geological conditions were favourable. 
64. The question of safety, which was crucial to 
the development of nuclear energy, was giving 
rise to problems not only in Japan and other 
industrialized countries but also in countries 
just embarking on nuclear programmes, Japan, 
which was engaged in several research and 
development programmes concerned with safety, 
was also participating in a number of international 
projects. It fully supported the Agency's activities 
in the field of safety and hoped that the Agency 
would come to play an even greater role in 
promoting exchanges of information, providing 
technical assistance and organizing symposia and 
similar meetings. 
65. The peaceful utilization of nuclear energy 
concerned both the industrialized and the developing 
countries. The Agency had provided technical 
assistance to 77 countries in 1975, and he 
hoped that it would continue providing such 
assistance to developing countries, especially in 
the form of equipment and training. His country 
attached great importance to those activities, 
and its contributions in support of them had been 
increasing year by year. At present, Japan was 
the third largest contributor among the Agency's 
Member States, and it was ready to pledge a 
contribution for 1977 in accordance with the scale 
of assessment. In addition, Japan was providing 
technical assistance to developing countries on a 
bilateral basis through training courses, the 
services of experts, equipment and fellowships, 
and it intended to expand those activities. 
66. The danger of nuclear proliferation was 
increasing and, in his opinion, the best way of 
8 



GC(XX)/OR. 188 

combating it was to secure the participation of 
as many countries as possible in NPT. His own 
country had acceded to NPT on 8 June 1976 and 
hoped to see its example followed by a large 
number of countries, so that NPT might become 
a truly effective instrument for preventing nuclear 
proliferation. In that connection, the action taken 
by the United Kingdom and the United States of 
America was to be welcomed; it would help to 
eliminate the existing inequality between nuclearand 
non-nuclear-weapon States and to increase 
participation in NPT. 

67. Noting that the Agency had so far concluded 
127 safeguards agreements, he said his Government 
hoped that Agency safeguards would be so 
applied as to cope with the expansion and the 
increasing diversity of nuclear activities. In that 
connection, he welcomed the efforts being made to 
rationalize and improve the present safeguards 
system. 
68. On the question of PNEs, he recalled that in 
1975 the Conference of the Committee on 
Disarmament (CCD) had come to the conclusion 
that it was technically difficult to distinguish 
between a PNE and the detonation of a nuclear 
weapon; technically speaking, therefore, proliferation 
of peaceful nuclear explosives was 
tantamount to proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
That being so, it was necessary to emphasize 
anew that non-nuclear-weapon States should 
adhere to the provisions of Article V of NPT if 
they wished to enjoy the economic benefits 
deriving from PNEs. He accordingly commended 
the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions 
for Peaceful Purposes for its studies of the 
technical, economic and legal aspects of PNEs. 
It was to be hoped that those studies would soon 
lead to the drafting of the agreement envisaged in 
Article V of NPT. 

69. In conclusion, he thanked the Director 
General for his outstanding work in guiding the 
activities of the Agency since the previous session 
of the General Conference. 
70. Mr. PANYARACHUN (Thailand) said his 
delegation appreciated the importance which the 
Agency attached to technical assistance; in view 
of the fact that most Member States were developing 
countries, technical assistance was of interest to 
more of them than any other Agency activity. 
71. During the past year, emphasis had been 
placed on the planning and implementation of 
nuclear power programmes and on prospecting 
for raw materials. That was a natural trend as 
more and more countries were acquiring nuclear 
power stations. However, Thailand was not 
entirely satisfied with the way in which the Agency 
was making very frequent use of the costly 
services of experts; it would be better to allocate 
more funds to other types of assistance. That 
should be borne in mind when the long overdue 
review of the guiding principles for the provision 
of technical assistance took place. 
72. Noting that Thailand was still very interested 
in applications of nuclear techniques in agriculture 
and medicine, which were very important for all 
those Member States which were developing 
countries, he expressed satisfaction at the close 
co-operation in that area between the Agency, the 
World Health Organization (WHO) and the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO). His country greatly appreciated the 
Agency's many studies and other activities in 
connection with nuclear safety and environmental 
protection and its programmes for training in the 
planning and implementation of nuclear power 
projects. 

73. With regard to PNEs, he said that the 
complexity of the subject called for great caution 
and that the "economic advantages" - if any should 
be considered in the light of the radiation 
effects. At all events, such explosions should 
always be performed under Agency surveillance. 
74. Thailand still supported fully the establishment 
of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres and 
the Agency's study on that subject. His country 
welcomed efforts, both within the Agency and 
elsewhere, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. Many of those efforts had resulted in an 
expansion of the Agency's safeguarding role and, 
consequently, in increased expenditures. The 
fact that certain nuclear-weapon States had 
decided on the unilateral submission of their 
commercial nuclear power stations to the Agency's 
safeguards was also increasing safeguards expenditures, 
but there was no corresponding benefit 
in terms of non-proliferation. The problem would 
become more serious as nuclear technology 
developed and spread. 
75. The Government of Thailand welcomed the 
ratification of NPT by Japan. However, the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons should be only 
a first step toward the final goal: nuclear disarmament. 
Whilst it was aware of the inequalities 
involved in NPT, his country had acceded to it in 
view of its importance for the world community. 
76. He pointed out that had he been able to attend 
the last meeting of the General Committee he 
would have made a statement supporting the nonrecognition 
of the credentials of the delegate of 
South Africa. 
77. Thailand, which fully supported the Agency's 
promotional and regulatory activities, had hosted 
several meetings during 1976 and had already 
pledged its contribution to the General Fund for 
1977. 
STATEMENT BY THE PALESTINE LIBERATION 
ORGANIZATION 

78. Mr. AL-SHAIB (Observer from the 
Palestine Liberation Organization) expressed 
the gratitude of the PLO, the body representing 
the Palestinian people, to the General Conference 
for deciding to invite it to attend its sessions as 
an observer. Its important decision was a further 
manifestation of the international recognition of 
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people 
-9 



GC(XX)/OR.188 

and its legitimate struggle to exercise those 
rights. The decision was also an additional proof 
that the policy of trying to deny the Palestinian 
people its rights and existence was destined to 
complete failure. The PLO would spare no effort 
to make a positive contribution to the Agency's 
work of promoting the peaceful utilization of 

atomic energy and preventing the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. In conclusion, he expressed the 
gratitude of the PLO to all delegations which had 
supported the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XX)/572. 

• The meeting rose at 5. 45 p. m. 
- 10 



GC(XX)/OR. 190 

International Atomic Energy Agency 3 June 1977* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 21-28 SEPTEMBER 1976 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETIETH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Conference Centre, Hotel Nacional-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, 
on Monday, 27 September 1976, at 3. 15 p.m. 

President: Mr. de. CARVALHO (Brazil) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

7 General debate and report for 1975 1-9 8 

(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

1 -1U 


Mongolia 

11-26 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 27-37 
Pakistan 38-40 
Greece 41-48 
Sudan 49-60 
Egypt 61-69 

Norway 70-79 
Niger 80-87 
Ghana 

88-90 
Paraguay 91-98 
Malaysia 
6 Closing date of the session and opening 99-103 
date of the next session 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 29 October 1976. 
** GC(XX)/573. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XX)/INF/163/Rev. 3. 
77-0217 


GC(XX)/OR. 190 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1975 
(GC(XX)/565) (continued) [1] 

1. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia) welcomed, in the 
name of his delegation, the Palestine Liberation 
Organization (PLO) as an observer. He went on 
to say that the Agency's report was of great 
interest and to congratulate the Director General 
on his personal role in the Agency's activities, 
recalling his visit to Mongolia, which had greatly 
contributed to strengthening co-operation between 
Mongolia and the Agency. 
2. Noting that the present session of the 
General Conference fitted into the context of 
international detente, which was opening up new 
prospects for co-operation between States, he 
emphasized the importance of the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe. 
3. The Mongolian delegation attached 
particular importance to detente and co-operation 
in Asia and was pleased that the conflicts on the 
Indo-Chinese peninsula had come to an end. 
Reduction of the risk of nuclear war, armaments 
limitation and disarmament were the grand 
objectives of the present. The Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) [2] had an 
important part to play in that connection, and he 
welcomed the recent ratification of NPT by Japan. 
However, NPT should be acceded to by all States 
possessing a nuclear industry, and he accordingly 
urged that further countries accede to it. 
4. Pursuant to the safeguards agreements 
required in connection with NPT, the Agency was 
having to cope with increasingly wide activities in 
the area of inspections, where - the Mongolian 
delegation felt - further development and even 
greater effectiveness were necessary. 
5. The Mongolian delegation approved of the 
study of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres. 
6. His delegation attached great importance to 
the Treaty between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on 
Underground Explosions for Peaceful Purposes 
(the PNE Treaty) and to the co-operation 
agreement between the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA) and the Agency. 
7. Mongolia recognized the value of the 
technical assistance provided by the Agency to the 
developing countries and was grateful for the 
assistance which it was beginning to receive. 
8. The Mongolian Government attached great 
importance to the Agency's programmes concerned 
with nuclear safety and environmental 
protection and with applications of radioisotopes 
in agriculture and medicine. 
[1] GC(XX)/OR. 189, paras 1-158. 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
9. It was pleased that the target for voluntary 
contributions had been increased to $ 6 million 
and would make its own modest contribution to the 
General Fund. 
10. The Mongolian delegation was convinced that 
the present session of the General Conference 
would contribute greatly to closer co-operation 
between Member States. 
11. Mr. NEMETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic) noted that the present session fitted into 
the context of international detente, for which the 
Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union had recently opened up new prospects 
by reasserting the crucial importance of peaceful 
co-existence and of reducing the risk of nuclear 
war. It was in that connection that the Soviet 
Union had proposed the conclusion of a treaty for 
the complete and universal prohibition of nuclear 
weapons tests. 
12. Emphasizing the importance of the 
PNE Treaty between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the 
Franco-Soviet agreement on prevention of the 
accidental use of nuclear weapons, he said he was 
convinced that those legal instruments would 
contribute to the development of the Agency1 s 
scientific and technical activities. 
13. Referring to Mr. Kosygin's message to the 
Conference [3], he stressed the importance of 
NPT in controlling the destructive potential of the 
atomic nucleus and the need, especially for the 
Agency, to go even further in that direction. He 
expressed satisfaction with the safeguards 
activities in connection with NPT which the Agency 
was performing, always with due regard for the 
national sovereignty of Member States. He 
supported the idea of a model agreement for 
countries not party to NPT and urged those 
countries to submit to safeguards all their 
activities and facilities connected with the use of 
fissionable materials which they received, 
including those in the field of fuel reprocessing. 
14. The Ukrainian delegation considered that the 
Agency's activities in the field of technical 
assistance were on the whole satisfactory and 
announced the payment of a voluntary contribution 
of 80 000 roubles to the General Fund for 1977. 
15. He was in favour of international action with 
regard to physical protection. He also approved 
of the study of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres; 
such centres, under Agency supervision, would 
make it possible to reduce the number of sites 
where nuclear waste was stored, and their 
establishment should be studied as a matter of 
urgency, for a growing number of countries were 
preparing to reprocess irradiated fuel themselves, 
with a consequent increase in the risk of 
proliferation. 
[3] Reproduced in document GC(XX)/INF/166. 
-2 



GC(XX)/OR. 190 


16. He was also in favour of the Agency's efforts 
to establish an international peaceful nuclear 
explosions service. 
17. The intensification of contacts between the 
Agency and various regional organizations 
concerned with the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
(for example, CMEA) was mutually beneficial. In 
that connection he noted that in five years, the 
total nuclear capacity installed in the member 
countries of CMEA had increased by a factor of 
seven, and it would rise from 7500 MW to 
30 000 MW between 1975 and 1980; furthermore, 
those countries were co-operating more and more 
closely in all their nuclear research and construction 
activities. He was pleased with the first 
results of the co-operation agreement concluded 
in 1975 with the Agency. 
18. With a view to rapid technical and scientific 
development, his country was paying 
particular attention to studies relating to nuclear 
physics and the applications of atomic energy. 
Thus, Ukrainian scientists were engaged in 
research on the properties of the atomic nucleus 
and the mechanisms of nuclear reactions. For 
that purpose, the Ukraine possessed a number of 
facilities to which the largest isochronous 
cyclotron in Europe had been added during the 
current year. 
19. A large proportion of that research was 
concerned with the development of nuclear power 
generation, which would be the main component 
in the 7-8% expansion foreseen for electricity 
production. There was also intense activity 
connected with the design and construction of 
nuclear power plants, the total installed capacity 
of which would increase at an annual rate of 
12-15%. 
20. To ensure the development of nuclear power 
generation and to permit the utilization of nuclear 
power by the national economy, studies of 
numerous questions were being conducted with a 
view to improving the efficiency, security and 
safety of power plants: radiation-induced damage, 
reactor thermodynamics, automatic control of 
power plants, etc. 
21. Other studies were concerned with the use of 
nuclear heat in the metallurgical and chemical 
industries. Much attention was being paid to the 
development of new types of reactor and to work on 
thermonuclear fusion. 
22. Ukrainian scientists were using various 
types of radiation sources in physics, chemistry, 
biology and geology. 
23. The Nuclear Research Institute of the 
Ukrainian Academy of Sciences had developed a 
range of radiation devices which were being used 
in industry and agriculture. Nuclear techniques 
were also being applied more and more in medicine, 
for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. 
24. He proposed that collaboration with the 
Agency in the field of information exchange be 
intensified. His country was preparing proposals 
for new research contracts and for new study 
visits by scientists from developing countries. 

25. He welcomed the increase in the exchanges 
between the Ukraine and the Agency within the 
framework of the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS), whose output in tape form would 
soon be used directly in the Ukraine. In that 
context, he stressed the assistance which the 
Agency was giving his country in connection with 
the establishment of an automated data retrieval 
system. 
26. The Ukrainian delegation welcomed the 
decision of the General Conference to invite the 
PLO to attend its sessions as an observer. 
27. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) welcomed the 
Conference's decision on the membership of 
Nicaragua and its decision to invite the PLO to 
attend sessions in the capacity of observer. 
28. Nuclear energy was at a critical point in its 
history. Certain politicians, scientists and other 
persons with mixed motives had for some time 
been raising four major controversial issues on 
which the Agency had to take a stand: (a) the role 
of nuclear energy in meeting the future needs of 
the world; (b) the safety and environmental impact 
of nuclear facilities; (c) the economics and 
financing of nuclear power plants; and (d) nonproliferation 
and world security. 
29. Pakistan believed that nuclear power, in 
spite of the difficulties associated with it, offered 
the only real answer to the expanding energy needs 
of the world, at least during the next 20 years. 
For developing countries short of fossil fuels and 
unable to afford the high price of oil, the only way 
to ensure continued economic development was to 
turn to nuclear energy. The industrialized 
countries should, in their own interest and in the 
interest of the world as a whole, conserve their 
reserves of oil and other fuels and share their 
technical knowledge with the countries short of 
energy sources so as to solve the energy problem 
on a world-wide basis. Pakistan fully endorsed 
the efforts being made by the Agency to promote 
the generation and utilization of nuclear energy. 
Studies carried out by the Agency had demonstrated 
the advantages of nuclear power. Furthermore, 
it was arranging for the training of the 
personnel required in the generation of nuclear 
power by organizing courses with the help of the 
United States of America, France and the Federal 
Republic of Germany. Other forms of energy, 
such as solar and geothermal energy, might also 
be covered in the Agency's work, but Pakistan 
believed that the Agency should not dissipate its 
resources but rather co-operate in such matters 
with organizations like the International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). 
30. The Agency had a responsibility, on one 
hand, to contribute to environmental protection 
by promoting technical progress and, on the 
other, to allay fears and combat the prejudices of 
pressure groups in different countries which were 
-3 

GC(XX)/OR. 190 

opposed to nuclear power, even though its development 
was essential to economic life. The Agency 
was to be commended on its efforts, and his 
country would like to see its programme in those 
areas expanded. 

31. The financing of nuclear power plants was 
one of the main problems for developing 
countries. Over the past few years, unit capital 
costs had risen by a factor of six and the competitive 
size of plants had increased. No doubt 
some costs could be kept down, and the Agency with 
that end in view - had initiated several cost 
analysis studies. The Agency should attach at 
least as much importance to that problem as to 
safeguards, so that the developing countries 
might experience the benefits as well as the 
disadvantages of nuclear power. 
32. Pakistan's position on the question of nonproliferation 
and world security was very clear: 
it believed in the exclusively peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy. That being so, it had placed all 
its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards and 
even agreed to the upgrading of existing safeguards 
wherever necessary. Also, it was an advocate of 
the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the 
region to which it belonged. 
33. Pakistan considered that the line drawn in 
NPT between the five nuclear-weapon States and 
the non-nuclear-weapon States would have to be 
maintained if proliferation was to be checked. It 
therefore attached great importance to Agency 
safeguards and had great faith in the Agency's 
ability in that field. His country deplored the 
"event of May 1974" as a serious setback for nonproliferation 
and a great disservice to all 
developing countries; it provided the advanced 
countries with a ready pretext for withholding 
peaceful nuclear technology from developing 
countries. In that connection, a number of 
countries which exported nuclear equipment and 
technology had established in London a "club" 
whose deliberations were surrounded by secrecy 
and which issued arbitrary guidelines. No doubt 
the countries in question had a moral responsibility 
to ensure that their exports did not contribute 
to proliferation, but their activities were 
causing serious misgivings in the developing 
countries. No attempt should be made to change 
the Agency's safeguards system without the full 
participation of all Member States. The meetings 
of the "London Club" might well give rise to 
misunderstandings between the advanced and the 
developing countries; certainly they were not 
serving the cause of peace and non-proliferation. 
He accordingly reiterated the proposal which had 
been made by Pakistan the year before to the 
effect that supplier and recipient States should 
act in concert to evolve a code of conduct 
establishing an equitable sharing of responsibilities 
and obligations in relation to all existing 
and future nuclear technologi.es. 
34. Poverty was as potentially dangerous for 
world.peace as proliferation., and both needed to 
be combated. The countries of the Third World 
were striving to create a new world order, based 
on justice and the fair sharing of the world's 
resources. The Agency could help them by 
providing technical assistance. However, only 
$ 6 million had been allocated for Agency technical 
assistance activities and more than 50% of 
requests had to be turned down for lack of 
resources; on the other hand, the budget for 
Agency safeguards was increasing steadily. In his 
country's opinion, the two activities in question 
were equally important and should therefore be 
given equal budgetary treatment. 

35. Pakistan supported the Agency's study of 
regional fuel cycle centres. In that connection, 
the Agency should act as a broker for the supply 
of fuel - in accordance with Article IX of the 
Statute, which had too long been neglected. He 
accordingly proposed that the Agency undertake a 
study of how fuel supplies for projects under 
Agency safeguards could be assured, in order that 
dependence on bilateral supply agreements might 
be lessened. 
36. Pakistan was one of the poorest countries 
in the world as regards indigenous fuel resources; 
it therefore had no alternative but to turn to 
nuclear energy. It had enjoyed the assistance of 
the Agency in preparing a long-range planning 
study which formed the basis of its nuclear power 
programme. The master plan envisaged the 
construction of 24 nuclear power plants by the 
year 2000, by which time two thirds of the 
country's electricity needs would be met through 
nuclear power generation. A start had already 
been made on establishing the necessary infrastructure, 
ancillary plants and manpower training 
centres and on prospecting for and mining nuclear 
materials, including uranium. A reprocessing 
plant, to be built with the co-operation of France 
under a comprehensive trilateral safeguards 
agreement, was an essential element in the plan. 
37. Over the past year, Pakistan's nuclear 
programme had progressed satisfactorily: an 
availability factor of 85% had been achieved at 
the Karachi nuclear power plant; the adjacent 
training centre was nearing completion; the 
country's sixth nuclear medicine centre - at 
Larkana - would be completed in 1977; work on 
the construction of a third nuclear agriculture 
centre had just started; uranium exploration, 
begun with the help of the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP), had been 
accelerated; and new deposits of zirconium and 
other nuclear minerals had been discovered. 
38. Mr. PEIOS (Greece) said he would like to 
comment briefly on some of the points which had 
been raised by the Director General in his opening 
statement [4] and which concerned the Agency's 
activities, the international scene and various 
problems currently affecting the Agency. 
39. Under its Statute, the Agency was required 
to seek to enlarge the contribution of atomic 
[4] GC(XX)/OR. 184, paras 24-62. 
-4 



GC(XX)/OR. 190 


energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world and to ensure, so far as it was able, 
that the assistance provided by it was not used in 
such a way as to further any military purpose. 
His country, while sharing the Director General's 
view that a proper balance should be sought 
between the Agency's promotional and regulatory 
activities, nevertheless felt that the need to make 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy available to 
more countries should not be overlooked in the 
course of efforts to achieve such a balance. In 
view of the current situation with regard to conventional 
fuels and of the growing interest in 
nuclear energy, it also agreed with the Director 
General as to the growing importance of the 
Agency's dual role. It was particularly interested 
in the technical assistance activities and regretted 
that they were being hampered by lack of funds. 
It hoped that much good would come of the review 
of the procedures for the provision of technical 
assistance. 

40. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that 
the work of the present session would help to 
further international co-operation in the field of 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
41. Mr. HABASHI (Sudan) said that the Agency's 
achievements during the 20 years of its existence 
spoke for themselves and that the Director 
General, in his opening statement, had brilliantly 
surveyed the strategy which the Agency had 
adopted, the problems it was facing and the 
answers found, and its plans for assisting 
Member States. 
42. For the Agency to discharge its mission 
successfully, more than good wishes would be 
needed. He therefore proposed to comment on 
some of the points made by the Director General. 
43'. In the first place, the increase in membership 
since 1957 had not been accompanied by a 

corresponding increase in the membership of the 
Board of Governors; the developing countries in 
general, and those of Africa in particular, were 
grossly under-represented in that body and also in 
the committees of the General Conference. His 
Government accordingly urged that an equitable 
distribution of seats be established. It was not 
that the developing countries were seeking 
prestige, nor were they playing politics; what they 
wanted was to play an effective part in the work of 
the Agency. 

44. With regard to the Vienna Convention on 
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage [5] and to NPT, 
he supported the Director General's call to 
Member States to accede to the Convention and 
his appeal to those countries which had not yet 
become signatories of NPT to reconsider their 
position. 
45. Sudan associated itself with all countries 
which had condemned the recently concluded 
[5] The text of the Convention is reproduced in 
Legal Series No. 4 (STI/PUB/430). 
contract for the supply of nuclear reactors to 
South Africa. The South African Government was 
practising a policy of racial discrimination, it 
did not represent the majority of the South African 
people, and its policy of apartheid was a threat to 
world peace; hence, it was violating the 
principles enshrined in the Statute and was not 
entitled to be a Member of the Agency, which was 
seeking to promote peace, health and security 
throughout the world. 

46. The Director General had indicated that, 
for the Agency to be able to help its' Member 
States, it needed an adequate knowledge of conventional 
and emerging alternative sources of 
power. Sudan was wholly in favour of expanding 
the terms of reference of the Agency so as to 
make it an international energy organization. 
47. His country was grateful to the Agency for 
the technical assistance which it had received, 
but at the same time it deplored the meagreness 
of the resources allocated to that type of activity. 
Voluntary contributions to the General Fund, the 
only source of financing for technical assistance, 
had grown from $1.5 million in 1959 to 
$5. 5 million in 1976; in terms of purchasing 
power the increase was very small, and the 
resources had to be spread over more and more 
activities. It was his country's contention that 
the Regular Budget should be the main source of 
financing for technical assistance and that at least 
30% of the Regular Budget total should be allocated 
to it; voluntary contributions would then become 
merely a supplementary source of financing. As 
pointed out by the Governor from the Philippines 
in a recent Board meeting, modern fighter-planes 
cost $14-16 million each - more than three times 
the amount placed at the Agency's disposal for its 
work in promoting world peace and security. He 
appealed to all Member States to increase their 
contributions to the General Fund, both in cash 
and in kind. Furthermore, the Agency should 
endeavour to keep down technical assistance costs 
by sub-contracting as much work as possible to 
institutes or semi-official bodies; he awaited with 
interest the Director General's report on efforts 
in that direction. 

48. In conclusion, he welcomed Nicaragua to 
membership of the Agency and the observer 
representing the PLO. It was to be hoped that the 
Agency would soon be able to welcome the legitimate 
representatives of Zimbabwe, Namibia and 
South Africa. 
49. Mr. SIRRY (Egypt) said that the twenty years 
of the Agency's existence had been marked by 
many important achievements in all fields of 
activity related to nuclear technology and its 
peaceful applications, and there had been a 
resulting expansion and consolidation of nuclear 
programmes in many countries throughout the 
world. The need for nuclear fuel and fuel cycle 
services was consequently increasing, posing new 
problems for the future, especially in reprocessing 
and waste management. 
50. The Agency should therefore plan and direct 
its activities in such a way as to meet the existing 
-5 



GC(XX)/OR. 190 

and foreseeable requirements of the developing 
countries; in that respect, the programme for 
1977-82 was completely satisfactory. 

51. The Egyptian delegation deplored the continuous, 
uncontrolled expansion of the Agency's 
regulatory functions at the expense of its 
promotional activities. Although it naturally 
supported safeguards and their universal application, 
his delegation believed that they should be 
applied only to significant quantities of nuclear 
materials and to large nuclear installations. 
52. To meet the future demand for uranium, the 
Agency should find some means of financing largescale 
exploration in developing countries and 
promote regional co-operation to that end. 
53. The Egyptian delegation believed that the 
study of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres should 
also cover the first phase of the fuel cycle. 
54. The Agency's technical assistance activities 
were not receiving the support and encouragement 
they deserved. Financing from voluntary contributions 
was not a satisfactory arrangement; it 
would be better to finance the provision of technical 
assistance from the Regular Budget. Nevertheless, 
his country had decided to make a voluntary 
contribution for 1977 which, like the one for 
1976, would exceed the amount corresponding to 
its base rate of assessment. 
55. Egypt was building its first nuclear power 
plant, which would have an installed capacity of 
some 600 MW(e) and was to go into service in 
1982. It would be the first of a series of nuclear 
power plants which, by the end of the century, 
would represent a total capacity of 50006000 
MW(e), equivalent to nearly 50% of the 
country's installed electricity generating capacity 
at that time. A new organization had been created 
to assume sole responsibility for the planning and 
implementation of Egypt's nuclear programme. 
56. Uranium prospecting and exploitation were 
continuing, and industrial concerns based in the 
Federal Republic of Germany, the United States, 
France and the United Kingdom had been invited to 
participate in development work. 
57. Another important project in Egypt's nuclear 
programme was the establishment of a radiation 
technology centre, which would have a cobalt-60 
source, supplied by Canada, and an electron 
accelerator, obtained through UNDP. 
58. One of the most interesting applications of 
nuclear technology, and one to which Egypt 
attached special importance, was the use of 
nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes (PNEs) 
in mining and civil engineering projects. 
59. In that connection one of the major projects 
contemplated by Egypt for generating electricity 
to supply Egypt's needs as of 1985 was the solar 
hydroelectric scheme of Qattara in the Western 
Desert. The feasibility study of the project which 
was now being undertaken would try to establish 
also whether the use of peaceful nuclear explosives 
and techniques would provide for substantial 
savings when carrying out the project as compared 
to the use of conventional methods. Egypt was 
keeping in close contact on that matter with the 
Agency, which had sent a fact-finding mission to 
Egypt for the study of the project. 

60. In conclusion, he welcomed the admission of 
Nicaragua to membership of the Agency and the 
admission of the PLO as an observer. 
61. Mr. ERKSEN (Norway), explaining his 
country's situation with regard to energy 
resources, said that Norway would not suffer an 
energy shortage for some time: at present, hydro 
power was providing most of its electricity, and 
its hydro-power reserves would enable it to meet 
increasing demand during the next few years. 
However, those reserves would have to be used 
sparingly, in accordance with - among other 
things - plans already adopted for the protection 
of nature. His country was therefore going to try 
to curb the growth of demand while it considered 
the alternative possibilities offered by fossilfuelled 
and nuclear power plants. At the same 
time, the important oil and natural gas deposits 
discovered in the North Sea would, within a few 
years, enable Norway to become an energyexporting 
country. Norway was thus in a position 
to examine carefully all the pros and cons of 
nuclear power before taking a decision, and that 
was what the Norwegian Government had been doing 
for about a year. 
62. It had established an ad hoc committee of 
21 experts representing a variety of disciplines. 
The committee had to prepare a study of all 
safety aspects of nuclear power plants, for 
comparison from the point of view of safety and 
environmental protection with power plants which 
burned oil or gas. On the basis of that study, his 
Government would be able to decide whether 
Norway should build nuclear power plants during 
the next decade. 
63. The Agency's assistance would certainly be 
of great value to the committee in its work. 
Nuclear technology was among those technologies 
whose obvious advantages were associated with 
risks which gave rise to public distrust. In the 
course of the preceding decade, the risks associated 
with nuclear power plants had frequently been 
assessed; the "Rasmussen study", carried out in 
the United States, was an excellent example of 
such assessments. Much less attention had been 
paid, however, to the question of the public 
acceptance of those risks, and the Agency had an 
important part to play in that connection. 
64. In collaboration with IIASA, the Agency was 
carrying out a study concerning assessment of the 
risks of energy systems generally with a view to 
determining how societies reacted to the new 
technologies and how those reactions and their 
causes could influence decisions. Norway was 
very interested in that study and would provide 
experts to assist in it. The Agency was also 
co-operating with IIASA and the World Health 
-6 



GC(XX)/OR. 190 


Organization (WHO) in a comparative methodo


logical study of energy options on the basis of 

which it would be possible to assess nuclear 

energy in relation to other forms of energy. 

65. Norway hoped that INIS would be further 
improved, so as to permit document retrieval on 
a wider international basis. 
66. His country attached great importance to the 
Agency's quality assurance work and to its 
activities under the Convention on the Prevention 
of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and 
Other Matter (the London Convention) [6]. The 
Agency had already prepared provisional definitions 
and recommendations relating to the 
disposal of radioactive wastes into the sea, and 
his Government, which was opposed in principle 
to such disposal, hoped that they would soon be 
revised. Permission to dump low-activity wastes 
in the sea under the London Convention should in 
no case be regarded as encouraging such dumping. 
International supervision and control of dumping 
operations were in any event essential. 
67. Referring to safeguards, he commended the 
Agency on the work it had done. The development 
of nuclear energy was making safeguards more and 
more necessary, especially in relation to public 
opinion. The safeguards system would have to be 
adapted to changing circumstances and in the light 
of technological progress if nuclear proliferation 
was to be prevented and public confidence gained. 
In spite of its many qualities, the Agency's 
safeguards system was not perfect and its geographical 
coverage was insufficient. The 
Norwegian delegation therefore fully endorsed the 
Director General's proposals for improving the 
system and his request that Member States submit 
plans of their nuclear installations to the Agency 
as quickly as possible in order to facilitate 
inspections. Also, his country supported the continuation 
of work on safeguards instrumentation 
systems and the establishment of a limited number 
of field offices. Norway urged those countries 
which had not yet acceded to NPT to do so and 
emphasized the importance of concluding with the 
Agency as soon as possible the safeguards 
agreements provided for in NPT. Norway, whose 
NPT safeguards agreement with the Agency had 
entered into force in March 1972, could only 
commend the Agency on the way its safeguards had 
caused only slight interference with the operation 
of Norwegian installations. 
68. Norway supported the Agency's study of 
regional nuclear fuel cycle centres. It believed 
that such centres would further the cause of nonproliferation 
by reducing the number of facilities 
to be safeguarded and the number of transport 
operations and - because of their international 
character - by rendering diversion more difficult. 
The Nordic countries were already studying the 
possibility of creating such a centre. Having cote] 
The text of the Convention is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/205. 

operated with other countries in the nuclear field 
for some 25 years, his country recognized the 
advantages of such co-operation, but it should be 
borne in mind that success depended very much on 
the support given by the host country. 

69. In conclusion, referring to the question of 
PNEs, he said his country was firmly convinced 
that the world community should halt the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons; moreover, it doubted 
whether PNEs offered many practical advantages 
in the short run. However, it recognized that 
under the terms of NPT the parties to it had the 
right to benefit from what advantages there were. 
His country was concerned, above all, about the 
needs of third States, which should have the right 
to participate in PNE surveillance procedures 
even if the PNEs in question caused them only 
slight inconvenience. 
70. Mr. POISSON (Niger) said that his country, 
which had become a Member of the Agency as soon 
as possible after gaining independence, had at 
once given its total support to the peaceful ideals 
enshrined in the Agency's objectives. 
71. With time, the possibility of using nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes had come to be 
generally accepted. As the violent opposition of 
ecologists had shown, however, some people still 
had misgivings. And yet nuclear energy was a 
necessity. It could and should be an instrument 
for progress and peace from which many 
developing countries might benefit in their efforts 
to catch up. His country' s wish in accepting the 
Agency's objectives had been to demonstrate its 
intention of sharing in general progress, as manifested 
in the peaceful utilization of the atom, and 
taking part in the improvement of relations 
between peoples in the strengthening of peace and 
in economic development. 
72. Following several years of drought, Niger 
now saw chances of an economic revival. To 
that end, it would employ a variety of technologies, 
including the utilization of nuclear energy. Over 
and above the uranium ore deposits which had 
been proven and were being exploited, however, 
Niger placed great hopes in solar energy. 
73. The prospects for a nuclear energy 
programme in his country were gradually taking 
form, despite the relatively meagre resources 
available. Niger was interested in all nuclear 
energy applications, including those in agriculture, 
human and animal health, plant selection, 
soil fertility, plant nutrition, pest control and 
food preservation. In the medical field, it hoped 
to benefit considerably from the knowledge 
amassed in the more advanced countries. 
74. The report of the Board of Governors for 
1975 gave an impressive picture of the spread of 
the Agency's work throughout the world. His 
country wanted to see greater resources placed at 
the Agency's disposal, so that countries engaged 
in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy might 
receive more help. Despite the Agency's cooperation 
with both advanced and developing 
-7 



GC(XX)/OR. 190 

countries, there were still two areas of concern waste 
management and the application of international 
safeguards at facilities using fissionable 
materials. 

75. In the case of waste management, there was 
a need for strict regulations and for even more 
stringent control of their application. Research 
should be intensified and the Agency should be 
enabled to maintain a closer watch on waste 
management operations and waste storage centres. 
76. As to safeguards, while all Governments 
which had signed NPT and many other Governments 
had urged very strongly that the Agency apply its 
safeguards more strictly and be more watchful, 
certain countries benefiting from transfers of 
technology - assured of impunity - were pursuing 
an increasingly disquieting policy. 
77. South Africa was one such country; with its 
ability to master nuclear technology it was causing 
anxiety to all Africans. As it was driven 
increasingly on to the defensive in protecting the 
privileges which it imagined to be essential for its 
survival, South Africa represented a threat not 
only to the 20 million Africans deprived of their 
basic rights but also to the other peoples of Africa. 
What kind of nuclear peace was possible in 
southern Africa, where day by day privileged 
minorities, incapable of taking a fresh look at 
those whom they had always held in subjection, 
were perfecting their mastery of nuclear power so 
as to make it the weapon of their own survival? 
In such a situation, conflict was inevitable, and all 
the purveyors of technology and all those in charge 
of safeguards, together with other Pontius Pilates, 
would bear an extremely heavy responsibility 
vis-a-vis Africa. 

78. His delegation recognized that no criteria of 
a political nature applied in the field of Agency 
safeguards; it should not, however, be impossible 
to treat requests from dubious applicants with 
circumspection. In the absence of a precise 
ruling, the Agency's prerogatives might be so 
interpreted as to delay a decision or to make it 
contingent on the consent of the sovereign assembly 
of Member States. 
7 9. Lastly, his delegation greatly appreciated 
the fact, discernible from the Board's annual 
report, that real international co-operation was 
being established through the Agency. By virtue 
of its constant efforts in the field of training and 
the technical assistance which it was providing in 
various forms, the Agency had become - in 
accordance with the spirit of its Statute - a leading 
centre where people could meet in their search for 
peace. 
80. Mr. ALLOTEY (Ghana) welcomed the representative 
from Nicaragua and the observer of the 
PLO. 
81. The Director General, in his excellent 
statement, had reviewed the Agency's activities 
to date. The greater international recognition of 
the Agency resulted from its ability to respond 
promptly to new situations, thanks to the Director 
General and the Board of Governors. 

82. His delegation supported on the whole the 
objectives set out in the programme for 1977-82, 
and its comments would therefore be confined to 
a few matters of immediate relevance for the 
developing countries. In that connection, it noted 
with satisfaction that the programme had been 
drawn up to reflect priorities established by the 
developing countries. The main thrust of Ghana's 
current programme was directed towards 
reactivation, with the help of the Soviet Union, of 
the nuclear reactor project. The reactor was to 
be used for research and training in nuclear 
science and technology and for radioisotope production. 
The experience gained through the project 
would subsequently enable Ghana to undertake more 
ambitious activities, particularly in the field of 
nuclear power. Ghana was also carrying out lively 
research relating to radioisotope applications in 
medicine, agriculture, pest control, hydrology and 
uranium prospecting. In that context, the scientific 
meetings held during the current session of the 
Conference had been most interesting, particularly 
those on food preservation by irradiation. The 
accounts given of the efficacy of the technique were 
most encouraging, as was the information given by 
the Director General concerning the FAO/WHO/ 
IAEA meeting of experts which had recommended 
that five irradiated foodstuffs be accepted for consumption 
unconditionally. 
83. Ghana wished to record its appreciation for 
the assistance which it had already received, both 
through the Agency and under bilaterial agreements 
with, for instance, the United Kingdom, the 
Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union. 
84. With regard to the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics at Trieste, he stressed the 
importance of its activities, which were enabling 
African scientists to break out of the isolation in 
which they sometimes had to work. The Swedish 
Government's generous contribution to the Centre 
was greatly appreciated by his delegation. 
85. The developing countries set great store by 
the technical assistance activities envisaged in the 
Agency's programme. Accordingly, his delegation 
felt bound to put forward two proposals designed to 
achieve a significant increase in the net flow of 
resources to the developing countries. Firstly, 
as his delegation had stated on previous occasions, 
the Agency's technical assistance programme 
should be financed from the Regular Budget instead 
of on the basis of voluntary contributions. 
Secondly, the cost of safeguards activities should 
be borne by the countries in which safeguards 
were applied. Admittedly, a recommendation had 
been made to freeze the contributions of developing 
countries to the safeguards budget at present 
levels, but that was merely a half-measure. 
86. As to the principles governing the Agency's 
work, his delegation supported the Director 
General's view that promotional activities and 
regulatory activities were inseparable. 
-8 



GC(XX)/OR. 190 


87. In conclusion, he was in complete agreement 
with the Nigerian delegate's forceful statement on 
the question of South Africa [7], which was not 
entitled to hold the seat on the Board of Governors 
allocated to Africa under Article VI. A. 1 of the 
Statute. If the present situation persisted, the 
development of nuclear technology was bound to be 
retarded throughout the African continent. As to 
the trilateral agreement between South Africa, the 
Agency and France, his delegation deplored the 
part being played by France, a country of which 
one would not have expected that it would help a 
ruthless and racist regime. It was to be feared 
that the "harmless" nuclear technology being 
supplied to South Africa might be diverted to other 
ends. 
88. Mr. DANILO PECCI (Paraguay) expressed 
his Government's gratitude for the technical, 
scientific, technological and economic assistance 
which the Brazilian National Nuclear Energy 
Commission - and especially the Atomic Energy 
Institute in Sao Paulo - had been providing under a 
bilateral agreement concluded in 1961. His country 
was likewise grateful to the Argentine Republic for 
the help received in such fields as the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy, basic and applied 
research, and health protection. 
89. In its nuclear policy, Paraguay was concentrating 
on agricultural research, health 
problems, the training of personnel in various 
fields of application (chemistry, physics, geology, 
medicine) and prospecting for radioactive 
materials. A nuclear studies centre, to be 
operated with the help of the Sao Paulo Atomic 
Energy Institute, was being established as part of 
the development programme of Paraguay's National 
Atomic Energy Commission. 
90. Lastly, a safeguards agreement between his 
country and the Agency was in the course of being 
negotiated. 
91. Miss LIM (Malaysia), thanking the Brazilian 
Government for its hospitality, recalled that 
Brazil was the country from which had been taken 
the original seeds of Hevea which was now the 
main natural resource of Malaysia. 
92. She fully agreed with the Director General 
that countries possessing a large nuclear industry 
should join the NPT system. The recent ratification 
of NPT by Japan was encouraging and, in 
spite of a certain note of pessimism in the Director 
General1 s statement, she considered that universal 
adherence to NPT was one means of ensuring world 
peace and security. 
93. The increasing number of nuclear power 
plants would inevitably call for expansion of the 
Agency's safeguards activities. In that connection, 
she noted that the cost of those activities had grown 
by 26. 3% during the past year, while the target for 
voluntary contributions in 1977 represented an 
[7] See document GC(XX)/OR. 186, paras 84 
to 88. 
increase of only 9%. The Malaysian delegation 
attached great importance to the establishment of 
the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSI), which had the task of 
redefining responsibilities in the field of safeguards 
and introducing a fuller system of reporting 
on safeguards implementation. She welcomed the 
Board's decision to freeze developing countries' 
contributions to the Agency's safeguards 
expenditure at the 1976 level until 1980 and hoped 
that a more equitable system of safeguards 
financing would be arrived at in the meantime, in 
accordance with the recommendation of the NPT 
Review Conference [8]. 

94. The proposed establishment of a data bank 
covering all forms of energy would enable Member 
States to base their power policies on more 
reliable and comprehensive information. The total 
nuclear capacity installed by the year 2000 would 
affect the demand for nuclear fuel cycle services. 
Therefore, the Malaysian delegation entirely 
approved of the assistance for uranium prospecting 
provided by the Agency to its Member States and 
also of the study of regional nuclear fuel cycle 
centres. 
95. Turning to the question which was probably 
of the greatest importance to developing Member 
States, technical assistance, she recalled that her 
delegation had already drawn attention to its 
concern at the lack of balance between the expenditures 
for technical assistance and those for 
safeguards. The mode of financing technical 
assistance was in need of revision; the fact that 
technical assistance depended essentially on 
voluntary contributions made it impossible to 
prepare and implement sound technical assistance 
programmes, even in the short term. In the 
Regular Budget, the funds allotted to technical 
assistance amounted to $ 1 867 000 as against 
$7 951 000 for safeguards activities. Apart from 
that lack of balance, it should be borne in mind 
that most of the former sum would be absorbed by 
salaries and administrative expenses. The target 
for voluntary contributions in 1977 - $6 million was 
very modest considering that in 1976, for 
example, it had not been possible to meet 60% of 
the requests for equipment and experts' services 
owing to lack of funds. For that reason the 
Malaysian delegation supported the proposal to 
create a special reserve fund for technical 
assistance, and it looked forward with great 
interest to the results of the review of the procedures 
for the provision of technical assistance, 
which were to be presented at the next session of 
the General Conference. 

96. Malaysia, like the majority of developing 
countries, was far from being able to enter the 
age of nuclear power; for the moment, it was 
striving to create a scientific and technical infrastructure. 
The Agency programmes of immediate 
interest in that respect were: technical assistance 
and training, food and agriculture, nuclear power 
and reactors, life sciences and physical sciences. 
[8] Held at Geneva from 5 to 30 May 1975. 
-9 

GC(XX)/OR. 190 

However, those programmes were very modest, 
and it would be necessary to make adequate provision 
for meeting the needs of the large group of 
developing countries in the same situation as 
Malaysia. 

97. Her country was very grateful to the Agency 
for the assistance which it had provided in the form 
of a research reactor and of nuclear medicine 
supplies worth $30 000. 
98. The Malaysian delegation welcomed the 
observer of the PLO and the representative from 
Nicaragua. In addition, it hoped that a means 
would be found of meeting the wish of developing 
countries to be represented more equitably in the 
various organs of the Agency, so that they might 
make a greater contribution to its activities. 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING 
DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 

99. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to 
fix the closing date of the session, on the recommendation 
of the General Committee. 

100. The General Committee had considered the 
matter and had authorized him to recommend on 
its behalf that 28 September 1976 be fixed as the 
closing date. 
© 101. The Committee's recommendation was 
accepted. 

102. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee had recommended 
fixing Monday, 26 September 1977 as the opening 
date of the twenty-first regular session, which 
would be held in Vienna in accordance with Rule 7 
of the Rules of Procedure. 
• 103. The Committee's recommendation was 
accepted. 
• The meeting rose at 5. 55 p. m. 
- 10 



GC(XX)/OR. 191 

International Atomic Energy Agency 7 June 1977* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTIETH REGULAR SESSION: 21-28 SEPTEMBER 1976 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Conference Centre, Hotel Nacional-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, 
on Tuesday, 28 September 1976, at 10. 50 a.m. 

President: Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
7 General debate and report for 1975 1 - 15 
(continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Zaire 1-8 
Chile 9-14 
11 Examination of delegates' credentials 16-2 1 
-The work of the Committee of the Whole 22 
8 The Agency's accounts for 1975 23 
9 The Agency's programme for 1977-82 and 24 
budget for 1977 
10 Assessment of Members' contributions 25 
towards the Agency's Regular Budget 
13 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension 26 - 27 
Committee 
14 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 28 
for 1977 
12 Election of Members to the Board of 29 - 48 
Governors 
Closing of the session 49 - 78 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 22 October 1976. 
** GC(XX)/573. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XX)/INF/163/Rev. 3. 

77-0221 


GC(XX)/OR. 191 


THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND REPORT FOR 1975 
(GC(XX)/565) (continued)[l] 

1. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) said he 
would limit his remarks to a brief outline of his 
country's position on certain questions arising in 
regard to the availability of cheap sources of 
energy, a matter of concern both to the Agency 
and to the world at large. 
2. The 1973 energy crisis had illustrated the 
importance of nuclear energy as an alternative to 
oil in most countries of the world and had led, 
during the past three years, to an intensification 
of national nuclear programmes and to associated 
problems in relation to the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
3. As a result, the Agency had been the scene 
of concerted action in favour of improvement and 
expansion of the safeguards system. In his 
Government's view, the safeguards programme 
suffered from two major defects: it was not really 
effective, and it was being developed at the expense 
of programmes for promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
4. There was therefore an increasing risk that 
the Agency would satisfy neither the supporters of 
an effective safeguards system nor the advocates 
of intensified promotional activities in the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy. It was for that 
reason that, during the June meetings of the Board 
of Governors, his Government had suggested the 
establishment of two separate organizations corresponding, 
respectively, to the Agency' s regulatory 
and promotional activities and financed by 
separate budgets. The present situation was such 
that it almost seemed necessary to amend 
Article II of the Statute defining the Agency's 
objectives to read: 
"The Agency shall seek to accelerate and 
enlarge its control over programmes for 
the development of atomic energy throughout 
the world in order to prevent their use for 
military purposes. It shall ensure, so far 
as it is able with its limited means, that 
assistance be provided either by itself, or 
at its request, or under its supervision or 
control, for developing the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. " 

5. That did not mean that his delegation was 
opposed to a further strengthening of the Agency's 
control programme. Quite the contrary, in view 
of the thinly veiled threats of nuclear blackmail 
from the Prime Minister of the minority, racist 
Government of South Africa. 
6. Firm action was necessary on the part of the 
Agency to ensure that South Africa did not use for 
military purposes the increasing assistance it was 
[1] GC(XX)/OR. 190, paras 1-98. 
receiving from several nuclear advanced countries. 
It was therefore gratifying to learn that South 
Africa intended to put its uranium enrichment 
plants under Agency safeguards, but that country 
should go still further and sign the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[2]. 

7. However, the Agency should stop giving an 
air of respectability to the policy of apartheid by 
granting the Vorster Government the status of a 
permanent Member of the Board of Governors for 
the African region, since that oppressive 
Government could not speak for the negroes of 
South Africa and a fortiori not for the entire continent 
of Africa. 
8. His Government therefore supported the draft 
resolution requesting the Board of Governors to reconsider 
the question of representation of the 
African region by South Africa on the Board of 
Governors and to report accordingly to the twentyfirst 
regular session of the General Conference[3]. 
9. Mr. ESTRADA-LEIGH (Chile) said that his 
delegation was most grateful to the Government and 
people of Brazil for their fine hospitality and for 
the excellent facilities placed at the disposal of the 
Conference. 
10. In Chile the National Radioactive Resources 
Plan was one of several priority programmes 
defined under the country's National Policy for the 
Development of Nuclear Energy for Peaceful 
Purposes. An area of 24 000 square kilometres 
containing significant anomalies was to be explored 
systematically for uranium deposits. The United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) was 
making an important contribution to that work, 
through the Agency, in the form of experts' assistance, 
equipment and fellowships. The strongest 
stimulus behind the programme was perhaps the socalled 
Uranium Law promulgated as recently as 
16 September, which, among other things established 
the terms of recompense in order to attract 
the interest of investors, both foreign and Chilean, 
in exploration and exploitation of the deposits. 

11. Chile's nuclear power project envisaged the 
entry into service of the country's first nuclear 
power plant in 1988. The plan of action at present 
being developed focused attention on the training of 
personnel who would be engaged in the project 
during its different phases. The Agency had been 
most helpful in that connection, granting fellowships 
in Argentina and Spain, and also at Argonne, 
Karlsruhe and Saclay. 
12. He took pleasure in announcing that at the 
end of 1976 Chile hoped to see the Lo Aguirre 
reactor, built with Spanish assistance, reach 
criticality for the first time. In May 1977 a pilot 
multipurpose irradiation plant with a 100 000 Ci 
source was to go into operation. 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[3] See document GC(XX)/RES/336. 
-2 



GC(XX)/OR. 191 

13. Chile was receiving collaboration and assistance 
from many quarters, but he wished to make 
special mention of the valuable help provided by 
the Agency and to record the gratitude of his 
Government for that help. 
14. The delegate of the German Democratic 
Republic had expressed the opinion that Chile 
should not be granted technical assistance by the 
Agency. That observation was entirely out of 
order. Chile was a Member of the Agency in 
good standing and was fully entitled to exercise all 
the rights and enjoy all the benefits conferred upon 
Members. That being so, the provision of technical 
assistance was contingent only upon the tech-v 
nical soundness of the projects submitted, and ? 
Chile's projects had been found to be sound. If 
asked for the reasons for his statement, the delegate 
of the German Democratic Republic would 
have to confess them to be purely political, and 
accordingly quite out of place in an organization 
whose mission was technical in nature. The delegation 
of Chile therefore wished to record a 
vigorous protest against the unwarranted observations 
of the German Democratic Republic delegation. 
15. The PRESIDENT, noting that no more delegates 
wished to speak in the general debate, suggested 
that the Conference pass on to consider 
item 11 of the agenda. \ / 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS 
(GC(XX)/575, 576 and Add. 1) 

16. The PRESIDENT drew attention to document 
GC(XX)/575, which contained the report of the 
General Committee on its examination of delegates' 
credentials, and informed the Conference 
that, since the General Committee had met, Iran, 
Italy and Paraguay had submitted credentials 
satisfying the requirements of Rule 27 of the Rules 
of Procedure. 
17. Certain corrections needed to be made in the 
General Committee's report. In paragraph 4(b) 
the words "by the Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole (Zaire) and . . . . " should be added after 
the words ". . . . was supported ....", and paragraph 
5 should precede paragraph 4. In that connection 
it was also to be noted that the delegate of 
Thailand had pointed out in the general debate that, 
if he had been able to attend the last meeting of 
the General Committee, he would have made a 
statement supporting the view that the credentials 
of the delegate of South Africa should not be recognized 
as valid. [4] 
18. It was clear that a majority of the Members 
of the General Committee condemned the apartheid 
policy of the Government of South Africa. He was 
sure that the Conference would agree with him that 
the condemnation of apartheid reflected in the 
report of the General Committee was shared by the 
[4] GC(XX)/OR. 188, para. 76. 
overwhelming majority of the delegates in the 
Conference and constituted a serious censure of 
the policy applied by the Government of South 
Africa. He understood however that as a result of 
extensive consultations, which were reflected in 
the statement he had just made, the General 
Conference, taking into account that statement, 
would now be prepared to adopt the draft resolution 
recommended by the General Committee in 
document GC(XX)/575. 

• 19. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XX)/575 was adopted. 
20. The PRESIDENT next drew the Conference's 
attention to document GC(XX)/576 and Add. 1, which 
contained a draft resolution sponsored by 
24 Member States concerning the designation of 
South Africa as a Member of the Board of 
Governors. He felt that there was no need to put 
that matter to the vote. He understood that there 
had been extensive consultations and that, while 
some Members had reservations, the Conference 
was of the opinion that the question of South 
Africa's designation should be referred to the 
Board of Governors for its consideration, and that 
a report on the subject should be submitted to the 
General Conference at its twenty-first regular 
session. 
• 21. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XX)/576 was adopted. 
THE WORK OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


22. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire), Chairman 
of the Committee of the Whole, reported on his 
Committee's consideration of the agenda items that 
had been referred to it: item 8 - the Agency' s 
accounts for 1975, item 9 - the Agency's programme 
for 1977-82 and budget for 1977 and 
item 10 - Assessment of Members' contributions 
towards the Agency's Regular Budget. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1975 (GC(XX)/566) 

• 23. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XX)/566 on the Agency's accounts for 1975 was 
adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S PROGRAMME FOR 1977-82 AND 
BUDGET FOR 1977 (GC(XX)/567) 

• 24. Draft resolution A (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1977), draft resolution B 
(Operational Budget allocations for 1977) and draft 
resolution C (The Working Capital Fund in 1977) 
set forth in document GC(XX)/567, Annex VII, 
were adopted. 
ASSESSMENT OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS 
TOWARDS THE AGENCY'S REGULAR BUDGET 
(GC(XX)/569 and 570) 

• 25. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XX)/569 on revised principles for the assess-
3 



GC(XX)/OR. 191 

ment of Members' contributions towards the 
Agency's Regular Budget and the draft resolution 
in document GC(XX)/570 on the scale of assessment 
of Members' contributions for 1977 were 
adopted. 

ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 

26. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee included two members and 
two alternates elected by the Conference. Since 
the previous session the Conference had been 
represented by Mr. Belacik (Czechoslovakia) and 
Mr. von Schenck (Switzerland) as members, with 
Mr. Addn (Argentina) and Mr. Jenkins (United 
Kingdom) as alternates. As Mr. Belacik and 
Mr. von Schenck were no longer able to serve on 
the Committee, he suggested that Mr. Modransky 
of Hungary and Mr. Jenkins of the United Kingdom 
be elected to serve as members, and that 
Mr. O'Neill of Australia be elected as an alternate 
member in place of Mr. Jenkins. 
• 27. Mr. Modransky (Hungary) and 
Mr. Jenkins (United Kingdom) were elected as 
members and Mr. O'Neill (Australia) as an 
alternate member of the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL 
FUND FOR 1977 (GC(XX)/57l/Rev. 4) 


28. The PRESIDENT referred the Conference to 
document GC(XX)/571/Rev. 4, which showed that 
by 6 p. m. on 24 September pledges of voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund for 1977 had been 
made by 48 Members of the Agency in an amount 
equivalent to $3 211 406. In the meantime pledges 
had been received from four more Members: 
Turkey had undertaken to contribute $18 000, 
Niger $1200, Qatar $1200 and Liechtenstein $1200. 
Fifty-two Members of the Agency were therefore 
pledged to contribute a total amount of $3 233 006 
to the General Fund, which was of course far short 
of the target of $6 million for voluntary contributions 
which the Conference had earlier set itself. 
He felt that it was the duty of every Member State 
to do something to help remedy that unsatisfactory 
situation. Clearly the Secretariat could not 
effectively plan, less still implement, a $6 million 
programme when pledges by Member States came 
to only half that amount. However, several 
Members which had contributed generously in the 
past were not yet able to make known their contributions 
for 1977, so there were grounds for hoping 
that the amount pledged might be significantly 
increased. He asked all delegates to bring the 
matter to the attention of the competent authorities 
of their countries, urging them to make further 
contributions to the General Fund appropriate to 
their means, so that the Agency would have enough 
funds at its disposal in 1977 to meet all reasonable 
requests it received for technical assistance from 
its developing Member States. Delegates would 
do well to bear in mind how often the importance 
of technical assistance had been stressed in the 
course of the present session. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XX)/564 and 574) 

29. The PRESIDENT drew attention to his memorandum 
in document GC(XX)/574 on the election of 
Members to the Board, in paragraph 2 of which he 
notified the Conference that 11 Members had to be 
elected to the Board, specifying the geographical 
areas in respect of which elections were required 
and the number of Members to be elected from 
each area. 
• 30. At the invitation of the President, a 
member of the Finnish delegation and a member 
of the delegation of the Holy See acted as tellers. 
• 31. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 
11 Members to the Board. 
32. The PRESIDENT informed the General 
Conference of the results of the voting. 
• 33. The result of the election of three 
Members from the area of Latin America was as 
follows: 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 209 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Argentina 70 
Panama 70 
Mexico 69 

• 34. Having obtained the required majority, 
Argentina, Panama and Mexico were elected to the 
Board. 
• 35. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Western Europe was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 4 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 135 
Required majority: 34 
Votes obtained: 

Portugal 68 
Belgium 67 

• 36. Having obtained the required majority, 
Portugal and Belgium were elected to the Board. 
• 37. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of Eastern Europe was as follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 68 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Czechoslovakia 68 

• 38. Having obtained the required majority, 
Czechoslovakia was elected to the Board. 

GC(XX)/OR. 191 

• 39. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Africa was as follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 139 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Niger 69 
Nigeria 68 
Gabon 1 
Ivory Coast 1 

• 40. Having obtained the required majority, 
Niger and Nigeria were elected to the Board. 
• 41. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 67 
Required majority: 34 
Votes obtained: 

Pakistan 39 
Iraq 26 
Egypt 2 

• 42. Having obtained the required majority, 
Pakistan was elected to the Board. 
• 43. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of South East Asia and the Pacific 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 1 
Valid votes: 70 
Required majority: 36 
Votes obtained: 

Malaysia 70 

• 44. Having obtained the required majority, 
Malaysia was elected to the Board. 
• 45. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of Africa, or the Middle East and 
South Asia, or South East Asia and the Pacific 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 69 
Required majority: 35 
Votes obtained: 

Egypt 67 
Pakistan 2 

• 46. Having obtained the required majority, 
Egypt was elected to the Board. 
47. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 
11 Members so elected, recalled that under 
Article VI. D of the Statute they would hold office 
from the end of the current session until the end 
of the second regular session of the Conference 
thereafter, in other words for a period of two 
years. 
48. He thanked the delegations of Finland and the 
Holy See, which had provided tellers, the two 
tellers themselves and their Secretariat assistants. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

49. Mr. SIRRY (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the 
African Member States, requested the President 
of the Conference to convey to the Government 
and people of Brazil and to the authorities of Rio 
de Janeiro the Conference's gratitude for the welcome 
accorded to delegates and the excellent 
facilities which had been put at its disposal. 
Delegates had been impressed not only by the 
beauty and dynamism of Brazil but also by the 
equality, harmony and happiness in which the 
many races constituting the Brazilian population 
lived. 
50. The countries of the African group greatly 
appreciated the President's courteous and efficient 
conduct of the deliberations of the Conference, the 
success of which was due in large measure to his 
wisdom. 
51. Lastly, he thanked the Director General and 
his staff for providing the usual high standard of 
service so far from the Agency's Headquarters. 
52. Mr. OSZTROVSKI (Hungary), on behalf of 
the countries of Eastern Europe, thanked the 
President of the Conference for the way in which 
he had guided the Conference's deliberations. His 
wisdom and great experience had undoubtedly contributed 
to the success of the twentieth regular 
session. 
53. He also thanked the Director General and his 
staff for the high quality of the documents prepared 
for the Conference. 
54. Lastly, he expressed gratitude to the 
Brazilian authorities for their hospitality, the 
excellent facilities provided and the possibility to 
get to know the beautiful country of Brazil. 
55. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina), speaking 
on behalf of the countries of Latin America, congratulated 
the President of the Conference on his 
conduct of the Conference's twentieth regular 
session, the success of which was particularly 
gratifying to the countries of Latin America as 
they had so strongly supported his election. 
56. He went on to thank the Director General and 
his staff for their efforts in preparing the excellent 
Conference documentation. 
57. In conclusion, he expressed gratitude to the 
Brazilian Government and people for their cordial 
hospitality, which had greatly contributed to the 
creation of an atmosphere of conciliation in which 
international co-operation had prospered. 
58. Mr. BEESLEY (Canada), on behalf of the 
North America region, congratulated the President 
of the Conference on the way in which he had guided 
the Conference's deliberations. The "spirit of 
Rio" created under his able guidance would long 
remain an example of how difficult questions could 
be settled in a manner which reflected credit upon 
the Agency. The welcome of the Brazilian 
Government and people and of the authorities of 

GC(XX)/OR. 191 

Rio de Janeiro had also contributed to the creation 
of the "Spirit of Rio". 

59. Thanking the Director General and his staff 
and the supporting personnel recruited locally, he 
said that the quality of Agency documents was seldom 
equalled and never excelled elsewhere within 
the United Nations family. 
60. Lastly, he commended the constructive spirit 
exhibited by delegates in dealing with some often 
divisive issues; it augured well for the future work 
of the Agency. 
61. Mr. SATTAR (Pakistan), speaking for the 
countries of the Middle East and South Asia, expressed 
gratitude to the Brazilian Government and all 
those Brazilians who had contributed to the success 
of the Conference's twentieth regular session for 
the generous hospitality and impeccable efficiency 
which delegates had experienced. He also commended 
the Secretariat on the services which it had 
provided with its characteristic competence. 
62. The success of the Conference's deliberations 
was due in large measure to the wise guidance of 
the President, who had earned the particular 
gratitude of delegates. 
63. Mr. BOT (Netherlands), on behalf of the 
countries of Western Europe, thanked the President 
of the Conference for his wise guidance and congratulated 
him on ensuring that the time-table of 
the Conference's deliberations had been adhered to. 
He also thanked the Director General and his staff 
for their continued devoted service to the Agency. 
64. The Government and people of Brazil were to 
be thanked for the excellent facilities provided and 
for their warm hospitality, which had more than 
made up for the lack of sunshine. 
65. In conclusion, delegates were to be commended 
on the spirit of understanding which they had 
demonstrated and their concern to reach agreement 
in the interests of the Agency and all Member 
States. 
66. Mr. SIAZON (Philippines), speaking on behalf 
of the Member States from the Pacific and the 
Far East, congratulated the President of the 
Conference on the way in which he had steered the 
Conference through a particularly difficult - but 
at the same time interesting - regular session, in 
which the developing Member States had for the 
first time successfully demonstrated their determination 
to play a greater part in the Agency. 
The success of the twentieth regular session was 
also due in no small part to the efforts of the 
Director General and his staff. 
67. Thanking the Government and people of 
Brazil, he said that delegates were leaving Rio de 
Janeiro with heavy hearts but lasting memories of 
a beautiful country. 
68. Mr. GEORGE (Australia), speaking for the 
countries of the South East Asia region, congratulated 
the President of the Conference on steering 
the Conference's deliberations to a happy conclusion 
and on his success in dealing with a number of contentious 
issues. 
69. He thanked the Director General and his staff 
for their dedication and commended the spirit of 
compromise which delegates had displayed. 
70. Participants in the Conference would leave 
Rio de Janeiro with pleasant memories of a beautiful 
city and hospitable people, and of a country 
with an exciting future. 
71. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, speaking on his 
own behalf and on behalf of the Secretariat, thanked 
the President and Government of Brazil, the 
Brazilian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the 
authorities of Rio de Janeiro for the facilities and 
accommodation made available to delegates and 
Agency staff. 
72. Congratulating the President of the Conference 
on his efficient conduct of the session, he expressed 
admiration for his ability to reduce the problems 
encountered to their correct proportions. 
73. The PRESIDENT, thanking delegates for their 
kind words, said he considered it a great privilege 
to have been President of a regular session which he 
was sure - would prove to have been very important 
for the Agency. 
74. He thanked delegates for their spirit of understanding, 
which had made it possible to reach 
agreement on a number of difficult questions, and 
the Director General, his staff and the locally 
recruited supporting staff for their contributions 
to the success of the session. 
75. Brazil considered it an honour to have been 
host to the Conference and hoped that delegates 
would take away with them happy memories. 
76. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure, he then invited delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
• 77. All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. 
78. The PRESIDENT declared the twentieth 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
• The meeting rose at 1. 25 p. m. 
-6 



