GC(XXI)/OR.192 
International Atomic Energy Agency February 1978* 
GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


ENGLISH 


TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Monday, 26 September 1977, at 11.5 a.m. 

Temporary President: Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) 
President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 

Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

Opening of the session 1 -3 
1 Election of the President 4-8 
2 Opening statements 9-8 7 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 29 September 1977. 
** GC(XXI)/577. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR.192 

THE RECORD 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the 
twenty-first regular session of the General 
Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure he invited the delegates to observe 
one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or 
meditation. 
• All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. 
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed 
those present and announced that the President 
of the Federal Republic of Austria had consented 
to honour with his presence the opening meeting 
of the twenty-first regular session of the General 
Conference, marking the twentieth anniversary of 
the founding of the Agency. The audience also 
included the President of the Austrian National 
Council, the Austrian Federal Minister for 
Foreign Affairs and various former Governors, 
delegates and Secretariat officials who had been 
associated with the Agency at its beginning. The 
Agency had had the good fortune to benefit from 
the joint efforts of exceptional personalities, 
which had enabled it to start its work on a sound 
foundation. The years of the Agency's twentieth 
anniversary had already been marked by 
important events such as the entry into service 
of the centrifuge enrichment plant at Capenhurst, 
which had resulted from co-operation among 
three west European countries, and the 
International Conference on Nuclear Power and 
its Fuel Cycle (the Salzburg Conference), which 
had established the Agency's dominant role in 
that area. He was convinced that the Agency 
would continue to play an ever-increasing part in 
the transfer of technology to developing countries, 
in conformity with the hopes of its founders. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited 
nominations for the office of President of the 
Conference. 
5. Mr. KAMIL (Indonesia) nominated the 
delegate of Iran, Mr. Etemad. Among his other 
qualifications the latter held a diploma in nuclear 
physics, and was Chairman of the Iranian Atomic 
Energy Commission and Assistant to the Prime 
Minister; he was thus particularly well qualified 
to exercise the functions of President of the 
Conference at its twenty-first regular session. 
6. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan), Mr. HAUNSCHILD 
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. CISSE 
(Senegal) and Mr. BARABAS (Czechoslovakia) 
supported the nomination. 
• 7. Mr. Etemad (Iran) was elected 
President of the General Conference for its 
twenty-first regular session by acclamation. 
• Mr. Etemad (Iran) took the Chair. 
8. The PRESIDENT thanked the delegates for 
the great honour they had accorded him by 
electing him to office. He regarded it as a 
tribute to his country, which was endeavouring 
to promote the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy. 
OPENING STATEMENTS 

• The President of the Federal Republic of 
Austria took the Chair reserved for him. 
• The Alban Berg Quartet played the first 
two movements of Schubert's string quartet in 
A minor. 
9. Mr. KIRCHSCHLAGER (President of the 
Federal Republic of Austria) said he desired to 
convey to the Agency the congratulations of the 
Republic of Austria and the Austrian people on 
the occasion of the Agency's twentieth anniversary. 
He was all the more happy to do so since he had 
taken part in the drafting of the Headquarters 
Agreement and had had the opportunity to follow 
the development of the Agency's activities. He 
was convinced that the Agency had properly 
performed the duties incumbent on it under its 
Statute and that it enjoyed exceptional international 
prestige. The fact that it had been entrusted 
with the application of safeguards in connection 
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[1] was witness to the 
confidence it had been able to inspire. Although 
he was aware of the difficulties the Agency had 
encountered during the last two decades, he would 
not refer to them since he believed that the host 
country of an international organization should 
show more reserve and discretion than the other 
Member States. Austria had offered a home to 
the Agency not so that it could exercise special 
influence within the organization but because it 
felt that its neutrality and its situation made it a 
suitable country for an international forum. 

10. He thanked the Agency for being the first 
international organization to settle in Austria 
and for facilitating his country's duties as host. 
He also wished to express his gratitude to the 
Director General of the Agency, 
Mr. Sigvard Eklund, who, while representing 
the Agency's interests with firmness, was 
conscious of the possibilities and limitations of 
the host country. He hoped that when the Agency 
was installed in the Donaupark it would feel still 
more strongly that its roots were in Vienna. The 
new headquarters building was a reflection not 
of any desire for prestige but of the conviction 
that international organizations that had decided 
to settle in Vienna should be able to carry out 
their activities under the best possible conditions. 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



GC(XXI)/OR. 192 


Finally, he expressed the hope that the Agency 
would remain faithful to its objectives, that it 
would be able to apply safeguards with maximum 
efficiency, and that it would succeed in achieving 
a better understanding of the utilization of atomic 
energy in the interests of the well-being, health 
and peace of the entire world. He trusted that 
the name of Vienna would continue to be happily 
associated with that of the Agency, 

11. The PRESIDENT announced that several 
messages of congratulation had been received 
from Member States, and he wished first to 
read the message sent by His Imperial Majesty 
Shahanshah Aryamehr of Iran. 
12. It was with deep pleasure that His Imperial 
Majesty was addressing a message to the 
International Atomic Energy Agency on the 
occasion of its twentieth anniversary. He wished 
to take the opportunity of offering his congratulations, 
and those of the Iranian Government and 
people, to the Members of the Agency, the 
Director General, the Secretariat and the entire 
United Nations family. 
13. During the past twenty years the world had 
witnessed the birth and development of the Agency 
and the technical support which it had generously 
provided to the world community. That support 
had played an important part in the promotion of 
nuclear energy throughout the world and in the 
development of nuclear power in individual 
countries. 
14. The mere fact of being a Member of the 
Agency was not the only reason for his country's 
participation in its activities. Iran firmly 
believed in the viability of nuclear energy and in 
its distinct place among the forms of energy 
available. The efforts made for the realization 
of a dynamic nuclear energy programme in Iran 
were based on that conviction. 
15. As everyone was aware, nuclear technology 
constituted a double-edged sword. It was clearly 
one of the most creative technologies at the 
disposal of countries for use in alleviating the 
imbalance with which the world community was 
confronted. On the other hand, the misuse of 
nuclear technology represented a real source of 
danger to man in his quest for survival. His 
Imperial Majesty believed that those apparently 
contradictory attributes could be integrated in a 
constructive manner so as to facilitate the 
achievement of the quality of life to which all 
aspired. 
16. The International Atomic Energy Agency 
was the paramount international institution in 
the domain of nuclear energy. It was invested 
with the twin and complementary goals of 
promotion and control. That was why the authors 
of the Agency's Statute had had the wisdom and 
courage to aim at integration rather than negation 
and fragmentation, and it was to be hoped that 
neither haste nor mistrust would lead to the 
abandonment of that approach. Iran believed 
that any attempt to replace those essential 
functions of the Agency by unilateral, bilateral 
or multilateral arrangements would seriously 
endanger its strength and integrity. Iran was in 
favour of more active participation by the Agency 
in both the promotion and the control of nuclear 
energy and would do its utmost to help realize 
those goals. 


17. His Imperial Majesty was aware that the 
use of nuclear energy posed formidable and 
continual challenges to all the world's institutions. 
However, it was necessary to exercise patience 
in order to arrive at common solutions within 
the universal context of the Agency. 
18. His Imperial Majesty also wished to take 
the opportunity to express his appreciation to 
the Director General and the Secretariat of the 
Agency for all the assistance they had rendered 
to Iran in the realization of its nuclear energy 
programme. 
19. Mr. FRI (United States of America) read 
the message from the President of the United 
States of America. 
20. The President of the United States addressed 
his cordial greetings to the delegations to the 
twenty-first regular session of the General 
Conference of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, a session which was of particular significance 
in that it marked the twentieth anniversary 
of the foundation of the Agency and was a reminder 
of the outstanding contributions the Agency had 
made during its relatively short life span. 
21. The IAEA deserved congratulations for its 
fidelity to the purposes of its Statute, which were 
to foster the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
to do everything possible to ensure that those 
peaceful activities were not diverted to military 
ends. The Agency had amply demonstrated that 
the Members of the international community had 
far more to gain through scientific and technical 
co-operation than by pursuing their own 
independent nuclear objectives. The IAEA's 
research and development effort in the field of 
nuclear energy had been to the advantage of all 
its Members, both industrialized and developing. 
22. The Agency's efforts to establish effective 
international safeguards were also most praiseworthy. 
It was in the interests of humanity as a 
whole to ensure that nuclear energy was not used 
for military purposes; the performance of the 
IAEA had helped to win the trust of the world 
community for the international safeguards 
system. The responsibility entrusted to it in 
connection with ensuring the implementation of 
the safeguards provisions of NPT represented a 
clear token of the trust and respect which the 
Agency had earned. However, the Agency's 
success should not engender undue optimism. An 
increasing number of countries were planning to 
expand their nuclear power programmes. That 
expansion inevitably meant an extension of the 
risks of misuse. The United States, along with other 
States Members of the Agency, was lookingto the 
IAEA for leadership in ensuring that the further 

-3 



GC(XXI)/OR. 192 

expansion of peaceful nuclear applications would 
not lead to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
The United States, for its part, undertook to do 
everything within its power to assist the IAEA in 
that endeavour. 

23. The aim should be to perfect the Agency's 
international safeguards programme so that the 
many benefits of the peaceful atom could be shared 
by all. 
24. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic 
Republic) read a message from 
Mr. Erich Honecker, General Secretary of the 
Central Committee of the Socialist Unity Party of 
Germany and Chairman of the Council of State of 
the German Democratic Republic. 
25. In his message, Mr, Honecker conveyed to 
the President, to the delegates to the twentyfirst 
regular session of the General Conference 
of the IAEA and to the staff of the Agency 
Secretariat the warmest congratulations of the 
Council of State, Government and people of the 
German Democratic Republic on the occasion of 
the twentieth anniversary of the founding of the 
Agency. He also sent best wishes for fruitful 
discussions at the Conference session. 
26. The Agency had always worked in the 
interests of peace, understanding among nations 
and the use of nuclear energy for the benefit of 
peoples. 
27. In the age of nuclear energy any military 
confrontation was fraught with great risk for the 
countries of the world. It was therefore vital to 
consolidate and promote the policy of detente and 
to make it irreversible. The arms race, particularly 
in the nuclear field, had to be halted and the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons prevented. 
28. The Agency's activities under NPT deserved 
appreciation and support by all States. The 
German Democratic Republic considered those 
activities a valuable contribution to world peace 
and security. 
29. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy were 
playing a growing part in the rapid development of 
the economy, science and technology, thus contributing 
to the prosperity of peoples. In the field 
of international co-operation, the International 
Atomic Energy Agency had major achievements 
to its credit. 

30. The German Democratic Republic was convinced 
that the Agency would continue to do 
everything it could to ensure that such co-operation 
served only the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and prevented the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
31. Mr. MIHULECEA (Romania) read a message 
from the President of the Socialist Republic of 
Romania. 
32. Mr. Ceausescu said in his message that it 
was a pleasure for him to address the participants 
in the General Conference of the IAEA, to whom 
he sent his warmest greetings. 

33. International life was witness to a profound 
social and national revolutionary change and an 
increasing affirmation of the will of nations to 
put an end to the policy of inequality and 
oppression and the desire for free and independent 
development in a world of enhanced co-operation, 
in which all countries had full access to the 
achievements of modern civilization. At a time 
of modern scientific and technical revolution, 
when science was becoming an important production 
force engendering an increase in the material 
resources of society, the exploitation of 
scientific and technological gains for the purpose 
of economic and social development of all 
countries was urgently needed if it was hoped to 
overcome lags in development and create a better 
world, 
34. It was particularly necessary to ensure 
access for all countries to the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes, more especicilly as 
a source of energy. At the same time, one could 
not remain oblivious of the fact that considerable 
scientific resources and advances in the field of 
nuclear energy were used for the production of 
means of mass destruction, a fact which presented 
a grave danger to the peace and existence of mankind. 
That was the reason why Romania was in 
favour of ending, most of all, the nuclear arms 
race and why it supported the idea of placing 
man's achievements at the service of progress 
and civilization. It was essential to end nuclear 
weapon production, to do away with the monopoly 
of certain States in the generation and use of 
nuclear energy, and to promote the access of 
countries to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in 
order to speed up progress throughout the world, 
more especially in the developing countries, and 
to improve the level of prosperity and civilization 
for the whole of mankind. 
35. Romania attached the greatest importance 
to modern science and technology, including 
nuclear physics and nuclear energy, as a means 
of ensuring a rapid advance towards economic and 
social prosperity. Similarly, within the framework 
of its general policy of developing ties with 
all countries of the world, irrespective of their 
social system, Romania was taking an active part 
in the international exchange of material and 
spiritual wealth. Accordingly, it was contributing 
to the creation of a climate of wide-scale cooperation 
in all spheres of activity, including 
scientific research, 
36. Romania had decided to continue making a 
full contribution to the Agency's development and 
to a steady strengthening of its role as a promoter 
of co-operation among States - following the 
principle of full equality and respect for national 
independence and sovereignty - in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
37. Mr. Ceausescu was convinced that the 
Conference would open up new vistas for the 
development of the uses of nuclear energy and 
-4 



GC(XXI)/OR. 192 


for international co-operation in that important 
field for the benefit of all countries, for progress 
and for peace throughout the world. 


38. Mr. WINSPEARE GU1CCIARDI (Director-
General of the United Nations Office at Geneva) 
read a statement by Mr. Kurt Waldheim, 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, on the 
occasion of the session of the General Conference 
marking the twentieth anniversary of the Agency. 
39. Mr. Waldheim said in his message that, on 
the occasion of the Agency's twentieth anniversary, 
it was a great pleasure for him to extend his 
greetings and good wishes to all participants in 
the General Conference. 
40. From the outset atomic energy had been a 
major concern of the United Nations. It had been 
the subject of the first resolution adopted by the 
General Assembly and since then the United 
Nations had been endeavouring to deal constructively 
with the dual nature of atomic energy. The 
aim of the United Nations had been to see that the 
enormous power of the atom was put to peaceful 
uses and used to foster economic progress, while 
at the same time safeguarding against proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
41. It was fitting, in connection with the 
anniversary being celebrated, to emphasize the 
impressive achievements of the Agency and the 
invaluable contribution it had thus made to the 
two fundamental objectives of the United Nations peace 
and economic development. 
42. In recent years reliance on nuclear energy 
had rapidly increased to meet the world's growing 
energy needs. Concomitantly, international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
had grown both in its scope and in the number of 
States involved. 
43. It was clear that once it had been harnessed 
and applied under adequate safeguards, nuclear 
technology could contribute significantly to 
economic development and human welfare throughout 
the world; it was in that regard that the Agency 
played a prominent role by promoting, in a variety 
of ways, the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
44. In his annual report to the thirty-second 
session of the General Assembly, the Secretary-
General had stressed that the danger of the spread 
of nuclear weapons was growing from year to year 
as nuclear technology became more widely known, 
and had indicated that continuous study and 
assessment of nuclear weapon problems, including 
non-proliferation, were clearly required if the 
international community was to be able to move 
forward. The Agency was one of the most 
important international instruments available for 
limiting some of the risks to which mankind was 
exposed. He shared with the Director General 
of the Agency the belief that one of the most 
notable achievements of the Agency was the confidence 
placed in it by the world community, 
which had invested it with the safeguards functions 
under NPT. 

45. He also firmly believed that the application 
of Agency safeguards, outside as well as within 
the framework of NPT, was of paramount 
importance in the success of efforts to prevent 
the diversion of nuclear technology. He welcomed 
the Agency's continued efforts to strengthen its 
safeguards system and found it gratifying that, as 
noted in the Agency's annual report for 1976[2], 
major progress had been attained in that field 
during the past year. All that was, of course, 
consistent with the Agency's responsibility to 
promote the dissemination of nuclear technology, 
particularly for the benefit of developing countries. 
In that connection he wished to refer to the value 
of the Agency's technical assistance and training 
activities in developing countries, together with 
the desirability of expanding and intensifying 
activities in that area. 
46. He also wished to mention the Salzburg 
Conference, which the Agency had organized in 
May 1977. That meeting, which had been aimed 
at promoting international discussion and 
clarification of the highly complex and sometimes 
controversial aspects surrounding the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, had been timely 
and useful. He felt that it was an indication of 
the Agency's concern, which was shared by the 
United Nations, with regard to the nature and 
scope of the problems that would confront mankind 
as a result of increasing reliance on nuclear 
power to meet growing energy demands. 
47. In conclusion, the Secretary-General 
expressed his confidence that the Agency would 
continue to play an invaluable role in promoting 
those goals in the future and wished the Conference 
all success in its deliberations. 
48. The DIRECTOR GENERAL thanked 
President Kirchschlager for his kindness in 
attending the opening meeting of the General 
Conference marking the Agency's twentieth 
anniversary, thereby demonstrating for the 
second time that year - the first had been at the 
Salzburg Conference in May - the interest that he 
took in the Agency's activities. He (Mr. Eklund) 
wished to convey through him to the Austrian 
Government and people, and to the City of Vienna, 
his appreciation for the twenty years of generous 
hospitality that the Agency had enjoyed in the 
Austrian capital and in the country as a whole. 
49. The founders of the Agency had shown 
wisdom and far-sightedness not only in drafting 
the provisions of the Agency Statute, but also in 
selecting Vienna as the Permanent Headquarters, 
a choice which had encouraged other United 
Nations bodies, such as the United Nations 
Industrial Development Organization, to settle 
there, and it was hoped that their example would 
be followed by many others. 
50. He wished to extend a welcome to a number 
of guests of honour, each of whom had played an 
important part in the history of the Agency; they 
[2] GC(XXI)/580. 
-5 



GC(XXI)/OR. 192 

included Mr. G. P. Arkadiev, Mr. H. G. de 
Carvalho, Mr. Sterling Cole, Mr, V.S. 
Emelyanov, Mr. Bertrand Goldschmidt, 
Mr. Bernhard Gross, Mr. Karl Gruber, 
Father Hesburgh, Mr. Heinrich Haymerle, 
Mr. I.I. Rabi and Mr. Henry D. Smyth. He also 
extended a special welcome to the members of 
the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC), He 
regretted that Mr. P. R. Jolles and 
Mr. P. Winkler, who had also been invited to 
attend, were unable to do so. 

51. He also requested Mr. Winspeare 
Guicciardi to convey the Agency's thanks to the 
Secretary-General for his kind message. 
52. It was President Eisenhower who had put 
forward the idea of establishing an international 
atomic energy agency in his address to the General 
Assembly on 8 December 1953; until that time 
nuclear energy had primarily been known for its 
power to destroy. 
53. In October 1956, a conference of 81 nations 
had put the final touches to the Agency's Statute, 
the text of which was then opened for signature. 
A short time before that, in August 1955, the 
First Geneva Conference on the Peaceful Uses of 
Atomic Energy had led to the disclosure of 
certain scientific and technical secrets (including 
the technology of reprocessing but not that of 
enrichment). 
54. The Agency's Statute had come into force 
in July 1957, and the first General Conference 
had been held in Vienna in October of that year 
under the presidency of the then Foreign Minister 
of Austria, Mr. Karl Gruber. At that Conference 
it had been decided to locate the Permanent 
Headquarters of the Agency in Vienna. The first 
Director General, Mr. Sterling Cole, had signed 
the Headquarters Agreement in December 1957. 
55. Recalling the provisions of Article II of the 
Statute relating to the Agency's objectives, he 
observed that the Agency was to "accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world", and that "it shall ensure, so far as it is 
able, that assistance provided by it or at its 
request or under its supervision or control is not 
used in such a way as to further any military 
purpose". The first objective gave the Agency 
the advantage of dealing with scientific and 
technical problems on which understandings could 
be reached more easily than on political matters, 
while the second objective brought the Agency into 
the political field and conferred on it a political 
importance which even the greatest optimist 
could not have foreseen in 1957. 
56. Ten years after the first General 
Conference the Board had accepted the generous 
offer of the Austrian Government to provide a 
site and premises for the Agency's Permanent 
Headquarters, which, according to the latest 
information available, would be ready for 
occupation in the summer of 1979. 
57. Quoting a few figures, he pointed out that 
the Agency's membership had grown from 54 on 
1 October 1957 to 110 at present. A similar 
growth had also been reflected in the Agency's 
Board of Governors, whose strength had increased 
from 23 in 1957 to 34 now. On the other hand, 
the number of annual meetings held by the Board, 
which was 70 in 1958, had declined in recent 
years to not more than eight to ten. The Board 
had changed from a forum for political debates 
to an effective decision-making body. The Agency's 
staff had increased from 400 in 1958 to 1400 now, 
and the principle of geographical distribution was 
being applied on the widest possible scale: 
whereas 28 nationalities had been represented in 
1958, there were 61 in the current year. The 
Regular Budget, which had amounted to about 
$4 million in 1958, had been set at $51 million 
for 1978. 
58. With the resources at its disposal the 
Agency had carried out activities in various 
fields by establishing research centres, holding 
conferences, encouraging applications of isotopes 
and radiation, and promoting nuclear power 
generation. 
59. In the field of research, it had established in 
1961 the Seibersdorf Laboratory and the 
International Laboratory of Marine Radioactivity 
at Monaco, and in 1964 the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, which it had 
been operating jointly with the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) since 1970. It had contributed to the 
maintenance of the Middle Eastern Regional 
Radioisotope Centre for the Arab Countries from 
1963 to 1968 and was co-operating with the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO) through the Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division of Atomic Energy in Food and 
Agriculture. 
60. The Agency had also held conferences which 
had promoted a considerable exchange of information 
between east and west as well as north 
and south. For example, it had participated in 
the Second Geneva Conference on the Peaceful 
Uses of Atomic Energy in 1958 and had been 
responsible for the scientific programmes for 
those held in 1964 and 1971. In 1977 it had 
organized the Salzburg Conference. 
61. Another of the Agency's achievements had 
been the establishment in 1969 of the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS), which provided 
world-wide coverage of literature dealing with the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was the first 
international, fully-decentralized, computerbased 
information system and had been adopted as 
a model by FAO and UNESCO. 
62. In the early years of its existence the 
Agency had been engaged mainly in promoting 
the use of radioisotope techniques and radiation 
in medicine, agriculture, industry and hydrology. 
Many of those techniques had now become routine 
in the majority of the industrialized and the 
developing countries and, in the case of the latter, 
6 



GC(XXI)/OR. 192 


still represented the major application of nuclear 
energy. The Agency devoted about a quarter of 
its budget to those activities, which were under 
the direction of the Department of Research and 
Isotopes. 

63. While in 1957 the commercial generation 
of nuclear power had not begun, more than 
200 nuclear power reactors would be in operation 
by the end of 1977. In about 20 years nuclear 
power had reached a stage where it accounted for 
about 10% of the total electricity generated in the 
industrialized countries. 
64. When the developing countries had begun to 
introduce nuclear power, the Agency had launched 
programmes designed to help them to build up the 
appropriate infrastructure and to train the 
required manpower. The training programme 
prepared for that purpose had taken the form of a 
series of courses, the first of which had been held 
in 1975, as well as on-the-job training. 
65. The Agency had also carried out three major 
special studies. The first, in 1963, had dealt 
with the use of nuclear power for desalting sea 
water. The second, which had begun in 1971, was 
a market survey of nuclear power in selected 
developing countries. The third study, which 
related to multinational fuel cycle centres, had 
brought out the significant advantages which a 
multinational approach would offer by deterring 
proliferation, facilitating radioactive waste 
management and reducing production costs through 
grouping together the users of different products. 
66. Of the Agency's further activities, mention 
should be made in the first instance of technical 
assistance and safeguards. In view of the increasing 
importance of technical assistance, the 
Agency had set up a Department of Technical 
Assistance in 1964. The Member States, on their 
part, had raised the target of voluntary contributions 
from $1. 5 million in 1959 to $6 million 
in 1977. While safeguards had been dealt with 
by a single Division in 1958, there was now a 
Department consisting of four Divisions, a section 
for standardization and administrative support, 
and a safeguards evaluation section. The activity 
in that field had been given a new dimension when 
in 1968 the General Assembly of the United 
Nations had approved NPT. The importance of 
that Treaty should not be belittled - it had been 
ratified by 102 States, which included almost all 
the industrialized non-nuclear-weapon States. 
Even in the non-nuclear-weapon States not yet 
party to NPT, nearly all significant nuclear 
facilities were currently under Agency safeguards. 
There were five exceptions, namely 
Egypt* India, Israel, South Africa and Spain, and 
that number might grow if the NPT regime was 
not made universal. Although the nuclear-weapons 
countries were still discussing their obligation 
regarding the cessation of the nuclear arms 
race, the Treaty represented a milestone in the 
efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation. 
67. The results obtained by the Agency were no 
doubt less than what it would have liked to achieve. 
However, every international organization was 
composed of a large number of Member States 
having widely different interests which could 
seldom be reconciled. He wished to thank SAC 
and other advisory bodies for their help in 
establishing the Agencyis programmes, and to 
pay a tribute to the spirit of co-operation which 
had been much in evidence between the Secretariat, 
the Board and the Member States. 

68. The tasks to which he attached the greatest 
importance in the immediate future were 
activities relating to nuclear power, technical 
assistance to the developing Members of the 
Agency and the Agency's safeguards functions. 
69. It was evident that present oil and gas 
reserves were not unlimited and might be 
exhausted before the end of the century. Despite 
some views to the contrary, it was also evident 
that the only new energy source available for 
immediate use was nuclear energy. Every 
1000 MW(e) of nuclear capacity introduced saved 
about 1. 5 million tons of oil per year. The 
potential of renewable energy sources for 
producing electricity - the most convenient 
energy form - was only marginal. The use of 
solar energy for heating could be expanded considerably 
in many areas of the world but it would 
remain limited until the storage problem had been 
solved. 
70. On the basis of numerous studies it could 
be concluded that it would be unwise to eliminate 
any option at the present time; yet that perfectly 
rational conclusion was being questioned in a 
number of industrial countries by persons who 
appeared to command more public attention than 
their popular support would justify. Even those 
who believed in the role of nuclear power had to 
acknowledge that public acceptance problems were 
a source of concern. He was conscious that he 
was entering into a highly complex field with 
social, economic, ethical and political ramifications. 
All the same, unless the present trend 
of making a legal playground of highly complex 
technical questions were reversed, the development 
of nuclear power in the industrial western 
world would be seriously hampered. The same 
bleak prospect would lie ahead of many developing 
countries, dependent as they were on the nuclear 
manufacturing industry. 
71. Perhaps the whole situation reflected a loss 
of confidence by some people in advanced technology 
in general, of which nuclear energy was 
for them a symbol. He expressed the hope that 
the stark realities with which the world would be 
confronted in the next decade or two, when the 
demand for oil could no longer be met and when 
it became apparent that the so-called renewable 
sources of energy were a long way off, would 
restore the will to act before it was too late. 
72. It was significant that doubts about nuclear 
energy were generally limited to an affluent 
section of the public in the richer countries. 
With one or two exceptions those doubts were not 
shared by Governments, regional organizations, 
-7 



GC(XXI)/OR. 192 


trade unions or the developing or socialist 
countries. Perhaps developing countries and 
workers' organizations had a deeper appreciation 
of the true implications of "zero growth". In any 
event, the Salzburg Conference had revealed that 
the majority of the participating Governments 
were firmly committed to making full use of the 
present generation of power reactors and were 
convinced that nuclear energy was a necessary 
and irreplaceable source of energy for mankind 
both in the short and the long term. 

73. In view of the importance of the public 
acceptance issue and the Agency's extensive 
experience in that field, the IAEA would have to 
become more active in providing objective, 
factual information to its Member States. In that 
way it would help to supply the background against 
which persons who were seriously interested in 
the matter could form a balanced opinion about 
the pros and cons of nuclear energy compared 
with other energy sources. 
74. With an eye to the long-term future of 
nuclear power, the Agency would continue to 
contribute to the development of fast-breeder 
reactors through an international working group. 
In response to the continuing interest in hightemperature 
reactors as a means of improving 
fuel utilization on the basis of the thorium cycle 
and supplying non-electrical energy in the form 
of high-temperature nuclear process heat, the 
Agency's activity in those areas would be further 
expanded. 
75. Recalling that at the first Geneva Conference 
in 1955 it had been predicted that controlled 
nuclear fusion would be achieved within twenty 
years, he stressed how risky it was to try and 
forecast the development of new energy sources, 
whether nuclear or otherwise. It now seemed 
unlikely that fusion would be a practical possibility 
before the end of the century. Nevertheless, 
the potential of fusion was enormous and fusion 
research workers had let it be known that their 
work had reached a critical juncture, 
76. The Agency's technical assistance programme 
relied on voluntary contributions, 
amplified by the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) country programmes. It 
was clear that the scope of the assistance supplied 
by the Agency to the developing countries had to 
be expanded and that the implementation of the 
programme had to be improved. The scope of 
assistance should be, and was, broader than 
"technical assistance" in the usual meaning of the 
term. A group of high-level consultants which 
had met recently had provided the Agency with 
valuable advice on the administration of the 
technical assistance programme and, in particular, 
on ways of eliminating delays and making full use 
of gifts in kind and gifts in the form of nonconvertible 
currencies. 
77. It emerged clearly from the report of the 
consultants that both the size and scope of the 
technical assistance programme should be 
directly related to the needs of the Member 
States. Consequently, the Agency should adapt 
its programme constantly to the changing 
situation in developing countries. Compared with 
the thousand million dollars it cost nowadays to 
build a standard 1000-MW power reactor, the 
cost of providing a few experts or fellowships was 
almost negligible. In such cases the Agency 
should concentrate on ensuring that the developing 
country concerned had access to the best and most 
suitable technology for its programme, that all 
safety requirements were met, that the country 
was able to obtain nuclear fuel and fuel-cycle 
services at a reasonable price, and that its views 
and interests were taken into account in future 
international policy decisions affecting the nuclear 
energy field. In that connection he recalled the 
suggestion made at the previous General 
Conference that an international pool of nuclear 
fuel be established. 

78. The Agency bore witness by its existence 
to the fact that the world was aware of the need 
to develop nuclear energy and concerned about 
the spread of nuclear weapons. In the past few 
years in particular, concern about proliferation 
had influenced the thinking of an increasing 
number of States, as the Salzburg Conference had 
shown. 
79. It had become apparent in recent years that 
safeguards remained the central element of any 
combination of measures taken against nuclear 
proliferation and that their existence was a 
primary condition for international commerce and 
co-operation in the nuclear field. It was heartening 
to note that 99 non-nuclear-weapon States had 
now acceded to NPT. In that connection he again 
appealed to the remaining States to accede to 
NPT also or, failing that, to enter into an agreement 
for the application of complete fuel-cycle 
safeguards. 
80. International interest in the potential 
effectiveness of safeguards continued to increase. 
The first Special Safeguards Implementation 
Report (SSIR) had been received with interest by 
the Board, Such reports would in future be 
prepared on an annual basis and thus provide a 
background for the continuous review of progress 
in that area. ' The recent organizational changes 
in the Department of Safeguards would assist 
considerably in making such a review. 
81. The first report showed the need for an 
effective and strong system of accounting and 
control of fissile material. He appealed for the 
active co-operation of Member States in 
establishing effective national systems and reaffirmed 
the Agency's readiness to assist them 
in any possible way. 
82. Intensive development work was essential 
if safeguards were to be made more credible and 
more cost effective. Considerable progress had 
been accomplished recently in the development 
of surveillance instruments which would help to 
achieve both those ends; more needed to be done 
to improve safeguards in continuously-fuelled 
power reactors and certain types of fuel fabri8 



GC(XXI)/OR. 192 


cation plants. It went without saying that the 
support of Member States was essential if those 
development programmes were to be successful. 

83. At the same time it had to be admitted that 
the non-proliferation measures practised to date 
had their limitations. In addition to the need for 
better control and physical protection of all 
nuclear material, it had to be recognized that the 
handling of large quantities of plutonium, as for 
example in a reprocessing plant, required a 
particular type of materials management. Even 
the strictest international safeguards verification 
did not prevent the accumulation of weapons-grade 
nuclear material within the peaceful fuel cycle, 
and hence there was a tendency to try to prevent 
proliferation by limiting the expansion of the 
peaceful nuclear cycle. It also seemed that such 
measures might impede development or encourage 
the establishment of independent national fuel 
cycles instead of furthering international cooperation 
in that field. 
84. He recalled that reprocessing had been declassified 
by the time of the first Geneva 
Conference in 1955. In the light of experience 
and, in particular, of the Agency's study of 
regional nuclear fuel cycle centres, it was 
generally accepted that the number of such plants 
should be limited to a minimum. To prohibit 
them, however, would probably lead to a result 
opposite to that intended. Isotope separation 
processes had always been classified by the 
nuclear-weapon States, which appeared to have 
stimulated research on new separation methods 
in several countries, a fact which had become 
clear at the Salzburg Conference. That was a 
prime example of how a policy of denial could 
stimulate research and development in a sensitive 
area. 
85. It should not be forgotten that in the long 
run there was no way of stopping the spread of 
nuclear technology among nations and, taking 
into account the proliferation problems which 
resulted, the aim should not be to block nuclear 
development but to find the best way of using it 
and the best means of applying effective safeguards. 
The Agency, which desired to promote 
both nuclear power and safeguards, was interested 
in the plans now being drawn up for the 
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation 
Programme to be undertaken by a group of States. 
86. The Salzburg Conference had indicated the 
potential usefulness of certain measures aimed at 
reducing the risk of proliferation and which 
would be complementary to the safeguards regime. 
At the Conference of the Parties to NPT in 1975 
it had been proposed that the export requirements 
recommended by the Conference should be complemented 
by import requirements. Other proposals 
that had been put forward in recent years 
included the setting up of multinational fuel cycle 
centres and the storage of fissile material under 
the Agency's control. Some of those measures 
would require new forms of international cooperation 
and such co-operation would be essential 
if trade in the nuclear field and the transfer of 
nuclear technology were to develop to their full 
potential. The Agency was prepared to serve as 
a forum for discussion and as a mechanism for 
the implementation of those new concepts aimed 
at non-proliferation. 
87. Recalling that the role of the Agency, like 
that of every organization in the United Nations 
family, was to contribute to peace, he was 
pleased to record that the promotion of nuclear 
energy by the Agency had always taken place in 
an excellent atmosphere of co-operation, and 
that, in its turn, had enabled the international 
community to charge the Agency with important 
tasks under NPT. In the space of twenty years 
the industrial use of nuclear power had grown 
from infancy to maturity and would play an 
increasingly important role in an energy-hungry 
world. If Member States continued to support 
the Agency, it would certainly be able to 
accomplish its most important task in the political 
area, namely to discharge its obligations under 
NPT and thereby help to ensure that the Treaty 
came up to expectations in curbing the nuclear 
arms race. In conclusion, he expressed the hope 
that the co-operative spirit which had prevailed 
in the Agency and which had often been referred 
to as the "spirit of Vienna" would also pervade 
the conferences held to study general disarmament. 

• The Alban Berg Quartet played the last 
two movements of Schubert's string quartet in 
A minor. 
• The Federal President left the hall. 
• The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m. 
-9 



GC(XXI)/OR. 193 

International Atomic Energy Agency March 1978* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Monday, 26 September 197Y, at 3. 50 p.m. 


President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
Election of other officers and appointmentof the General Committee 
1-2 
General debate and annual report for 1976 3-9 0 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of AmericaFranceUnited KingdomItalyGerman Democratic Republic 
3-1 7 
18-3 5 
36-5 5 
56 72 
73-9 0 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 September 1977. 
** GC(XXI)/577. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR. 193 


THE RECORD 


ELECTION OF OTHER OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT 
OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 


1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the informal consultations regarding the 
composition of the General Committee had not led 
to a solution acceptable to all parties; he therefore 
proposed that Rule 42(a) of the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference relating to 
consideration of the provisional agenda 
(GC(XXI)/577) should be waived until such time as 
the General Committee had been formed, and that 
the Conference should proceed in the meantime 
with the general debate. 
• 2. The General Conference accepted the 
President's proposal. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 


1976 (GC(XXI)/580) 


3. Mr. FRI (United States of America) said 
that his country was proud to have been involved 
in the creation of what had become a unique and 
successful international endeavour. Twenty-four 
years had passed since President Eisenhower had 
made his historic "Atomic Power for Peace" 
address before the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, in which he had proposed the 
establishment of an international agency to promote 
the world-wide sharing of the potential 
benefits of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. Although today that vision was reality, 
everyone should recognize that the reality was, 
in a sense, a fragile one, for it could survive 
only as long as countries continued to sustain it. 
The Agency and its achievements were based on 
the assistance that the individual Member States 
chose to render it. It could not be all things to 
all men, but its achievements were many and its 
Member States could be proud of the remarkable 
degree of harmony and co-operation that normally 
prevailed in the deliberations of the Board of 
Governors and of the General Conference. And 
it was essential to continue to keep extraneous 
political issues out of their deliberations if the 
Agency was to preserve its reputation for 
impartiality and objectivity in discharging its 
responsibilities. 

4. On the occasion of the Agency's twentieth 
anniversary, the General Conference would 
naturally wish to consider what accomplishments 
it had already achieved and what could be expected 
of it in the years ahead. First, as the Director 
General had observed in his opening statement [1], 
the Agency had made remarkable progress in 
organizing and implementing international programmes 
for scientific and technical co-operation. 
It had demonstrated, to quote President Carter, 
that men gained far more by sharing their 
knowledge and tools than by using them in secrecy 
and isolation. The Agency had provided the 
[1] GC(XXI)/OR. 192, paras 48-87. 
industrialized countries and their developing 
neighbours with many opportunities to co-operate 
and to share their scientific developments for 
their mutual benefit. > 

5. Second, it had proved the importance of the 
safeguards system, which was international in 
character and internationally administered. That 
system was unique in the history of nations, and 
its success so far was a credit both to the Agency 
and to those Member States which had accepted 
the application of Agency safeguards within their 
territories. His country had always been a 
staunch supporter of that highly important Agency 
activity, and would continue to support the 
development of effective and efficient Agency safeguards 
procedures, 
6. The Agency had similarly responded to the 
needs of Member States by promoting physical 
security throughout the international community. 
Although physical security was largely a matter 
of national responsibility, Member States had also 
to work co-operatively on an international level 
to prevent the theft of nuclear materials or the 
sabotage of a nuclear facility in any of their 
territories, since the consequences of non-cooperation 
could have serious implications for all 
Member States. The problem was an international 
one, and it was encouraging to note that the Agency 
was taking the lead in that important area. In 
connection with the Physical Security Convention 
that had been proposed, the United States had 
sponsored a first draft, which the Agency 
Secretariat had circulated and which contained 
several articles for consideration. 
7. Finally, it was broadly accepted that nuclear 
power was called upon to play an increasingly 
important role in the foreseeable future in face 
of the grim realities of the energy crisis and the 
need to increase total world energy supplies. In 
seeking to assist Member States in that endeavour, 
the Agency had played an active role by giving 
advice and assistance to those Member States 
planning, or already implementing, nuclear 
power programmes to meet their immediate 
energy needs. The Agency had conducted training 
courses for that purpose and was now offering 
increased fellowship training for more specialized 
on-the-job training for personnel who would be 
responsible for nuclear power programmes in 
different countries. 
8. A broad range of health and safety regulations 
had been issued for the guidance of countries 
in their nuclear programmes. The Agency's 
regulations for the safe transport of nuclear 
materials had been widely adopted and were an 
excellent example of the role it could play. The 
Agency was to be particularly commended on its 
programme for the development of standards and 
codes of practice for the safe operation of nuclear 
power plants. 
9. The Agency had been successful, too, in 
promoting activities of importance in connection 
with other practical applications of nuclear energy. 
Since its establishment, it had given advice and 
2 



GC(XXI)/OR. 193 


provided technical assistance to its Member 
States in such areas as food and agriculture, the 
life sciences, and the physical sciences. Its 
contribution in those areas had been especially 
important to Member States which were just 
starting out in the nuclear field. 

10, No review of the Agency's accomplishments 
of the past two decades would be complete without 
mention of the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS). Launched on a limited basis in 

1970, INIS was an outstanding example of the 
willingness of the more advanced nuclear States 
to share with others the results of their nuclear 
research and development. INIS had become a 
valuable means of broad distribution of technical 
information to all Member States, thereby 
enabling them to keep abreast of the latest 
advances in nuclear science and technology. 

11. Turning to the future, he wished to make a 
comment on the recent nuclear policy decisions 
in the United States. In April 1977, President 
Carter had first raised the issue of United 
States concern regarding nuclear non-proliferation 
in a way that had seemed to challenge some of the 
basic assumptions which had prevailed in the 
international nuclear community for so long. At 
first blush, it might have appeared to some that 
the United States decisions with regard to reprocessing, 
breeder projects and export policy 
could diminish legitimate world-wide efforts to 
derive the maximum benefit from the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy for all States. 
12, The ensuing months, however, had served 
to clarify those initiatives and to reconfirm his 
Government's underlying conviction that the 
nuclear States could work together in harmony 
towards commonly held objectives. Few would 
dispute the objectives of those policy initiatives more 
secure and reliable non-proliferation 
controls - but, at the outset at least, many 
nations had perceived those initiatives as being 
unrealistic, over-ambitious, and possibly as 
militating against their interests. There was 
now emerging, however, a growing realization 

in the world that the United States did share those 
fundamental non-proliferation objectives, and 
that they were within reach through the determined 
exercise of reason, goodwill and 
enlightened international co-operation. 

13. Tangible signs of such co-operation were 
becoming increasingly manifest; there had been, 
for example, a great deal of talk about the 
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation 
(INFCE), since President Carter had first proposed 
it in April of the present year. The United 
States had held discussions with more than thirty 
countries with a major interest in nuclear energy. 
In October, his country would be hosting an 
initial organizational conference, among the 
topics for which were likely to be fuel and enrichment 
availability, security of supply and fuel 
assurances, spent fuel storage, reprocessing, 
breeder reactors, improved efficiency of thermal 
reactors and advanced converter reactors, and 
alternative fuel cycles. The Agency was to take 
part in that conference and would, it was hoped, 
play an important role in implementation of the 
relevant programme. 

14. The favourable response that the concept 
of an international fuel cycle evaluation programme 
had met with was encouraging. All 
countries had domestic priorities, which had 
created differing views as to how different 
aspects of the fuel cycle should be handled. 
Recent experience had shown, however, that with 
mutual goodwill States could resolve their differences 
if they were prepared to approach those 
problems at the concrete technical or negotiating 
level. 
15. Most encouraging was the fact that many 
individuals in the technical community were now 
prepared to re-examine and review the options in 
an objective manner so as to be sure that nuclear 
programmes could continue to move forward 
aggressively, but under terms affording the 
greatest possible assurances to the international 
community. Only a year ago in the United States 
it had been difficult to find many people either in 
the Government or the private sector who were 
willing to accept the possibility of introducing 
technical modifications to the fuel cycle or developing 
ways of internationalizing aspects of the 
fuel cycle with a view to making them safer 
against the risk of proliferation. But there were 
now many individuals, both in the United States 
and in other Member States of the Agency, who 
were ready to exert considerable effort to achieve 
that goal. In short, the past year had reaffirmed 
that the vast majority of States shared a common 
dedication to non-proliferation, that their efforts 
in that area had been marked by notable accomplishments, 
and that many significant and real 
opportunities still lay ahead. 
16. The Agency was thus beginning its third 
decade at a most propitious time. It had been 
established two decades earlier as a focal point 
for international co-operation in promoting the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy world 
wide. Subsequently, as the need for effective 
international safeguards and non-proliferation 
controls became increasingly apparent, the 
Agency had again served as the cutting edge for 
the co-operative international effort in achieving 
those goals. 
17. Today, at the beginning of its third decade, 
the Agency was called upon once more to face a 
new challenge: as an energy-hungry world groped 
with the dual challenge of energy shortages, on 
the one hand, and nuclear proliferation, on the 
other, the importance of meaningful international 
dialogue and co-operation had never been greater. 
Member States had to be able to work together, 
recognizing their individual national needs and 
differing requirements, while exercising the 
utmost care and solicitude for the future peace 
and security of all the nations in the nuclear 
world. The Agency was the foundation for that 
effort and a fulcrum for a new era of even greater 
harmony among nations, just as it had pioneered 
unprecedented levels of international co-operation 
-3 



GC(XXI)/OR. 193 

and dialogue over the past two decades. His 
delegation was confident that, through the IAEA, 
and with a continued spirit of goodwill among 
nations, it would be possible to forge a new world 
that would be both safe and rewarding. 

18. Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT (France) said that it 
was clearer than ever before that the fulfilment 
of man's energy requirements was a condition for 
the peace and happiness of a growing world, where 
a lack of energy would create tension that could 
lead to a situation no longer under control. 
Fulfilment of that need meant combating wastage 
and resorting to all forms of available energy, 
including the major contribution to be made by 
nuclear power. 
19. A geopolitical approach to the problem 
showed that it was not possible to reserve nuclear 
energy for a small number of industrialized 
countries. Hence the inevitability of expanding 
international trade in nuclear materials, equipment 
and technology had to be recognized. His 
country was planning to contribute to the quest 
for a satisfactory balance in the world energy 
market that could not be brought about without a 
rapid increase in the forms of energy used to 
replace oil, and was ready to meet the needs of 
countries whose development required recourse 
to nuclear energy. 
20. Nevertheless, the year 1977 - the twentieth 
anniversary of the Agency - might well go down 
in the history of nuclear energy as the year of 
reconsideration: reconsideration, in certain 
circles, of the actual part to be played by nuclear 
energy in meeting world requirements; reconsideration 
of international agreements at present 
in force, but which could be subjected to 
renegotiation; reconsideration of the trust placed 
in the Agency's safeguards system, even in cases 
where the safeguarding covered the entire nuclear 
activity of the country concerned; reconsideration 
of the political factors and national regulations so 
far governing international nuclear trade; reconsideration, 
among certain supplier countries, of 
the terms under which uranium was exported, 
which sometimes resulted in stoppage of sales or 
even production; and reconsideration of technological 
decisions accepted as being most suitable 
for the economic development of nuclear energy, 
more especially the conventional plutonium cycle, 
together with the urgency advocated in introducing 
fast neutron breeders. 
21. All those reconsiderations created a climate 
of instability in nuclear industrial programmes 
and of mutual distrust among supplier and purchaser 
countries. They were basically associated 
with the major problem of non-proliferation, which 
Governments were seeking to solve but refusing to 
involve themselves in the dilemma of whether or 
not to develop nuclear energy on a world scale or 
to deny it to others because of the fact that such 
development could be used as a point of departure 
for military applications. 
22. No solution to the dilemma should be allowed 
to hamper access to that indispensable source of 
energy by different countries or to make them 
unduly dependent on one or more States in meeting 
their nuclear energy needs. That was particularly 
applicable to uranium, which had to be made 
available under satisfactory economic and 
political terms. Although it was desirable that 
sales of uranium for civil programmes should be 
subject to the corresponding international safeguards, 
it was unacceptable that they should be 
accompanied as well by requirements based on 

direct intervention in the national strategy of the 
fuel cycle of the importing country. His 
Government could not approve of contract clauses 

on the strength of which suppliers sought to take 
advantage of their position and to reserve for 
themselves the right of veto on reprocessing of 
the uranium after irradiation. 

23. It was essential to intensify uranium prospectingj 
as it would be rash to rely on the present 
reserves, which were in the long run inadequate 
or else uncertain. It was therefore a wise move 
to develop breeder reactors, which made it 
possible to boost the energy from a given quantity 
of uranium by a factor of approximately 50. 
Furthermore, such reactors were the best way of 
usefully burning the plutonium produced in 
nuclear power stations. 
24. The industrial assimilation of breeder 
reactors would be a long process; hence, to save 
time, the industrialized countries should be the 
first to go ahead with such projects, France had 
contributed in 1977 by commencing construction 
of a 1200 MW(e) power plant, the Superphenix, on 
behalf of Electricite de France, ENEL (Italy) and 
RWE (Federal Republic of Germany). 
25. The present year had seen Franco-German 
collaboration in the field of fast neutron reactors, 
which would enable the research organizations and 
partners in industry of five countries - France, 
Germany, Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands to 
pool their extensive know-how. The 
collaboration would also cover safety problems, 
including radioactive waste management, for 
which there was as yet no better solution than the 
reprocessing of irradiated fuel, a necessary 
operation from the ecological point of view and 
also of advantage in saving uranium. 
26. French policy with regard to the export of 
nuclear equipment was geared to the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons and, accordingly, 
to further strengthening of the provisions and 
safeguards pertaining thereto. It was for that 
reason that it had been decided not to export reprocessing 
plants for the time, being. At the 
same time, extreme caution with regard to the 
risks of proliferation had to be matched with the 
need tp develop nuclear energy, hence his country 
was still willing to assist with that development 
by meeting legitimate needs for technology and 
providing services relating to the fuel cycle, 
27. Any limitation on the transfer of equipment 
or technology involving a major stage of the fuel 
cycle, particularly enrichment or reprocessing, 
had to be offset by access to the relevant services. 
-4 



GC(XXI)/OR. 193 


A guarantee of that kind entailed a choice of 
supplier in a free and competitive market, in 
which any uncertainty surrounding the outcome of 
a nuclear supply contract would have been 
completely dispelled. 

28. At the International Conference on Nuclear 
Power and its Fuel Cycle (the Salzburg Conference), 
held in May, the French delegation announced its 
discovery, in 1968, of a separation process based 
on chemical exchange that involved only a moderate 
consumption of energy and seemed suitable 
for plants satisfying markets of limited size; the 
process was considered especially favourable 
from the standpoint of non-proliferation as an 
equilibrium time of some 30 years was required 
in order to produce uranium with enrichment 
rates of potential use for military purposes. 
Since the discovery of the process, the French 
Atomic Energy Commission had been in contact 
with a number of governmental organizations 
abroad with a view to examining conditions under 
which the process could be the subject of international 
co-operation. 
29. There might thereby be found an industrially 
acceptable process, involving a minimum number 
of limitations associated with non-proliferation, 
that did not open up the first pathway towards the 
construction of nuclear weapons, i. e. pure 
uranium-235. His country was aware of the 
hazards created by the second pathway - the 
isolation of plutonium - and supported measures 
aimed at preventing the spread of that material, 
for example, limiting the number of processing 
plants as a function of non-proliferation and 
economic criteria and making them multinational 
in character; extracting plutonium at such plants 
only when justified and storing it either on the 
spot or at suitable centres under Agency safeguards 
pursuant to Article XII. A. 5 of the Statute; 
and, finally, transporting plutonium only in such 
forms as made it particularly difficult to recover. 
Such action with regard to the handling of plutonium, 
together with the industrial development of 
a "non-proliferating" enrichment process, 
contributed to the quest for a union between the 
requirements of non-proliferation and the terms 
sought after by countries which would hardly 
tolerate, in the long run, the perpetuation by a 
limited number of Powers of a monopoly on the 
key stages in enrichment and reprocessing. 
Study of those measures was part of the INFCE 
programme which it had been planned to initiate 
in Washington in the month of October. 

30. His country hoped to take part in that programme, 
although it had to be understood that no 
decision likely to affect the nuclear programmes 
under way could be taken during it. It was 
essential that industrial enrichment and reprocessing 
operations meeting energy requirements 
and fuel cycle strategies already decided 
on should continue during the study, the outcome 
of which must not be prejudged. 
31. The major factor in proliferation was in 
effect an increase in nationally-independent 
programmes, which could be avoided only in the 
atmosphere of mutual trust surrounding the 
Agency and its safeguards system that the 

international community had gradually managed 

to build up over the past twenty years. The 
progress made in that field since the controversy 
in 1956 over Article XII of the Statute relating to 
Agency safeguards should not be underestimated. 

32. For several years now the French Government 
had accepted the principle of safeguards on 
its territory, as applied by Agency inspectors. 
It was now working out, in conjunction with the 
Agency, a series of safeguards procedures for 
the La Hague plant and would shortly be negotiating 
with the Commission of the European 
Communities and the Agency on ways of verifying 
safeguards applied by the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) in France. Furthermore 
his Government was using the Agency's system 
for the safeguarding of its nuclear exports. 
33. The Agency's success in the field of safeguards 
had been so valuable that no effort should 
be spared to protect the system against political 
encroachment; it was the first time in history 
that an effective international safeguards system 
had been established. For that reason he 
regretted to see that in 1977 the deliberations of 
the Board of Governors had taken on a political 
colouring. There, too, was an example of 
reconsideration, namely that of the Article of the 
Statute defining the composition of the Board, a 
proposal for an increase in the membership of 
which was again under discussion. His Government 
considered that the present composition of 
the Board represented a suitable balance between 
countries assisting the development of nuclear 
energy and those aspiring to its benefits, and 
that there was no need to enlarge it. 
34. Another chronic ill was the Agency's budget 
and its excessive rate of increase, which was out 
of proportion to the normal increase in other 
activities; it was hoped that the Director General 
would adopt the most stringent measures to 
remedy that situation. 
35. The Secretariat was to be commended on 
its valuable study of multinational fuel cycle 
centres. The Agency could and should play a 
part in the application of a realistic non-proliferation 
policy, which should not create, through 
constant change, fresh uncertainties in the 
international nuclear industry and nuclear trade, 
for they were already handicapped by the administrative 
restraints, the growing complexity of 
protection regulations and the nuclear controversy 
in general. His delegation was confident that the 
Secretariat and the Director General, on the basis 
of their broad experience, would be able to see 
the Agency through in that major task. 
36. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) said that 
the Agency, in celebrating its twentieth anniversary, 
could look back with satisfaction on two 
decades in which it had played its part in the 
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear power 
and had made a substantial contribution to the 
common objective of avoiding the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
-5 

GC(XXI)/OR. 193 

37. Since the Agency's last General Conference 
in Rio de Janeiro a year ago, the world-wide 
debate on the benefits and problems of nuclear 
power had continued and intensified. A major 
landmark of the current year had been the 
conference organized by the Agency in Salzburg in 
May on "Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle", 
which had provided a valuable forum for Member 
States to exchange their own particular knowledge 
and experience of nuclear power. 
38. At the previous year's General Conference 
the United Kingdom delegation had said that the 
most difficult problem in the future development 
of nuclear power would be that of avoiding proliferation 
of nuclear weapons [2], That statement 
still held true. However, the previous twelve 
months had seen intensive discussion of the 
problems of preventing the future spread of 
nuclear weapons and the international community 
as a whole was perhaps now more aware than it 
had ever been of the pressing nature of that 
problem. 
39. The United Kingdom still maintained that 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) [3] should continue to be the 
cornerstone of efforts to control proliferation. 
It welcomed the fact that Switzerland and Panama 
had ratified the Treaty since the previous 
General Conference and hoped that those Member 
States of the Agency which did not yet adhere to 
the Treaty would reconsider their position. 
40. There was now full awareness of the 
urgency with which the problems of nuclear proliferation 
should be tackled and much of the credit 
for that was due to the forthright statement of 
United States non-proliferation policy by 
President Carter on 7 April. That subject had 
been considered further at the highest political 
level at the London Economic Summit meeting in 
May. Heads of State and Government present 
had said in their final communique: 
"We agree on the need to increase 
nuclear energy to help meet the world's 
energy requirements. We commit ourselves 
to do this while reducing the risks 
of nuclear proliferation Our 
objective is to meet the world's energy 
needs and to make peaceful use of nuclear 
energy widely available, while avoiding 
the danger of the spread of nuclear weapons. 
We are also agreed that, in order to be 
effective, non-proliferation policies should 
as far as possible be acceptable to both 
industrialized and developing countries 
alike. " 

The United Kingdom Government was party to that 
statement and had made it clear that it shared 
that commitment. 

[2] GC(XX)/OR.185, para. 49. 
[3] Reprocuced in document INFCIRC/140. 
41. His Government supported President 
Carter's proposal for an international nuclear 
fuel cycle evaluation programme. The United 
Kingdom would play a full part in that programme, 
and hoped that as many other Member States as 
possible would feel able to participate and to 
contribute their own knowledge and experience of 
nuclear power. It was only by such broad 
participation that it would be possible to achieve 
policies which were acceptable to both industrialized 
and developing countries alike and which 
recognized the real part nuclear power had to 
play in meeting the world's growing energy needs. 
42. The United Kingdom hoped that the Agency 
would be able to contribute to the study from the 
expertise that it had built up over the years. The 
Agency's participation would be of special benefit 
in respect of safeguards and the question of international 
control of sensitive sections of the fuel 
cycle. The Agency's report on regional nuclear 
fuel cycle centres, published that year, was a 
valuable study of that concept. The United 
Kingdom also welcomed the continuing work of the 
Agency on international plutonium management, 
in which it had been glad to assist the Secretariat. 
It hoped that it would be possible in the near 
future to turn the work and studies that had been 
done on international plutonium management into 
a practical scheme. It believed that such a 
scheme could be a major step towards the common 
goal of ensuring that the potentially great contribution 
of nuclear power to world energy supplies 
could be realized without any increase in the risk 
of the spread of nuclear weapons. 

43. While the United Kingdom would readily take 
part in the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation 
Programme (INFCEP), it recognized - as he felt 
sure all Member States recognized - that there 
was no simple technical solution to the problem 
of non-proliferation. There was no magic fuel 
cycle that would overcome all difficulties. The 
strategy would have to be to place the most 
stringent controls on sensitive technologies and 
fissile materials which could be used to produce 
atomic weapons. INFCEP would be valuable in 
clarifying thinking on the most effective technical 
approaches. 
44. However, one should not forget what had 
already been achieved. The safeguards system 
operated by the Agency was of fundamental 
importance to non-proliferation. The United 
Kingdom reaffirmed its commitment to that 
system. It was essential that it should continue 
to be improved and strengthened; and the United 
Kingdom would continue to give the Agency every 
support it could. 
45. Further, the blunt truth was that, if the 
international community was to eliminate proliferation, 
it had to remove the incentive to acquire 
nuclear weapons; and that meant the serious 
pursuit of detente and balanced measures of disarmament. 
There was a direct link between 
removing the incentive for acquiring nuclear 
weapons and the creation of conditions of stability 
and security in the world. Those directly 
-6 

GC(XXI)/OR. 193 


concerned with nuclear matters had a major 
responsibility. But non-proliferation was finally 
a political problem and the basic solutions would 
equally have to be political. 

46. The availability of energy was one aspect in 
the economic factors which had a bearing on 
stability. Thus, having expressed the support 
of his Government for the safeguards system, it 
was right for him also to express its continued 
support for all the activities of the Agency, 
particularly the technical assistance programme. 
The United Kingdom would continue to meet in full 
its assessed contribution to that programme and 
would continue to provide an additional sum to be 
used by the Agency to provide fellowships for 
scientists from Member States party to NPT. 
47. In the United Kingdom, as elsewhere, public 
interest in nuclear matters had increased markedly 
in recent years. The British Government was 
concerned to ensure that there should be full 
public discussion of the advantages and disadvantages 
of nuclear power and with that in mind had 
initiated a wide-ranging public ventilation of the 
issues involved. Public debate was being 
conducted in the press, radio and television, in 
public meetings and elsewhere. Nuclear power 
did not need to proceed by stealth; it could stand 
up to responsible public debate and criticism, and 
from that point of view the nuclear industry welcomed 
public debate. 
48. That process did, of course, result in 
delays which were frustrating for the industry, 
but it was felt that, by stripping away the veils of 
secrecy behind which nuclear fission had originally 
been developed, it should be possible to proceed 
with a nuclear programme in a greatly improved 
climate of public understanding and acceptance. 
The British Government, the United Kingdom 
Atomic Energy Authority, the nuclear industry 
and the safety and environmental protection 
agencies were all taking part and providing 
information for the public. 
49. At the present time a wide-ranging public 
inquiry was investigating the proposal to expand 
the reprocessing of oxide fuels at Windscale. 
The Government had confirmed that there should 
be procedures for public consultation before 
major decisions were taken, and had announced 
that a decision to build a first commercial fast 
reactor would be subject to a public inquiry which 
would enable all relevant issues to be considered. 
50. In the United Kingdom, nuclear projects 
had progressed well in the past year. The four 
advanced gas-cooled reactors at Hinckley Point 
and Hunterston continued to operate well. Each 
station was producing over 1000 MW(e). The 
magnox reactors continued to give excellent 
service and to produce electricity substantially 
cheaper than that generated by fossil-fuel stations. 
51. The prototype fast reactor at Dounreay had 
been taken to full power earlier that year, and 
continued to run smoothly. After nearly twenty 
years of successful and reliable operation, the 
small experimental fast reactor had now been 
closed down, as planned. A particularly interesting 
and important set of experiments had been 
carried out during the final year of operation 
which had contributed substantially to confidence 
in the safety and reliability of liquid-metal-cooled 
fast reactors. 

52. The gas-centrifuge uranium enrichment 
plant at Capenhurst had come into production the 
previous year and had been officially opened two 
weeks ago on 15 September. The plant was part 
of the Urenco enterprise which was jointly owned 
by the United Kingdom, Netherlands and the 
Federal Republic of Germany. The plant at 
Almelo in the Netherlands was being built to the 
same time-table and would be officially opened in 
a month's time. 
53. The sales of radiochemicals from the 
United Kingdom Radiochemical Centre for use in 
medicine and industry had increased by 40% in the 
past year. 
54. The demands on the Agency were increasing 
year by year, and Member States were fortunate 
in having the skill and experience of the Director 
General and his staff to meet the increasing workload 
and seek solutions to all the problems arising. 
55. He expressed his Government's continued 
commitment to all the Agency's activities and 
confidence that, given the full support of all 
Member States, the Agency could meet the 
increased tasks facing it with the same effectiveness 
that it had displayed in the past twenty years. 
56. Mr. CLEMENTEL (Italy) said that his 
delegation wished to extend its heartiest congratulations 
to the President of the Conference, Italy 
was particularly grateful to the Agency for all 
that had been accomplished over the years in the 
interests of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. Nuclear energy had come rapidly to 
maturity, and the wealth of concrete achievements 
- not only in technology but in the more 
specifically political realm of international 
collaboration and solidarity - had come about in 
large measure through the efforts of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency. The Agency had 
made possible a fruitful pooling of knowledge and 
financial resources during the twenty years of its 
existence, and one must hope that the future would 
bring similar or even better results. Italy had 
believed in the value of international collaboration 
in nuclear energy matters from the beginning, and 
it was particularly satisfying to note that that 
confidence had not been misplaced. 
57. He would dwell on those of the Agency's 
objectives which Italy considered particularly 
important as the organization entered its third 
decade, though the significance of past accomplishments 
should certainly not be underestimated. 
Nuclear power had proved itself to be a valid 
alternative to conventional energy sources. 
Despite the opposition of certain - often illinformed 
- sectors of public opinion, and despite 
the grave problems presented by economic 
-7 

GC(XXI)/OR. 193 

recession, which in many countries had slowed 
down nuclear programmes, one could legitimately 
expect a full resurgence of activity in the nuclear 
field during the coming few years; the results of 
the Salzburg Conference were an adequate demonstration 
of the truth of that statement. 

58. In view of the large investments required 
for nuclear programmes, and because it was so 
important to ensure that national options were 
based on proven technology, Italy felt that one of 
the Agency's tasks for the immediate future 
should be to ensure the broadest possible dissemination 
of nuclear technology. The transfer of 
technology must take place, moreover, in such a 
way as to guarantee complete respect for the 
sovereignty of recipient States and to avoid the 
imposition of burdensome and unnecessary 
conditions which would bear prejudice to the 
development of nuclear power and cast doubt on 
the genuineness of the desire for international 
collaboration. 
59. Another of the Agency's fundamental tasks 
was to see to it that nuclear development did not 
lead to a proliferation of nuclear weapons. His 
Government was convinced that the Agency could 
do much in that sphere provided it had full cooperation 
from the international community, in 
particular the nuclear-weapon States, Until 
those States displayed a firm resolve not to supply 
nuclear materials and technology to countries 
which did not accept the conditions of NPT, and 
until they gave evidence of an equally firm resolve 
to move towards nuclear disarmament within the 
framework of a programme of general and complete 
disarmament, the danger of proliferation 
would remain present. Above all, it was quite 
wrong to impose increasingly burdensome obligations 
on countries which had voluntarily renounced 
the nuclear military option by adhering to NPT. 
Thus all articles of NPT, not just the first three, 
must be applied. If a regime which put parties 
to NPT at a palpable disadvantage were allowed 
to take over, the new accessions regarded as 
essential if the Treaty was to become fully 
effective would be discouraged. While it was true 
that a hundred countries had acceded to NPT, it 
was also true that most of the world (if one took 
population, territory and national income into 
account) was represented by the nuclear Powers 
and by countries that had not renounced the 
possibility of joining them. 

60. For all those reasons, Italy could not 
regard NPT as a goal attained. It was merely 
one stage on the way towards the goals of general 
nuclear disarmament and dissemination of nuclear 
technology among all countries party to NPT. 
And it was a stage that had lasted seven years 
without exhibiting adequate results. All the 
agreements concluded between the nuclear Powers 
during those years were limited to measures 
aimed at checking the nuclear arms race; little 
had been done to achieve genuine nuclear disarmament 
as foreseen in Article VI of NPT, 
61. The situation was even worse where the 
application of Article IV was concerned, if one 
took account of the increasingly severe obstacles 
placed in the way of the transfer of information 
and technology. 

62. As a party to NPT, Italy was eager that the 
Treaty's objectives should be attained as soon as 
possible, and was co-operating closely with the 
Agency to that end. All its own nuclear installations 
had been subject to inspection in the period 
from April to August. 
63. The Agency would have to be especially 
vigilant to ensure the availability of nuclear fuel 
and discourage any tendency towards centralization, 
which would do immense harm to the goal of 
broad utilization of nuclear power. The Agency 
should also continue to promote the uses of nuclear 
energy in other sectors of particular importance 
to developing countries, such as medicine and 
agriculture. The recent decision of a joint FAOIAEA-
WHO committee to recommend that 
authorization should be given for the marketing of 
certain important irradiated foodstuffs was 
evidence of how international collaboration could 
help to solve some of the serious problems 
afflicting humanity. 
64. Public information was another area in 
which the Agency's contribution was vital. The 
alarming controversy that had developed over 
nuclear energy was too often nourished by misunderstandings, 
ill-founded anxieties and a simple 
lack of accurate information. The Agency, 
strong by virtue of its experience and the respect 
it had succeeded in inspiring, could do much to 
allay those fears. 
65. Italy wished to compliment the Agency on 
the work recently accomplished by the Ad Hoc 
Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful 
Purposes (PNE). It believed in the possibilities 
of that technology, at least in certain sectors, 
and considered it important that a general regime 
should be available for its application when the 
time came; that regime must not, however, 
constitute an obstacle to the conclusion of an 
agreement banning nuclear weapons completely, 
to which Italy continued to attribute first priority 
within a programme of general and complete 
disarmament. Furthermore, the work of the 
Ad Hoc Advisory Group needed to be pursued in 
greater depth; many problems had not been 
studied adequately, not through any want of goodwill 
but through lack of time. The work should 
thus be resumed immediately and appropriately 
supplemented. 
66. Italy also gave full support to the Agency's 
activities connected with fast reactors and with 
the preparation of safety codes and guides. The 
competence with which the latter task had been 
tackled deserved particular mention. 
67. The perfect organization of the Salzburg 
Conference in May was another achievement that 
merited special praise. An international conference 
held at that juncture had made an 
exceptionally valuable contribution to the further 
development of nuclear power and had given 
8 



GC(XXI)/OR. 193 


renewed courage to all who for years had been 
struggling on its behalf. 

68. The Italian Government lent full support, 
likewise, to the Agency's activities on behalf of 
the developing countries. It was seriously 
considering, in that connection, the possibility 
of increasing its contribution to the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, in view 
of the importance of the Centre's work for developing 
countries. 
69. In the year past Italy had unfortunately, like 
many other countries, seen a slowing down of its 
nuclear programme, owing particularly to the 
opposition of some sectors of public opinion. The 
recurrent and increasingly numerous debates on 
the subject in recent times had made it clear, 
however, that the opposition was based largely on 
emotional reactions. In fact, with a rising demand 
for energy and a large balance-of-payments deficit, 
Italy had no choice but to turn to nuclear energy on 
a large scale. In the course of the year the 
Italian Parliament had accordingly conducted a 
thorough analysis of the whole energy problem, 
following which it had reconfirmed the absolute 
necessity of building at least eight nuclear units 
as soon as possible in addition to the four already 
ordered, so that by 1985 the country would have 
an installed nuclear capacity of about 13 000 MW(e). 
That objective had recently been accepted in the 
Government programme approved by all political 
forces, so there could no longer be any doubt 
about the nuclear programme which Italy intended 
to carry out. 

70. Another problem that had to be faced, along 
with the construction of facilities, was the fuel 
cycle - particularly the ultimate phases of the 
cycle, on which the feasibility of a fast reactor 
programme would depend. The undeniable 
potential of available technology, the size of the 
market and the certainty of having to rely on the 
nuclear option were valid arguments in favour of 
a national fuel reprocessing plant. 
71. Fast reactors, even though they had not 
gone beyond the research and development stage, 
constituted another important chapter in the 
Italian nuclear programme. Destitute as it was 
of uranium resources, Italy could not afford to 
disregard a type of reactor capable of exploiting 
to the maximum the energy potential of uranium fuel. 
72. In conclusion, he wished to express the hope 
that the Agency would further intensify its vitally 
important activities on behalf of the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy. 
73. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic 
Republic) said that the political background of the 
twenty-first regular session was characterized by 
world-wide efforts to achieve detente and the 
peaceful coexistence of States with different social 
systems. In that regard, the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe [4] had set 
an important example. 
[4] Opened at Helsinki, 3 July 1973, continued at 
Geneva from 18 September 1973 to 21 July 1975 
and was concluded at Helsinki on 1 August 1975. 
74. At the same time, however, the enemies of 
detente were attempting to hamper international 
relations. The development and introduction of 
new weapons, including nuclear weapons, ran 
counter to world-wide peace endeavours. It was, 
therefore, imperative to bolster political detente 
with military detente. That most important task 
stressed the importance of non-proliferation and, 
in that connection, his Government condemned 
the policy of nuclear threat pursued by the South 
African apartheid regime. 
75. NPT was a highly significant instrument, 
and its universality was indispensable for full 
effectiveness. 
76. His Government believed that all nonnuclear-
weapon States that had not acceded to NPT 
should place all their nuclear activities under 
IAEA safeguards, thus demonstrating that their 
nuclear facilities were used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. 
77. As a measure for the prevention of a nuclear 
war, the Political Advisory Committee of the 
Warsaw Treaty members had proposed, in 
Budapest, that a treaty should be concluded in 
which participant States of the All-European 
Conference would undertake not to be the first to 
use nuclear weapons. The conclusion of a 
complete and permanent nuclear test ban treaty, 
acceded to by all nuclear-weapon States, as 
proposed by the Soviet Union, would be a valuable 
contribution to stopping the nuclear arms race, 
and current negotiations should result in early 
success. 
78. The real issue was to end the nuclear 
weapons race and ensure the reduction of nuclear 
weapons stockpiles. President Leonid Brezhnev 
had also recently streesed that all States should 
make efforts to prevent the further proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, should ban their testing and, 
last but not least, should do away with nuclear 
weapons altogether. His Government strongly 
supported those views. . 
79. The outstanding event since the previous 
regular session of the General Conference had 
been the Salzburg Conference. He was sure that 
many participants would agree that that conference 
had once more clearly brought out the indispensability 
of nuclear power as an energy source. 
80. At the last meeting of the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA) top priority had 
been given to the development of nuclear power 
engineering, and the Council had recommended 
that Member States conclude a treaty for multilateral 
international co-operation in the production 
of nuclear power plant equipment during the period 
1981-90. 
81. Although nuclear energy had proved to be an 
extremely safe and clean source of power, 
continued emphasis had to be placed on safety 
considerations. Human safety and environmental 
protection should be the prime consideration in 
all projects and his Government therefore strongly 
-9 



GC(XXI)/OR. 193 

supported the Agency's work on problems of 
safety and protection. In that context he wanted 
to pinpoint the progress made with the programme 
for drafting safety standards. His Government 
was convinced of the need for regional fuel cycle 
centres so that the report of the IAEA study 
project, showing the manifold advantages of such 
centres, was of great interest. He welcomed 
the new Agency plan to implement a programme 
for preparing guidelines and criteria for the 
safe disposal of radioactive wastes in geological 
formations. 

82. His Government had paid particular 
attention to the Secretariat's efforts to meet the 
Agency's obligations in the field of nuclear safeguards, 
and much had been achieved since the 
previous regular session. 
83. He hoped that the structural changes in the 
Department of Safeguards would ensure the 
effectiveness of direct control activities and 
information processing, and the further methodical 
development of safeguards activities. It was 
extremely important that the results and 
effectiveness of safeguards should be continuously 
analysed both by a control group within the IAEA 
and by the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSI), and that periodic reports 
be made to the Board of Governors. His 
Government welcomed the Secretariat's 
endeavours to elaborate precise and uniform safeguards 
agreements. 
84. Without serious support from Member 
States, the Secretariat's efforts to achieve 
effective safeguards could not be successful, and 
the Salzburg Conference had underlined that 
political tolerance was a precondition for solving 
the technical problems of safeguards. Responsible 
management of national safeguards systems, 
strict observance of safeguards agreements and 
constructive co-operation with the IAEA were 
indispensable commitments on the part of 
States, while the Agency's responsibility was to 
improve its safeguards system, to implement the 
principle of independent controls on the basis of 
uniform criteria and to process the information 
obtained. 
85. In regard to INIS, he believed that the 
inclusion of abstracts in "Atomindex" had 
considerably increased the value of that publication. 
He also thought that nuclear medicine 
should be included in the scope of INIS. 

86. In the interest of promoting the political 
and economic independence of developing countries, 
his Government gave assistance to developing 
countries under the Agency's programme for 
technical assistance, particularly in the field of 
training and education, and he had been authorized 
to say that the German Democratic Republic would 
make a voluntary contribution of 240 000 marks 
in support of the 1978 programme for technical 
assistance. 
87. A matter for concern was the increase in 
the budget for 1978, especially since a large part 
of the increase was due to price rises. His 
delegation was prepared to accept the budget but 
expected that the programme would be carried 
out with strict economy. 
88. On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary 
of the foundation of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, he wanted to refer briefly to the Agency's 
role throughout the world. 
89. The problematic nature of nuclear energy 
had rendered unavoidable the establishment of 
special bodies to deal with various aspects. 
However, in the interests of effective utilization 
and of international security all problems relating 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be 
centred on the IAEA. 
90. The IAEA played a prominent role in science 
and technology. The large number of extremely 
well prepared interdisciplinary scientific conferences 
had proved particularly effective in propagating 
scientific insight into the use of nuclear 
energy. The value of those conferences was 
enhanced by the fact that the Agency was also 
deeply engaged in safeguards activities. 
Endeavours to promote the use of nuclear energy 
could make sense only if the prime obligation of 
ensuring peace were met, and if the Agency was 
to fulfil its mission in the interests of all 
concerned it would need full support. 

• The meeting rose at 5. 30 p. m. 
- 10 



GC(XXI)/OR.194 

International Atomic Energy Agency March 1978* 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 27 September 1977, at 10. 20 a.m. 

President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 

Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

3 Election of other officers and appointment 1 -3 
of the General Committee (continued) 

7 General debate and annual report for 4-11 3 
1976 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Federal Republic of Germany 4 -27 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 28 -85 
Pakistan 86 -102 
Brazil 103 -113 

Point of order 114-115 

7 General debate and annual report for 116-127 
1976 (continued) 

Statement by the delegate of: 

Canada 116 - 127 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 3 October 1977. 
** GC(XXI)/577. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR.194 

THE RECORD 

ELECTION OF OTHER OFFICERS AND 
APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 
(continued! 1]) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that as a result of the intensive consultations 
that had been held between representatives of the 
eight geographical regions regarding the composition 
of the General Committee, he believed 
that there would be no objections to the constitution 
of a General Committee composed of 
17 members, namely the President, the eight 
Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole and seven additional Members. To 
do that, it would be necessary, as at the preceding 
regular session, to suspend Rule 40 of the Rules 
of Procedure so that seven Members instead of 
five could be elected. That would be an exceptional 
measure which could in no way constitute a 
precedent. He recalled that the representatives 
of the eight geographical regions all wanted a 
permanent solution to be found to the problem of 
the composition of the General Committee. He 
himself hoped that agreement would be reached 
on a satisfactory formula that could be applied at 
the next session, if possible within the framework 
of the present text of Rule 40 of the Rules of 
Procedure. 

2. He proposed that the delegates of the 
following States be elected as the Vice-Presidents 
of the General Conference: Federal Republic of 
Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Nigeria, Peru, 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the 
United States of America. He proposed 
Mr. Roehnsch (German Democratic Republic) as 
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and, 
lastly, to make up the General Committee, he 
proposed the following Members: Canada, Chile, 
Egypt, France, Hungary, Sudan and the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
• 3. The General Conference accepted the 
President's proposals. The General Committee 
was thus duly appointed. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 
1976 (GC(XXI)/580) (continued) 

4. Mr. HAUNSCHILD (Federal Republic of 
Germany), said that on the occasion of the 
twentieth anniversary of the IAEA, the 
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany 
wished to express its gratitude to the Director 
General and his staff. He congratulated 
Mr. Eklund who had been directing the work of 
the Agency for the past 16 years with much 
devotion, a great sense of responsibility and a 
remarkable realism. 
5. From the outset, the Agency had gained an 
excellent reputation, based on the quality of the 
[1] See document GC(XXI)/OR. 193, paras 1 
and 2. 
work it performed. It provided countries with 
the possibility of studying progress in nuclear 
research and technology. Under its technical 

assistance programme, it rendered enlightened 
help to the Third World. Through the Agency's 
work, the needs of those countries were better 
understood and other States could thus help them 
in many ways. 

6. On the regulatory side, the Agency had 
achieved much in the field of radiation protection; 
the reactor safety standards, at present being 
prepared, also promised to become of fundamental 
importance. 
7. The Agency's future work would be largely 
determined by the fact that it had been charged 
with applying control measures, called "safeguards", 
in particular under the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[2]. 
That activity was essential, since only a universal 
organization was in a position to apply uniform 
standards and to act with the objectivity and 
authority necessary in such a highly political 
area. 
8. The International Conference on Nuclear 
Power and its Fuel Cycle (the Salzburg 
Conference) organized by the Agency and held in 
May 1977 had helped considerably in enabling 
countries to understand each other's interests 
and viewpoints on the complex question of nuclear 
energy policy. That Conference had confirmed to 
the industrialized and to the developing countries 
alike that nuclear energy would be increasingly 
required to meet world demand for energy in 
spite of the wider use of conventional energy 
sources, in spite of the accelerated development 
of new forms of energy and in spite of all efforts 
to conserve energy. The Salzburg Conference 
had once again made it clear that only a few 
countries possessed both raw materials in 
sufficient quantities and the industrial capacity 
and know-how in the different sectors of nuclear 
technology. Intensive international co-operation 
was therefore necessary. 
9. Outlining the main elements of the energy 
policy of the Federal Republic, he explained that 
top priority was accorded to all measures for 
saving energy; however, only limited relief could 
be expected from them. The use of new technologies, 
in particular solar energy, would only 
be able to meet a small percentage of the country's 
needs in the coming decade. For that reason the 
Federal Republic continued to depend on nuclear 
energy, and it considered that the present 
situation called for a moderate but sustained 
expansion of nuclear energy in the form of lightwater 
reactors, which had proved their reliability. 
10. As in other countries, the use of nuclear 
energy was a highly controversial topic in the 
Federal Republic of Germany. The Government 
was trying to convince the population that that 
source of energy was necessary and could be 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



GC(XXI)/OR.194 


safely controlled. It was promoting a comprehensive 
programme of nuclear safety research 
in order to explore and enlarge the margins of 
safety of nuclear installations. 

11. The development of advanced reactor systems 
continued. As to the high-temperature reactor, 
its utilization for the production of industrial heat 
was considered as the most important of its 
possibilities. Regarding the fast-breeder reactor, 
the efforts for developing and using it industrially 
in five western European countries had been combined 
on the basis of agreements concluded that 
summer by Belgium, France, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Italy and the Netherlands. 
12. The Federal Republic of Germany was now 
concentrating on the preparations for the 
establishment of a fuel cycle centre. It intended 
to combine, at one single site, the various stages 
of the fuel cycle: storage of irradiated fuel 
elements, reprocessing, treatment and concentration 
of radioactive waste, final disposal of 
that waste in salt formations and, finally, refabrication 
of the materials recovered into new 
fuel elements. By avoiding unnecessary transport, 
and by immediate recycling of plutonium, 
that concept offered effective protection against 
misuse of nuclear material. 
13. Intensive and detailed studies had shown 
that a country like the Federal Republic of 
Germany, densely populated and lacking in raw 
materials, could not renounce reprocessing and 
the use of plutonium as fuel. Ecological considerations 
had led the authorities in the Federal 
Republic to demand proof of satisfactory arrangements 
for the disposal of spent fuel, before a 
licence to construct a nuclear power station was 
granted. The requirements for the rational use 
of raw materials and the independence of supply 
led to the same results. 
14. The debate on international nuclear energy 
policy had a twofold aim: to satisfy the energy 
demands of a growing number of countries and to 
make the peaceful use of nuclear energy widely 
accessible; at the same time the danger of the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons had to be avoided. 
15. The Federal Republic assumed that the 
proposal made by the United States of America 
for the international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation 
project had the same double objective and that it 
placed equal weight on the two components thereof, 
namely promoting nuclear power and ensuring 
non-proliferation. The Government of the 
Federal Republic was therefore in favour of that 
project and was prepared to participate actively 
in it. The project should yield important results 
for the further development of nuclear energy. 
The task would be to compare the modifications 
and alternatives currently contemplated with the 
nuclear power strategies at present being pursued. 
However, the situation varied so greatly from one 
country to another that different countries might 
well arrive at different conclusions. Consequently, 
care should be taken not to adopt premature 
measures in the course of the programme. Likewise 
Governments should not be obliged to accept 
any specific results of the evaluation. 

16. However, each national programme should 
be consistent with NPT, because that Treaty, to 
which more than 100 States had acceded, had to 
serve as the basis for all efforts made to attain 
the Agency's objective of preventing the misuse 
of nuclear energy. The forthcoming consultations 
should lead to arrangements which were multinational, 
non-discriminatory and generally 
binding, so as to create an even more effective 
obstacle to proliferation. 
17. It had to be recognized, however, that 
proliferation was first and foremost a political 
problem which had to be tackled by political 
means. Safeguards alone could not solve the 
problem. It was in that sense that Article IV of 
NPT envisaged world-wide co-operation and 
committed the developed countries to assist the 
others in their development. 
18. The Federal Republic had always attached 
great importance to international co-operation. 
It saw the long-term transfer of nuclear technology 
as part of its effort to support the developing 
countries. For its part, it hoped, through that 
co-operation, to improve its supply of raw 
materials. 
19. It was clear that nuclear technology imposed 
great moral obligations on all partners. The aim 
should be to get all countries to collaborate in 
measures to assure international non-proliferation. 
20. As nuclear technology was already widely 
disseminated, a policy aimed at denying nuclear 
materials and technology to certain countries 
would increase rather than diminish the risk of 
uncontrolled activity in sensitive areas. Countries 
should therefore aim to open a dialogue, establish 
nuclear interdependence within the framework of 
adequate and equitable arrangements, work together 
in joint ventures and develop a climate of 
mutual trust. 
21. In that context it had to be realized that the 
proposed international evaluation project would 
achieve its objectives only if the largest possible 
number of States participated. All interested 
countries, whether suppliers or recipients, should 
be able to take part in it. On those grounds alone 
it was obvious that the services of the Agency 
should be made use of in the project, for it 
included in its membership nearly all the countries 
with an interest in nuclear power. In that way it 
would also be possible to inform those Member 
States not actively taking part in the programme 
of its progress and results. The Agency, as an 
experienced and objective universal organization, 
was in the best position to handle that complex 
programme for the benefit of all Member States. 
The creation of a new organization would only 
lead to unnecessary delay; for all those reasons 
it was desirable for the Agency to provide the 
secretariat of the proposed evaluation project. 


GC(XXI)/OR.194 

22. Furthermore the Agency possessed technical 
expertise in many fields, in particular on 
uranium resources, the characteristics of 
different types of reactors and radioactive waste 
disposal. In the safeguards sector the Agency 
had acquired considerable practical experience 
and its consistent efforts to develop more efficient 
techniques were to be commended. Quite recently 
the Agency had put forward a number of initiatives 
which deserved thorough examination, namely the 
Regional Nuclear Fuel Cycle Centres Project, the 
study of an international system of plutonium 
management and the elaboration of a convention 
on the physical protection of nuclear material. 
Apart from secretariat services, the Agency was 
thus in a position to contribute in substance to 
many parts of the evaluation. 
23. The fact that the Agency was well equipped 
to play an important role in implementing the 
evaluation programme testified anew to the wisdom 
of the authors of the Statute in providing for both 
promotional and regulatory functions. The 
essential thing was for a constant balance to be 
maintained between those two fields of activity. 
The Government of the Federal Republic would 
therefore continue to co-operate actively in both 
those fields. 
24. As the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
was the prerequisite for any international nuclear 
co-operation, the Federal Republic would support 
the Agency as the central body in a global safeguards 
system. Consequently, it had proposed 
to the Agency a joint programme for the technical 
development of safeguards, since new technical 
development would certainly bring about substantial 
improvements in the present safeguards 
system. The Federal Republic hoped that discussions 
on the work to be carried out jointly 
would begin in the near future. 
25. The Agency's activities on the transfer of 
nuclear technology had already served to establish 
great confidence in its ability. It had successfully 
introduced nuclear techniques in nutrition and 
agriculture and thus made a valuable contribution 
to the battle against the world food shortage. 
26. The Federal Republic had traditionally 
contributed in many ways to the Agency's 
technical assistance programme. In 1978 it 
would increase its contribution to the General 
Fund to more than $580 000 and it would make 
additional voluntary contributions of more than 
$1 million for experts, fellowships, conferences, 
training courses and joint projects. 
27. In conclusion, he reiterated that his 
Government had every confidence in the Agency's 
future and would continue to support it actively 
in its important work, 
28. Mr. MOROKHOV (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) made the following statement:[3] 
[3] This statement is reproduced verbatim at 
the speaker's request under Rule 89(b) of the 
Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. 
29. 
"Mr. President, allow me to congratulate 
you on behalf of the Soviet delegation 
on your election to the high post of 
President of the General Conference. 
30. 
"I have been accorded the great honour 
of reading out the text of a message to the 
participants in the twenty-first session of 
the General Conference of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency from L.I. Brezhnev, 
General Secretary of the Communist Party 
of the Soviet Union and Chairman of the 
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the 
USSR. 
31. 
"Allow me to make the message known 
to you: 
•

T O PARTICIPANTS OF THE TWENTYFIRST 
SESSION OF THE GENERAL 
CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY 

•I should like to extend my cordial 
greetings to the participants of the 
twenty-first session of the General 
Conference of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. 
W•e understand the task faced by the 
Agency in promoting the extensive use 
of atomic energy for the maintenance 
of peace and for the health and wellbeing 
of the world's peoples because 
these objectives are dear to us. 

'The Soviet Union is collaborating 
actively, and is ready to develop 
further collaboration, with other 
countries in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, and in particular 
within the framework of the Agency. 
Our country is making extensive use 
of the energy of the atom for creative 
purposes and is willing to share its 
rich experience and its scientific and 
technical knowledge in this field in the 
interest of further progress of mankind. 

•e advocating the development of 
Whil 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
the Soviet Union is fully determined, 
together with other States, to strengthen 
the international regime of nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons in 
every way. Everything possible must 
be done to ensure that the international 
exchange of nuclear technology, which 
in many countries will lead to the 
development of a scientific, technical 
and industrial potential in the nuclear 
sphere, does not become a channel for 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons, 

W•e must not be blind to the fact that 
the forces in the world which would 
like to possess nuclear weapons as a 
means of threatening the people have 
not yet been eliminated. For this 


GC(XXI)/OR. 194 


reason the problem of placing a 
reliable barrier in the way of nuclear 
weapons proliferation and of preventing 
the danger of nuclear war is now acute 
as never before. 

•

Th e International Atomic Energy-
Agency has a major part to play in 
the solution of this extremely 
important problem and we express the 
hope that it will make every effort to 
ensure that the atom serves only the 
interests of peace. 

• 
will 
Th e Soviet Union, for its part,
continue to co-operate fully in the 
achievement of the noble objectives of 
this authoritative international organization. 


'Permit me to wish the participants of 
the twenty-first session of the General 
Conference of the Agency every success 
in their important and responsible 
work. 

L. Brezhnev' 
"This year we are celebrating the 
twentieth anniversary of the Agency's 
activities. It can be said with full conviction 
that over these years the International 
Atomic Energy Agency has become a 
recognized centre for the joint solution of 
scientific and technical problems involved 
in the peaceful use of atomic energy and 
for the provision of assistance to developing 
countries in that field. A particularly 
important part of the Agency's activities is 
concerned, and rightly so, with matters 
relating to the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 

"The problem of further strengthening 
the international regime of non-proliferation 
is more urgent today than ever before and 
directly related to the preservation of peace 
and security and to reducing the threat of 
nuclear war. 

"Over the last few years many countries 
have speeded up their development of 
nuclear power, which is becoming one of 
the most important sources for meeting 
energy requirements in those countries; 
this has inevitably entailed an accumulation 
of large quantities of nuclear materials and, 
as a consequence, an increased risk of the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. 

"in the opinion of the Soviet Union, an 
opinion which is shared by many States, the 
solution of the problem of the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons should not be 
permitted to slow down the rate of development 
of nuclear power production in the 
world or to hold up the economic development 
of countries. Nevertheless, the 
development of nuclear power should go 

hand in hand with the strengthening of the 
regime of non-proliferation. 

36. 
"All those who value the cause of peace 
should actively strive to make the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
a truly universal instrument of an international 
policy of non-proliferation 
embracing every single State. Unfortunately, 
not all nuclear-weapon States, and not all 
States with a significant nuclear potential 
either, have acceded to the Treaty, and 
some of them, for example the Republic of 
South Africa, are actually going against the 
Treaty by actively preparing to carry out 
nuclear tests. 
37. 
"The South African authorities, 
stubbornly refusing to give up their policy 
of racial oppression and apartheid against 
the African population, are seeking by force 
of arms to halt the irreversible process of 
the liquidation of the colonial-racist system 
in South Africa. If nuclear weapons were 
to find their way into the hands of the racist 
regime of Pretoria, a direct threat to the 
security of the African States would be 
created and the nuclear threat to the whole 
of mankind would be increased. The 
dangerous intentions of the South African 
racists must be resolutely condemned. 
38. 
"Nor is the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
further strengthened by the campaign for a 
new phase in the nuclear arms race conducted 
by certain circles in the West to the 
keynote of developing production of the socalled 
neutron bomb and other dangerous 
types of armament. 
39. 
"A cause for legitimate concern is the 
way the non-nuclear States Members of 
EURATOM are delaying the practical 
application of Agency safeguards in those 
countries. At the Board of Governors' 
meeting of 23 September 1977, many 
Governors expressed deep apprehension in 
that regard. The Soviet delegation would 
like to stress once again the inadmissibility 
of further delay in applying Agency safeguards 
to the nuclear activities of those 
countries. 
40. 
"in the course of its 20 years of 
existence the Agency has acquired considerable 
experience in safeguards activities. 
A system of legal procedures has been 
worked out, the Agency inspectorate has 
been built up, and safeguards methods and 
procedures have been worked out and 
introduced at many types of nuclear facility. 
At present the Agency is carrying out safeguards 
activities in many non-nuclear 
countries of the world. 
41. 
"in the context of nuclear power development 
throughout the world and of expanding 
international trade in nuclear materials and 
equipment, problems of perfecting the 
5 


GC(XXI)/OR. 194 

Agency's activities in the matter of safeguards 
are assuming an increasingly 
prominent place among the measures designed 
to strengthen the regime of the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. We regard 
effective Agency safeguards as one of the 
main preconditions for international cooperation 
on a broad scale in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 

42. 
"The Agency is now entering a new 
phase in its safeguarding activities. The 
main feature of this phase is the sharp 
increase in the volume and complexity of 
the safeguards. For this reason the task 
of making maximum use of all the resources 
of the Agency's safeguards system has become 
a matter of extreme urgency. 
43. 
"The system is based, as we know, on 
the principle of independent verification. 
The Agency should take full advantage of 
this right, irrespective of the extent to 
which accounting and control in certain 
States, or groups of States, has been 
developed. At the same time it is essential 
for all countries accepting Agency safeguards 
to set up and operate effective 
nuclear material accounting and control 
systems. The consistent application by the 
Agency and by countries of the provisions of 
the Agency's safeguards system is a 
guarantee of effective international control 
in the matter of non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
44. 
"There is still urgent need for a 
radical improvement in the work of the 
Agency inspectorate. The Department of 
Safeguards has recently been reorganized 
and a second Division of Operations and a 
Safeguards Evaluation Section have been set 
up. In our opinion, this Section will have 
to play a leading part in improving the 
effectiveness of Agency safeguards. It is 
now important to consolidate the Department 
with highly qualified specialists and to 
raise the interrelationship between the 
Divisions and Sections of the Department 
to a qualitatively higher plane. 

45. 
"There has likewise long been a need 
for a thorough analysis of the activities of 
the Agency's inspectorate, and also for 
the formulation of long-term and shortterm 
plans for improving its activities. 
This would make it possible to find a 
sounder approach to the problem of 
determining the necessary manpower and 
financial resources and of activating, on a 
planned basis, the development of safeguards 
procedures and techniques, as well 
as of the instruments and equipment used 
for such activities, and of putting them into 
operational practice; this is particularly 
important at the present time when the 
Agency is beginning to apply safeguards at 
a number of major facilities that are 
"sensitive" from the standpoint of the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. Another 
item on the agenda is the formulation of 
effective model safeguards agreements. 

46. 
"Because of the increased volume of 
safeguards activity on the part of the Agency, 
there has been a considerable upsurge in 
the volume of information which it is 
receiving. Until recently, insufficient 
attention was paid to the processing and 
analysis of the information. We believe 
that the establishment of a special Safeguards 
Information Treatment Unit in the 
Department of Safeguards and the development 
and effective introduction of an 
automated data processing system are, in 
principle, of great importance for the 
entire Agency safeguards system, 
47. 
"In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, 
an urgent matter at the present time is the 
drafting, within the IAEA, of a universal 
international agreement on the physical 
protection of nuclear materials, equipment 
and transports. 
48. 
"Attributing great importance to the 
Agency's safeguards activities, the USSR 
delegation wishes to announce that the Soviet 
Union has made a special contribution of 
300 000 roubles, in its national currency, 
for the development of the technical aspects 
of safeguards in 1978. This contribution 
by the Soviet Union can be used, in particular, 
for inspectors' courses to be held at 
Novovoronezh nuclear power station, the 
development of technical safeguards methods 
at that station, and for Agency conferences 
and courses on safeguards to be held in the 
USSR. 
49. 
"For its part, the Soviet Union is 
willing to continue assisting the Agency in 
the work of strengthening its safeguards 
system, which is so important for the cause 
of peace. 
50. 
"We would like to stress particularly 
that States which are suppliers of nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology 
assume a special responsibility and that 
there is a need for strict safeguards to 
ensure that international co-operation in the 
matter of peaceful uses does not become a 
channel for the spread of nuclear weapons. 
This problem is not a commercial but a 
political one, involving considerations of 
security. As we know, a group of suppliers 
of nuclear materials, equipment and technology 
have worked out some guiding 
principles for nuclear exports. At the 
suppliers' conference held in London in 
September, agreement was reached that the 
Agency would be informed, through its 
Director General, of the policy pursued by 
the suppliers in safeguarding nuclear 
exports. The work on strengthening the 
measures for safeguarding exports will be 
continued. The Soviet Union, for its part, 
-6 

GC(XXI)/OR.194 


will strive consistently for adoption of the 

principle of complete safeguarding as a 

condition for the supply of any materials, 

equipment or technology included in the 

agreed initial list. 

"1977 will rightly go down in history as 
a milestone in the advance of the Soviet 
people towards a Communist future. It is 
the year of the 60th anniversary of the 
Great October Socialist Revolution, which 
opened up a new age in the history of mankind. 
It is the year of adoption of the new 
Soviet constitution, the constitution of a 
developed socialist State, embodying the 
historical experience of its struggle for 
freedom, democracy and peace on our 
planet. 

"A factor of no mean importance in 
ensuring the progress of our socialist 
economy has been the part played, and still 
being played, by peaceful atomic science 
and engineering. History will impartially 
and rightly record the fact that the homeland 
of the peaceful atom was the Soviet 
Union. The start-up of the first nuclear 
power station in the world in the town of 
Obninsk near Moscow on 27 June 1954 laid 
the foundation of a great industrial revolution, 
the significance of which for mankind 
cannot be overstated. Not even a 
quarter of a century has passed since that 
memorable day, and yet there are now more 
than 180 nuclear power stations operating 
on our globe. The unit capacity of reactors 
has grown from 5000 to 1 million kW and 
their total world potential has exceeded 
90 million kW. It would have taken about 
100 years to have achieved that figure by 
means of conventional power production. 

"Although the Soviet Union possesses 
adequate natural resources of conventional 
fuels, it is still developing nuclear power 
at a very fast rate. 

"Whereas the production of electricity 
during the ninth Five-Year Plan (1970-75) 
increased overall by 40%, in the nuclear 
power stations it increased by a factor of 
seven. During the tenth Five-Year Plan 
(1976-80) the volume of nuclear power 
production further increased by a factor 
of almost five. 

"At present, nuclear power stations 
which have either been built or are under 
construction in the USSR represent an overall 
capacity of more than 21 million kW(e). 

"One of the main trends in the development 
of Soviet nuclear power production has 
been the construction of nuclear power 
stations with pressurized water reactors 
(VVER). Plants with pressurized water 
reactors having a capacity of 440 MW(e) 
(VVER-440) have shown that they can compete 
with fossil fuel stations in all regions 

of the European territory of the Soviet 

Union. The technical perfection and operational 
reliability of nuclear stations with 

VVER-440 reactors has enabled us to 

provide technical assistance for a number 

of foreign countries (German Democratic 

Republic, People's Republic of Bulgaria, 

Finland, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic 

and Hungary) in the development of their 

power production on the basis of nuclear 

power stations. 

57. 
"The next step in the development of 
nuclear power production is the VVER 
reactor with a capacity of 1000 MW(e) 
(VVER-1000), the construction of which is 
being carried out for the fifth unit of the 
Novovoronezh nuclear power station. 
58. 
"A great deal of attention is being given 
to the development of nuclear power stations 
based on uranium-graphite channel reactors. 
The accumulation of knowledge during the 
construction and operation of the first 
generation of these reactors has made it 
possible to begin designing a series-produced 
commercial channel reactor with a capacity 
of 1000 MW (RBMK-1000). The first such 
reactor attained rated power at the beginning 
of November 1974, and the second reactor 
at the Leningrad power station did so in 
January 1976. The first RBMK-1000 
reactor at the Kursk nuclear power station 
started producing energy in December 1976. 

59. 
"At present, new units containing 
RBMK reactors are being constructed at 
the Leningrad, Kursk, Chernobyl'sk and 
Smolensk nuclear power stations. 
60. 
"As it has been found possible to boost 
the power of reactors of this type, it has 
also been possible to develop a design of 
more economic reactors having a unit 
capacity of 1500 MW. The construction of 
the first reactors of this capacity is being 
carried out at the Ignalina nuclear power 
station in the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist 
Republic. 
61. 
"A new step towards meeting future 
needs has been made with the development 
" of a design for 
a sectional-unit uraniumgraphite 
reactor of the channel type 
(RBMK-KP-2400) with an electricitygenerating 
capacity of 2400 MW. 

62. 
"In 1973 the BN-350 fast neutron 
reactor was put into service at the nuclear 
power station in the town of Shevchenko and 
the third unit of the Beolyarsk nuclear 
power station was built with a BN-600 
reactor, thus providing a basis on which the 
next step in the development of fast neutron 
reactors can be made and on which problems 
relating to the nuclear fuel for future largescale 
nuclear power facilities can be solved. 
63. 
"Design work is already being done on 
a fast neutron reactor having an electrical 

GC(XXI)/OR.194 


capacity of 1600 MW (BN-1600) and with 
advanced technological and economic 
characteristics. 

64. 
"in view of the need to replace fossil 
fuel by nuclear fuel in a branch of energy 
production such as that of low-potential 
heat for industrial and communal needs, 
work is being done in the Soviet Union on 
the construction of atomic stations for 
supplying heat, atomic plants for the 
production of electricity and heat, and also 
of reactors to meet the needs of the 
metallurgical and chemical industries. 
65. 
"Noting the future programme for the 
development of atomic energy, the twentyfifth 
Congress of the Communist Party of 
the Soviet Union has drawn attention to the 
need of speeding up the construction, 
expansion and reconstruction of specialized 
plants for the production of reactors and 
their components. The 60th anniversary 
of the Great October Socialist Revolution 

will be commemorated by the putting into 

service of the first basic workshops of the 

new gigantic industrial complex known as 

Atommash'•, designed for the series 
production of powerful atomic reactors for 
electricity generation. This complex will 
come into full operation during the present 
five-year period. 

66. 
"When our industry is in possession of 
such a complex it will have been raised to 
a qualitatively new technical level. Its 
entry into service will make it possible to 
accelerate considerably fulfilment of the 
task set by the twenty-fifth Congress, 
according to which the development of 
nuclear power is to be accomplished ahead 
of schedule and the fuel and energy balances 
of the country are to be improved. 
67. 
"in 1959 the Soviet Union constructed 
the first atomic-powered ice-breaker, 
called the 'Lenin'. The construction and 
operation of this vessel made it possible 
to acquire experience and to lay the 
necessary basis for building non-military 
vessels running on nuclear power. 
68. 
"In 1975 the ice-breaker 'Arktika' 
went into service. The voyage of the 
'Arktika' to the North Pole in August 1977 
was an enormous step forward in the opening 
up of the north and gives an indication 
of the extent of scientific and technological 
progress in our country. In 1978 operation 
of the atomic ice-breaker 'Sibir' will 
begin. 
69. 
"The construction and successful 
operation of powerful ice-breakers running 
on nuclear power is of great significance 
to the national economy. The use of atomic 
ice-breakers has made it possible to extend 
voyages considerably (up to eight months 
and more) and to plan the movements of 
ships on the North Sea route, thus opening 

up new possibilities for developing the 

wealth of the Soviet Arctic and for the 

economic growth of the northern regions 

of the Soviet Union. 

70. 
"The Soviet Union is fully able to 
satisfy the need for enriched uranium 
arising out of the expansion of its national 
atomic energy programme and it also 
provides a number of countries, under 
mutually advantageous conditions, with 
enrichment services in connection with 
uranium to be used for peaceful purposes. 
The Soviet Union remains ready to provide, 
at Soviet enrichment plants, services to 
other countries for the enrichment up to 
5% of uranium-235 of uranium belonging 
to them, doing so strictly in accordance 
with the United Nations Charter, the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons and other agreements relating to 
the safeguarding of nuclear exports now in 
force. 

71. 
"in connection with the matter just 
mentioned, the Soviet delegation would 
like to emphasize the significant contribution 
made to the development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy by the 
Salzburg Conference on Nuclear Power and 
its Fuel Cycle organized by the Agency in 
May 1977 and to express its gratitude to 
the Secretariat of the Agency for holding 
the Conference at an opportune moment and 
for its efficient organization. The 
Conference showed that in various parts of 
the world there are different ways of 
approaching present and future problems; 
these can be explained to a large extent 
by the particular characteristics and 
economic needs of individual countries. 
The Soviet Union considers that discussions 
of the ways and means of developing nuclear 
power should be continued and will welcome 
further efforts to this end. 

72. 
"The position of our country is that 
international co-operation is the proper 
way of solving environmental problems. 
Examples of this are provided by the cooperation 
of the States Members of the 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
in investigating the radioactivity of international 
waters such as the Danube river 
and the Baltic Sea and by the work of the 
Agency in connection with the Convention on 
the Prevention of Marine Pollution by 
Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter. 
73. 
"The Soviet Union is paying great 
attention to the solution of long-term 
problems of research and development 
relating to thermonuclear power production 
and is carrying on a wide range of work to 
this end. 
74. 
"The view of the Soviet Union is that 
the enormous task of mastering nuclear 

GC(XXI)/OR.194 


fusion can be most effectively achieved 
on the basis of broad international cooperation, 
a start towards which was made 
by Academician I. V. Kurchatov, the founder 
of the Soviet nuclear industry. 

75. 
"We wish to express our willingness to 
continue to participate actively in the joint 
solution of this enormous scientific, 
technological and economic problem. 
76. 
"Mr. President, the Soviet Union will 
continue to support the IAEA in the development 
of such important branches of its work 
as safeguards, nuclear power and its fuel 
cycle, controlled nuclear fusion, the 
International Nuclear Information System 
(INIS) and also other important problems 
coming under the Agency's programme. 
77. 
"The Soviet Union pays a great deal of 
attention to the provision of technical 
assistance to developing Member States of 
the Agency and supplies those countries, on 
the basis of Secretariat requests, with 
equipment and materials financed from its 
voluntary contributions to the technical 
assistance fund; it also trains national 
staff. 
78. 
"Between 1969 and 1976, of the total 
amount of voluntary contributions made by 
the USSR (2.8 million roubles paid in its 
national currency), the Agency has already 
used over 2 million roubles. 
79. 
"Out of this contribution the USSR has 
provided 15 scientific visits for specialists 
from developing countries working on 
various aspects of nuclear science and 
technology. 
80. 
"Since 1977, annual three-month courses 
on the application of nuclear techniques to 
agriculture have been organized at the 
Timiryazev Ail-Union Agricultural Academy 
in Moscow. It is planned to organize similar 
courses from 1978 to 1979 at the 
Novovoronezh nuclear power station on the 
operation of water-cooled, water-moderated 
reactors. The organization in Moscow of 
annual courses on the application of nuclear 
techniques to medicine is under consideration. 
The first scientific and technical safeguards 
tour for specialists from developing 
countries has been organized and is now 
proceeding successfully; it involves a visit 
to a number of nuclear facilities in the 
Soviet Union. 
81. 
"The Soviet delegation has been empowered 
by its Government to announce an 
increase in the voluntary contribution of the 
USSR to the IAEA technical assistance fund 
for 1978 to 650 000 roubles, payable in the 
national currency and designed in the first 
place for the provision of assistance to 
developing countries that are parties to 
NPT. This contribution may be used for 
purchasing Soviet equipment, instruments 

and materials and also for Agency study 

tours and scientific visits to the USSR in the 

context of technical assistance. 

82. 
"The effective combination of technical 
assistance and the measures necessary for 
safeguarding it will help consolidate the 
regime of non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and therefore will ensure fuller 
implementation of the Agency's tasks under 
its Statute and the provisions of NPT. 
83. 
"Mr, President, in summing up my 
statement I should say that the development 
of broadly based international co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of atomic energy is not 
possible without a number of steps being 
taken to ensure international peace and to 
strengthen the regime of non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. These steps include 
increasing the number of countries acceding 
to NPT, improving the effectiveness of the 
Agency's international safeguards system, 
applying strict safeguards to nuclear exports 
(including the extension of safeguards to all 
the nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon 
States which are importers), instituting an 
effective system for protecting nuclear 
materials and facilities and developing a 
system of fast and co-ordinated action to be 
taken by States in case any country does not 
fulfil its obligations and thereby creates a 
danger of nuclear weapons proliferating. 
84. 
"The Soviet Union considers that if there 
is goodwill and determination on the part of 
States, these tasks can be fulfilled successfully 
and, in this way, favourable conditions 
for the development of mankind can be 
created under conditions of lasting peace 
and universal security. 
85. 
"Allow me, in conclusion, to wish our 
organization continuing success in the task 
of developing uses of nuclear energy with 
the aim of furthering peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world. " 
86. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) said that the history 
of the Agency over the preceding twenty years 
was, in a sense, the history of development of 
nuclear energy in the world. The Agency's 
establishment had raised great hopes but the 
initial optimism had diminished and some 
scepticism had recently been voiced about the 
role of atomic energy in the world. The transition 
from early euphoria to present-day realism 
was due in a way to the growing maturity of 
atomic energy. In that regard, Pakistan had full 
faith in the unlimited potential of nuclear energy 
in both the medium and the long term and was 
convinced that the Agency had a vital role to play 
in the world. 
87. He recalled that during the preceding few 
months three major conferences had been held one 
at Persepolis on the transfer of nuclear 
technology, another at Salzburg on nuclear power 
and its fuel cycle, and the World Energy 

GC(XXI)/OR. 194 

Conference at Istanbul. The results of those 
conferences had clearly shown that there was no 
practical substitute for nuclear power in the 
foreseeable future. Nuclear energy had become 
an essential ingredient of economic life, and its 
economic benefits should be accessible to all, 
provided that it was employed strictly for peaceful 
purposes. 

88. Several key issues were associated with 
the future role of atomic energy, namely the 
energy crisis, transfer of technology and nuclear 
proliferation. There was no doubt that the world 
was facing an energy crisis which not only endangered 
the prosperity of the industrialized 
countries but also threatened the economic growth 
of the developing countries. That crisis had 
worsened because of the absence of a global 
policy and wastage of energy in the industrialized 
countries. As a result the developing countries, 
constituting 64% of the world population, were left 
with less than 14% of energy resources, which 
was inadequate for their economic development. 
Unless the industrialized countries adopted a 
global policy of equitable sharing of energy 
resources and reduced their oil requirements, 
there was no hope of restoring the balance. 
89. That meant that during the following two 
decades the countries of the Third World would 
have to acquire the basic technology of nuclear 
power. It was unfortunate that certain industrialized 
countries were following, in the name of 
non-proliferation, a calculated policy of placing 
embargoes on the sharing of nuclear technology 
with the Third World. History showed that such 
embargoes had quite the opposite effect to that 
intended. He agreed with the Director General 
that there was no way of stopping the spread of 
nuclear technology. Negotiations offered the 
best hope of preventing its misuse because proliferation 
was essentially a political problem, 
which must be resolved politically, 
90. There were no restrictions on the transfer 
of resources from the Third World to the 
industrialized countries. There should likewise 
be no restrictions on the flow of nuclear technology 
for peaceful purposes in the opposite 
direction. Technology should be a common 
heritage of all mankind and no country or group 
of countries should have a monopoly. A deliberate 
policy of denial could worsen the already unsatisfactory 
relationship between North and 
South, which situation must be avoided at all 
costs. 
91. Pakistan attached the highest importance to 
the prevention of the further spread of nuclear 
weapons and to the reduction and eventual elimination 
of the entire nuclear arsenal. The Super 
Powers should set an example by concluding, 
without delay, a comprehensive nuclear test ban 
treaty, thereby promoting the cause of nonproliferation. 
It would also be desirable, in his 
opinion, to create an international climate for 
nuclear disarmament by providing the non-nuclearweapon 
States with an assurance of security 
against nuclear threats. 
92. In the interest of strengthening the nonproliferation 
regime, it was necessary to 
generate a climate of confidence among the 
supplier and the recipient States. It was therefore 
important that the supplier States should 
honour their existing agreements, and the 
sanctity of international treaties, which represented 
the very corner-stone of the concept of 
non-proliferation, must be preserved. 
93. Pakistan was therefore in favour of a 
dialogue between the supplier and the recipient 
States with a view to establishing internationally 
acceptable norms to regulate the supply and use 
of nuclear technology, equipment, materials and 
services. An attempt by any group unilaterally 
to impose its conditions on others could not achieve 
the desired results. His country hoped that a 
dialogue would be instituted soon, possibly under 
the auspices of the Agency. 
94. At the last meeting of the Board, Pakistan 
had supported the Agency's participation in the 
international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation 
(INFCE) proposed by the United States, In its 
view, the Agency's participation in such a study 
should take place without any prior commitments 
and without affecting the 1978 and other programmes 
of the Agency which had been duly considered 
and approved by the Board. He considered 
that the INFCE study would be productive 
only if it aimed at an objective evaluation of the 
technical and economic aspects of the various 
nuclear fuel cycle alternatives. 
95. As regards Article VI of the Statute, his 
country had co-sponsored a proposal to amend 
that Article in order to rectify the serious im-
balance which affected the representative 
character of the Board. It was essential that 
the Board's membership be based on fair geographical 
distribution. The regions of Africa 
and the Middle East and South Asia, with a total 
of 41 Members, had only nine seats on the Board 
or a representation of 22%, whereas the remaining 
six regions had 25 seats or a representation 
of 36. 7%. There was thus an obvious imbalance. 
The situation was all the more surprising because 
the countries of Africa, the Middle East and 
South Asia represented not only a sizable proportion 
of the world population but. also were the 
world's foremost suppliers of oil and uranium. 
Many of those countries had embarked upon 
ambitious programmes for the development of 
nuclear energy and were making important contributions 
to the Agency's work. It was therefore 
in the best interests of the Agency that those 
two regions should be given their due share of 
representation on the Board. 
96. As regards his country's programmes, 
Pakistan was deeply committed to the peaceful 
development and application of nuclear energy 
for the economic advancement and welfare of its 
people. The new Government in Pakistan was 
pursuing the speedy implementation of the national 
nuclear energy programme and would honour all 
existing agreements and contracts. There was a 
national consensus regarding the early completion 
- 10 

GC(XXI)/OR.194 


of the reprocessing plant currently under construction 
with the co-operation of France; the 
plant had been placed under the most strict 
Agency safeguards, approved by the Board of 
Governors in 1976. 


97. As an energy-deficient country, Pakistan 
was implementing a comprehensive programme 
of nuclear energy development for peaceful 
purposes. The Karachi Nuclear Power Plant 
had just entered its fifth year of commercial 
operation. In co-operation with Agency experts, 
Pakistan was planning to install further nuclear 
power plants; it was envisaged that, by the end 
of the century, two thirds of the country's 
electricity needs would be met through nuclear 
power. 
98. Special emphasis was being placed on the 
search for uranium in Pakistan, where vast areas 
potentially containing substantial reserves of 
uranium had been delineated. Given the current 
world-wide uranium supply difficulties, Pakistan 
was prepared to consider all offers of technical 
and economic co-operation in the exploitation of 
those potential reserves for peaceful purposes. 
Pakistan had established two training centres to 
meet its growing need for technical manpower the 
Nuclear Power Training Centre at Karachi 
and the Centre for Nuclear Studies at Islamabad; 
it would be possible to train 200-300 technicians 
a year at the two Centres. In June, 170 scientists 
from 25 countries had participated in an 
"International Summer College on Physics and 
Contemporary Needs" at Nathiagali; his country 
was grateful for the co-operation of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics in helping 
to organize it. 

99. As regards the Agency's programme, 
Pakistan considered that parity should be maintained 
between the promotional and the regulatory 
activities of the Agency. His country noted with 
concern that safeguards expenditure had increased 
while the resources allocated to technical 
assistance had decreased or remained the same 
in terms of purchasing power, despite the rapid 
growth in the nuclear programmes of the developing 
countries. The widening gap between the 
funds for safeguards and those for technical 
assistance was creating a serious imbalance in 
the Agency's overall programme. 
100. The Pakistan delegation fully supported the 
expansion of the Agency's nuclear power programmes 
and of its activities relating to safety 
and waste disposal. It particularly appreciated 
the efforts which the Agency was making with 
regard to the training of manpower for nuclear 
power plants and to the preparation of guides and 
safety codes. 
101. Turning to technical assistance, he said 
that Pakistan was against any attempts to impose 
safeguards in connection with the granting of 
fellowships and with scientific visits, which were 
unlikely to represent substantial contributions in 
sensitive areas. The performance of the Agency 
over the past three years had been reviewed by 
the Director General. Pakistan would continue 
to co-operate with the Agency and strongly 
supported the re-election of the Director General 
so that he could guide the Agency through the 
difficult period ahead. 

102. Although not all the dreams of the past 
20 years about atomic energy had been realized, 
it was to be hoped that during the next two decades 
the Agency would succeed in promoting world wide 
the peaceful uses of the atom. He was confident 
that there would be a resurgence of nuclear power 
in the 1980s. Nuclear energy would become the 
mainstay of electric power systems in the world 
and render it possible to avoid a worsening of the 
energy crisis as advanced and breeder reactors 
became a commercial reality. Concern about 
environmental hazards would be allayed through 
further improvements in nuclear technology. 
The developing countries would no doubt become 
the main users of nuclear energy, which would 
help them in their development. Pakistan was 
convinced that the threat of nuclear proliferation 
could be contained through a collective decision 
of all nations to abolish nuclear weapons in the 
interests of mankind's survival - and the Agency 
would undoubtedly play a key role in bringing 
that about. 
103. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) congratulated 
the President on his election and wished him 
success in the fulfilment of his complex duties. 
104. Recalling the almost unanimous opinion that 
oil production would start to decline between 
1980 and 2000, with a consequent energy shortage, 
he emphasized the need to seek major substitutes 
without delay. The years up to 1985 would be 
critical ones, during which serious decisions 
would have to be taken with a view to reducing 
energy demand and establishing new forms of 
energy production. In the period up to the end 
of the century it was necessary to intensify international 
co-operation in the seeking, development 
and demonstration of new energy sources and in 
energy conservation so that the world ceased to 
depend largely on oil. 

105. In the growth/no-growth debate it should 
not be forgotten that the least advanced countries 
had the most to lose in a no-growth situation. 
Developing countries needed to increase their 
energy production in order to satisfy their energy 
needs and obtain for their people a standard of 
living equivalent to that in industrial countries. 
106. Brazil, which had been host to the General 
Conference in 1976, was striving to achieve a 
rapid transition; it was hoped that the country's 
electricity-generating capacity would be almost 
90 000 MW(e) by 1990, with 10% of it nuclear, and 
some 280 000 MW(e) by the year 2000, with about 
40% of it nuclear. During the next 20 years, an 
interconnected grid on a nationwide scale would 
gradually be established; maximum possible use 
would be made of the hydro potential of the Amazon 
region and nuclear power generation near centres 
of high consumption would be developed. As 
fossil fuels would probably not suffice for 
electricity generation, priority would obviously 
- 11 

GC(XXI)/OR. 194 


have to be given to nuclear power, which would 
play a supplementary role before ultimately 
becoming the country's main energy source. 

107. In its nuclear programme, Brazil was 
paying particular attention to safeguards and 
physical protection. It was extremely grateful 
to the Agency for the training in safeguards and 
manpower development which it had provided for 
Brazilian personnel. His country's nuclear 
programme was being put into effect at an 
accelerated pace, with full implementation of the 
agreement with the Federal Republic of Germany. 
108. Brazil was perfectly aware that its nuclear 
programme could not be implemented without 
technical assistance from outside. As the 
availability of qualified manpower was one of the 
conditions of success, top priority had been given 
to training. It was expected that the major UNDP 
project of which the execution had been entrusted 
to the Agency would usefully complement the 
training efforts being made at the national level. 
In that connection he welcomed the Agency's 
decision to introduce courses for future nuclear 
power project personnel into its training programme. 
The importance of qualified manpower 
for success in the transfer of complex nuclear 
technology had been demonstrated at a number of 
conferences, and the Agency's Secretariat had 
responded quickly. Efforts were being made to 
integrate nuclear power training programmes 
into a coherent manpower development programme; 
those efforts deserved support and should include 
many of the on-going assistance programmes. 

109. The Brazilian authorities had been following 
closely the progress of the NUSS programme and 
believed that the four codes of practice which had 
already been issued would be of considerable value 
to all Member States. The NUSS programme 
should continue at an accelerated pace and should 
receive higher priority. In view of the great need 
for uranium in the future, it was gratifying to 
note that five members of the Secretariat were 
now concerned full-time with the field of activity 
extending from uranium geology to ore processing, 
and he therefore hoped that the Division of Nuclear 
Power and Reactors would be able to help all 
Member States - and especially those which were 
developing countries - in that area. 
110. The Agency now had over 87 inspectors, 
and also more than 2000 remote-controlled 
cameras for monitoring 315 nuclear facilities 
throughout the world. Nuclear materials were 
strictly accounted for and it was possible to 
detect any diversion for the purpose of fabricating 
nuclear weapons. Brazil was aware of the need 
to prevent environmental damage which might be 
caused by the nuclear facilities being installed 
on its territory; it was therefore engaged in 
establishing systems to ensure adequate radiation 
protection, nuclear safety, physical protection 
and nuclear materials accounting and control. 
Moreover, new regulations - such as those in 
the bill on liability recently submitted to the 
Brazilian Congress - were being introduced. 
Some provisions were already in force - for 
example, those relating to the registration of all 
nuclear materials in Government and private 
possession, the obtaining of authorization for the 
possession and transfer of nuclear materials and 
for the construction and operation of nuclear 
facilities, radiation protection and the physical 
protection of nuclear materials and nuclear 
facilities. 

111. By the end of 1975, the year in which the 
agreement between Brazil and the Federal 
Republic of Germany had been signed, four joint 
ventures had already been established. The 
foundation of joint companies for the fabrication 
of fuel assemblies and for the erection of a fuel 
reprocessing plant was also planned. The first 
Brazilian nuclear power plant, which represented 
a pioneer effort, was under construction and 
expected to start operating in 1978; it would 
serve as the basis for a gigantic programme of 
nuclear technology transfer and implantation 
covering engineering, fuel, heavy components, 
generating systems, electric systems, reprocessing, 
etc. 
112. His country firmly believed that the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy required safeguards 
and physical protection systems which would 
prevent the unauthorized use of nuclear materials 
by individuals or groups in or outside Brazil. It 
had already complied with the Agency's recommendations 
concerning safety and environmental 
protection and undertaken not to perform any act 
which ran counter to the Agency's objectives. 
The trilateral safeguards agreement concluded 
between the Federal Republic of Germany, Brazil 
and the Agency could be considered the most 
complete safeguards agreement ever signed under 
the Agency's aegis. 
113. He emphasized in conclusion that Brazil 
was a peaceful country which was living in 
harmony with all its neighbours, maintaining 
close and cordial relations with them and always 
ready to co-operate with them in promoting and 
maintaining peace. The Brazilian Government had 
great confidence in the Agency and its ability to 
ensure nuclear peace and would continue to support 
it actively, especially in the field of safeguards. 
POINT OF ORDER 

114. Mr. RODRIGUEZ CRUZ (Cuba) said that, 
on a point of order, he wished to enter a protest 
on behalf of the Latin American Group because 
the General Committee had been elected without 
the participation of that Group since the latter 
had been meeting in another meeting room at the 
time of the election. During the 15 years he had 
been representing the Cuban Government in the 
Agency agreements of importance, such as the 
election of the General Committee, had never been 
arrived at without the participation of all regional 
groups. What made the agreement in question 
even less acceptable to the Latin American Group 
was the fact that the Latin American area had 
been the only one with only two representatives 
on the Committee whereas the other regional 
groups had three. 

12 


GC(XXI)/OR. 194 


115. The PRESIDENT recalled that, when the 
consultations had ended the previous day, he had 
announced that the present meeting would begin 
at 10 a.m. The obvious presumption had been 
that item 3 would be taken up first; it had therefore 
rested with groups desirous of holding 
additional consultations to meet earlier in the 
morning. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 
1976 (GC(XXI)/580) (continued) 

116. Mr. CARTER (Canada) considered that the 
Agency's twentieth anniversary offered an 
appropriate time for assessing its accomplishments 
to date and for giving thought to how its 
effectiveness might be enhanced. The Agency's 
role was to promote nuclear energy while 
restricting its use to peaceful purposes only. 
117. In the mid-1940s Canada had possessed the 
means to produce nuclear weapons but had opted 
for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Since 
that time, it had applied itself to action for the 
prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and to contributing to the efforts made by other 
countries to meet their peaceful energy requirements. 
118. It was not easy to reconcile efforts to 
prevent proliferation and world-wide production 
of peaceful nuclear power. The difficulties 
involved had led many countries to join together 
to establish the International Atomic Energy 
Agency, develop a safeguards system and 
negotiate NPT. And in the late 1950s, the gift 
by Canada of a significant quantity of uranium to 
the Agency for use for peaceful purposes had 
become the first transaction subject to international 
safeguards. 
119. Well aware of its dual function of control 
and promotion, the Agency had sought to maintain 
a balance between the two types of activity, 
by developing inspection and verification 
procedures and furnishing its Member States 
with nuclear know-how, experience and technical 
assistance. That had not been an easy task, for 
some countries had been more interested in 
securing access to knowledge and experience 
than in opening their facilities to international 
inspection and verification. Others, again, had 
preferred to hold on to the economic advantage 
deriving from their advanced nuclear knowledge 
and know-how. 
120. As countries worked together in the late 
1950s and early 1960s to develop an international 
system of nuclear safeguards and a treaty on the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, it had 
become evident, first, that there was need for a 
greater awareness in the international community 
of the dangers posed by the increasing use of nuclear 
energy, and, second, that safeguards could 
not be enforced single-handedly but would have 
to be applied under an international system. As 
a result of the energy crisis, it had become even 
more evident, first, that nuclear power would 
provide a major incremental source of energy; 

second, that large amounts of plutonium would 
be available in spent fuel; and, third, that the 
danger of proliferation of nuclear weapons would 
thus be greater. A number of countries had 
therefore taken action, individually and collectively, 
to lay the groundwork without delay for the required 
system of international safeguards. 

121. Thus, Canada had proceeded to take a 
number of steps at the national level and,' in < 
collaboration with other countries, at the international 
level. At the national level it had 
attached new conditions to the sale of Canadian 
technology, equipment and material. In 1976 ithad 
decided to suspend nuclear shipments to 
countries which declined to accept those conditions. 
That decision had been taken with the 
utmost reluctance, for the countries affected 
were ones with which Canada had very close ties 
and whose economic development it had no desire 
to hold back. It would therefore proceed with 
dispatch in endeavouring to find a remedy for 
that situation. 
122. Furthermore, moved by a regard for 
justice, the Canadian Government had decided 
in 1976 that adherence to NPT or acceptance of 
full-scope safeguards would from that time 
onwards be required of States recipients of 
Canadian nuclear supplies; that action had been 
designed essentially to promote the universality 
of NPT and to remove the disadvantage affecting 
States party to the Treaty. At the international 
level, Canada had likewise joined with other 
countries in action to strengthen the application 
of safeguards. In concert with other nuclear 
supplier countries, it was proposing that exports 
of sensitive technology should be subject to a 
more stringent safeguards system. There was 
no intent, however, to set up a group consisting 
of supplier countries only; the participation of 
other countries would be welcomed. Canada had 
always been opposed to discrimination of any 
kind and it was the first to accept the same 
commitments and constraints that it sought to 
impose on others. Under NPT, Canada had 
accepted full-scope safeguards on all its nuclear 
facilities. 
123. Recently, Canada had agreed to participate 
in the international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation 
programme. It shared the view that, when transition 
to a "plutonium economy" was under consideration, 
there was need for study of all fuel 
cycle operations, together with their separate 
implications and the anticipated consequences of 
their adoption. It was gratifying that a large 
number of the Member States of the Agency had 
agreed to attend the meeting on that matter to be 
held in October and that the Agency had decided 
to take an active part in the discussions. 
124. The prevention of the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons was a matter of very great 
interest to his country. Its concern was not 
actuated by material considerations, for it had 
an almost fully indigenous nuclear technology and 
its own sources of uranium. In fact, it could be 
more advantageous for Canada, as an exporter of 

GC(XXI)/OR.194 


nuclear technology and materials, to take a stand 
against safeguards instead of promoting their 
application. It was, however, convinced that 
safeguards were definitely needed and that they 
should be applied to everyone in the same way 
and not to the detriment of countries that had not 
yet achieved independence in the nuclear field. 
Canada firmly believed that the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons was avoidable, provided that 
every country subscribing to NPT would honour 
its obligations. A global system and strict 
nuclear safeguards, applied by the IAEA, would 
be the best guarantee against proliferation and 
Canada was committed to the establishment of such 
a system. 

125. Before closing his remarks, he had a few 
comments to make on some of the current issues 
before the General Conference. First, the 
Special Safeguards Implementation Report 
recently discussed in the Board of Governors had 
been communicated to Member States. A number 
of problem areas were cited in the report in 
relation to light-water reactors, on-load-fuelled 
reactors, and bulk handling facilities. His 
Government was prepared to provide assistance 
to the Agency in money and personnel to assist 
in the further development of a system of safeguards 
for on-load-fuelled reactors. 
126. Secondly, the Agency was to be commended 
for its efforts in inviting all the Member States 
to attend the meeting to be held in October for 
the purpose of drafting a convention on the 
physical protection of nuclear materials. It was 
to be hoped that all the countries represented at 
the General Conference would participate in the 
meeting, for the important subject to be dealt 
with was an integral part of the non-proliferation 
system. Thirdly, he was pleased to announce 
that, as in the past, his Government would be 
making a voluntary contribution to the General 
Fund; it was ready to agree on a target of 
$ 7 million in that regard. Lastly, the Agency 
should not allow itself to be engulfed by matters 
likely to cause divisions among its Members, 
and the Members should make every endeavour 
to create a more positive spirit within the Agency. 

127. In conclusion, he emphasized that the two 
or three years ahead would be important in so 
far as an effective non-proliferation regime was 
concerned. For its part, Canada was sustained 
by the belief that the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons was avoidable, provided that all States 
truly so desired. 
• The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m. 
14 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
March 1978* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Tuesday, 27 September 1977, at 3.20 p.m. 

President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

5 
Arrangements for the Conference 1 -3 

(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
1 -2 
of items for initial discussion 

(b) 
Closing date of the session and opening 3 
date of the next session 

6 
Appointment of the ! Director General 4 -9 

7 
General debate and annual report for 10 - 137 
1976 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Norway 10 - 25 
India 26 - 39 
Argentina 40 - 53 
Malaysia 54 - 65 
Republic of Korea 66 - 75 
Belgium 76 - 90 
Yugoslavia 91 - 100 
Australia 101 - 114 
Nigeria 115 - 124 
Czechoslovakia 125 - 137 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 September 1977. 
** GC(XXI)/591. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR. 195 

THE RECORD 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(a) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND 
ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL 
DISCUSSION (GC(XXI)/577 and 587) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee recommended that the 
agenda consist of all the items on the provisional 
agenda set forth in document GC(XXI)/577, with 
the deletion of item 4 (Applications for membership 
of the Agency), under which there was no 
business, and with the, addition of the two items 
requested by the Board in document GC(XXI)/587; 
that items be allocated for initial discussion as 
indicated in document GC(XXI)/577 and that the 
additional item entitled "The Agency's budget for 
1977" be discussed first in the Committee of the 
Whole and the additional item entitled "Appointment 
of the External Auditor" be discussed first 
in plenary, and that, in respect of the two 
additional items proposed by the Board, the time 
limit laid down in the last sentence of Rule 15 of 
the Rules of Procedure be waived. 
• 2. The General Committee's recommendations 
were accepted. 
(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND 
OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
3. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee recommended that it 
envisage bringing the session to a close on Friday 
afternoon. It would not be possible to make a 
firm recommendation to the Conference until a 
little later in the week, but he thought it desirable 
that the Conference have Friday afternoon in mind 
as a target. He urged all delegations to cooperate 
in trying to achieve the target. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE .DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(GC(XXI)/578) 

4. The PRESIDENT observed that, as stated 
in document GC(XXI)/578, in June the Board had 
appointed Mr. Sigvard Eklund to the post, to 
serve for a term of four years to run from 
1 December 1977. Pursuant to Article VILA of 
the Statute, the Board requested the Conference 
to approve the appointment and accordingly 
recommended adoption of the draft resolution set 
out in the document. 
• 5. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XXI)/578 was adopted by acclamation. 
• At the invitation of the President, 
Mr. Eklund entered the meeting. 
6. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Eklund that 
the Conference had approved his appointment to 
the post of Director General. He was pleased to 
be the first to congratulate him, and invited him 
to take the oath of office. 

7. Mr. EKLUND took the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all 
loyalty, discretion and conscience 
the functions entrusted to me as 
Director General of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, to discharge 
these functions and to regulate my 
conduct with the interests of the Agency 
only in view, and not to seek or accept 
instructions in regard to the performance 
of my duties from any Government 
or other authority external to 
the Agency, " 

8. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, having taken 
the oath, thanked the Conference for the confidence 
which it had shown in him by approving his 
appointment. To be the head of an international 
organization was a privilege and a challenge, and 
he would do his best to fulfil the Conference's 
expectations. However, his possibilities were 
limited, and he could do so only if Member States 
continued to give him the support which they had 
generously given him in the past; he very much 
hoped that they would, for the nature of the tasks 
now facing the Agency made such co-operation 
more vital than ever before. 
9. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire), congratulating 
the Director General on his re-appointment, 
emphasized his qualities as an organizer and a 
scientist. He was confident that the Director 
General would receive the full support of all 
Member States in the exercise of his important 
functions and he hoped that, in 1980, the 
Conference would have the opportunity to celebrate 
the Director General's twentieth year at the head 
of the Agency. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 
1976 (GC(XXI)/580) (continued! 1]) 

10. Mr. ERIKSEN (Norway) said that Norway 
was more directly concerned with the regulatory 
than with the promotional side of the Agency's 
activities. In particular, it considered it 
important to provide the Agency with all the means 
necessary to accomplish its tasks in respect of 
safeguards. On the other hand, it realized that 
the regulatory and promotional aspects did not 
run counter to one another; both should be 
developed in harmony. 
11. The target of $7 million for voluntary 
contributions to the General Fund and the additional 
$500 000, if agreed, were acceptable to the 
Norwegian Government. Subject to parliamentary 
approval, it would contribute to the General Fund 
in accordance with its agreed percentage. 
[1] GC(XXI)/OR. 194, paras 4-113 and 116-127. 
-2 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


12. In general, the Agency's programme was 
well balanced, and his Government supported it. 
13. Norway had no power reactor programme, 
and since it had a rather limited nuclear energy 
research and development programme its 
scientific contributions to the Agency's programme 
would be restricted to certain areas. One of 
those areas was reactor fuel technology, in which 
it had experience in the fields covered by the 
International Working Group on Water Reactor 
Fuel Performance and Technology which might 
be of interest to the Agency, 

14. Norway's experience in nuclear reactor 
control and instrumentation could probably also 
be made use of in the execution of the Agency's 
programme. Assistance might also be given in 
the revision of the manual of advisory material 
on the application of the IAEA transport regulations, 
drawing on Norway's experience in the 
international transport of nuclear fuels. 
15. The coming into force in 197Y of the safeguards 
agreement in connection with the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT)[2] between IAEA and the European Atomic 
Energy Community (EURATOM) and the nonnuclear-
weapon States Members of EURATOM[3] 
had been noted with satisfaction. It was hoped 
that that agreement would be fully implemented in 
1978. 
16. The preparation of reports by the 
Secretariat to the Board of Governors on the 
effectiveness of safeguards implementation was a 
worthwhile undertaking. It was hoped that those 
reports would lead to improvements in areas in 
which weaknesses in routines were appearing. 
17. The statement in the annual report for 1976 
(GC(XXI)/580) that there was no doubt that, 
provided sufficient resources could be employed, 
the Agency would be able effectively to safeguard 
the reprocessing and enrichment plants that were 
for the first time coming under safeguards had 
been noted with interest. 
18. With regard to ensuring that the Agency 
had the necessary means to carry out its duties 
in safeguards, his Government was always ready 
to share with the Agency the experience it had 
obtained in running a small national safeguards 
system. It would be glad to co-operate with the 
Agency to the extent that the latter might want to 
make measurements, perform tests, etc. in 
Norway in order to improve the methods of safeguards. 
19. The Norwegian Government had been alarmed 
at recent reports that South Africa was about to 
explode a nuclear device and had noted the South 
African Government's statement that that was not 
the case. It would feel more comfortable, 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/193 and Add. 1 
however, if South Africa would adhere to NPT and 
place all its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. 


20. The Agency had made an impressive 
contribution to the study of regional nuclear fuel 
cycle centres. His Government considered that 
work to be very important and fully supported it. 
Regional nuclear fuel cycle centres would contribute 
to non-proliferation by reducing the number 
of facilities to be safeguarded and by reducing the 
number of transports that had to be undertaken. 
Moreover, misuse of materials would be more 
difficult because of multinational ownership and 
control and such centres should make it possible 
to make efficient use of nuclear resources. 
Aspects of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres 
should also be evaluated in relation to the International 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) 
which was to be undertaken internationally at the 
invitation of the United States. In connection 
with the latter, participation by the IAEA and the 
making available for general use of the results of 
its work in those studies would be welcome. 
21. It was highly desirable that some degree of 
harmonization in regulations concerning physical 
protection of nuclear materials and equipment in 
the various countries was achieved. A theft of 
nuclear materials in one country might have 
consequences in other countries. Norway was 
therefore in favour of an international convention 
on the physical protection of such materials. 
Such a convention might also facilitate trade in 
nuclear materials and in connection with international 
transport, in particular, might prove to 
be useful. 
22. The International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) was developing in the right way. 
The usefulness of the INIS Atomindex had increased 
considerably with the inclusion of abstracts. It 
was very important that INIS member countries 
should be able to search the INIS data bases 
directly using dial-up telephone lines connecting 
their own terminals with the Agency's computer. 
Norway hoped to be connected as soon as possible 
to the planned experimental network. 
23. Norway's opposition to the dumping of 
radioactive waste at sea had been stated on several 
occasions. The Agency had important responsibilities 
under the Convention on the Prevention of 
Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other 
Matter (the London Convention)[4]. For that 
reason, in particular, Norway supported the more 
active role that the Agency was now playing in the 
study of radioactive waste disposal. 
24. Norway was, in principle, reluctant to see 
nuclear explosives used for peaceful purposes. 
Strict observation by the international body 
provided for in Article V of NPT during the 
carrying out of such explosions was important, 
in the first place to prevent proliferation of 
[4] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/205. 
-3 

GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


nuclear weapons, secondly to prevent nuclearweapon 
States making use of such nuclear 
explosions with the intention of developing nuclear 
weapons, and thirdly to prevent nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes (PNE) constituting health 

or safety hazards to third countries. 

25. Norway was therefore in favour of arrangements 
which gave the Agency a strong regulatory 
role in connection with PNEs, including explosions 
which were carried out under bilateral agreements 
between a nuclear-weapon State and a non-nuclearweapon 
State. International arrangements in 
connection with PNEs must be designed so that 
the interests of third countries concerned were 
taken care of. 
26. Mr. SETHNA (India) said that in the first 
two decades of its existence the Agency had grown 
significantly both in content and form, adding new 
and important dimensions to the scope of its 
activities and the sphere of its responsibilities. 
27. The Agency's twentieth anniversary, which 
was being commemorated, provided an opportunity 
for reflection, an occasion for all present to reaffirm 
their faith in the organization and to 
rededicate themselves to the cause for which it 
had been created. 
28. India had been engaged in the field of nuclear 
energy for over a quarter of a century. At the 
end of the Second World War, when most nations 
still looked upon atomic energy as a force for 
destruction, India had already been thinking in 
terms of harnessing atomic energy solely for 
economic development, and it had never deviated 
from its commitment to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy. In that spirit, his Government 
saluted the present occasion which marked the 
twentieth anniversary of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency as an instrument for promoting 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
29. He noted that the study relating to the 
establishment of nuclear fuel cycle centres had 
been completed. However, his delegation could 
not but notice that techno-political considerations 
were now emerging that might influence the 
emphasis on that programme. 
30. The work on safety codes and guides was 
progressing well. India had considerable 
experience on safety problems, which could be of 
use to other developing countries. 
31. His delegation was happy to note that on the 
basis of the recommendations contained in the 
memorandum submitted by Member States of the 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear 
Science and Technology (the RCA Agreement)[5] 
to the Director General at Rio de Janeiro in 
September 1976, the RCA had been continued for 
another period of five years from June 1977, In 
[5] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/167. 
response to a suggestion by the Agency, India had 
drawn -up a suggested plan of action for the period 
1977-1982 for consideration by RCA members. 
His delegation recommended that a scientific 
meeting be held in the region as soon as possible 
to finalize the plan of action for the next five years. 
That would enable the Agency to assess the 
financial implications and find ways and means of 
making available adequate funds for implementing 
the plan. 

32. The most important event in the Agency's 
programme in 1977 had been the International 
Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle 
(the Salzburg Conference) held in May, That 
Conference had contributed greatly to restoring 
the conviction that nuclear power was in fact 
necessary and an irreplaceable source of energy 
supply to mankind both in the short and the longer 
term, which stemmed from the recognition that 
nuclear energy would be indispensable to meet 
rapidly growing future world energy needs. 
There seemed to be no immediate and proven 
alternative to nuclear energy. Moreover, not 
only was nuclear power cheaper, safer and 
environmentally more favourable in many situations, 
but the impending crisis in energy 
resources also made it imperative to develop 
nuclear energy as a part of national programmes 
in many countries. That being the situation, the 
Agency could play a greater role in publicising 
more information on research and development in 
the field of nuclear waste disposal so as to allay 
unfounded fears and misgivings currently being 
voiced in certain quarters. 
33. The provision of technical assistance to 
developing countries was a matter for concern. 
In that connection, the Director General, at 
Salzburg, had expressed disappointment at the 
failure to provide enough resources for technical 
assistance to developing countries. 
34. The two major spheres of the Agency's 
responsibilities were the provision of technical 
assistance and the application of safeguards. 
Those two facets of its activities were equally 
important. In recent years, while the regulatory 
activity of the Agency had expanded greatly with 
budgetary provisions increasing from year to year, 
there was regrettably no evidence of recognition 
of the growing need for technical assistance. On 
the contrary, considering the prevailing inflationary 
trends and currency fluctuations, the Agency's 
technical assistance programme, even with a 
modest increase in voluntary contributions, had 
not shown any effective growth. It was essential 
that voluntary contributions should in real terms 
reflect an increase capable of meeting all 
technically feasible projects requested by the 
developing countries. The time had come for the 
problem of financing technical assistance to be 
resolved on a long-term basis, so that the issue 
did not have to be belaboured each year. Various 
suggestions were under study; meanwhile, for the 
coming year, the Board of Governors had recommended 
a target of $7 million for voluntary 
contributions in cash with an appeal for a further 
sum of $ 500 000. India would continue to support 

-4 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


the Agency's technical assistance programme to 
the best of its capacity. It had been providing 
fellowships and the services of experts to other 
developing countries through the Agency's 
technical assistance programme, besides providing 
facilities for scientific visits. In addition, his 
Government had recently agreed to implement a 
project in a developing country which the Agency 
had been unable to take up for lack of funds. His 
delegation was glad to announce a contribution of 
US $ 60 000 in national currency to the General 
Fund for 1978, which was higher than his country's 
normal share. It hoped that the target for 
voluntary contributions would be fully realized 
and that the Agency would be able to gear up its 
operating machinery, eliminating impediments in 
its delivery capacity and unnecessary delays and 
bottlenecks in implementing its technical assistance 
programme. 

35. In the past, he had had occasion to express 
concern about the tendency to apply restrictive 
policies in regard to the provision of technical 
assistance in the form of fellowships, scientific 
visits, etc.- There was now an additional cause 
for concern as the application of safeguards was 
being extended to technical assistance involving 
transfer of technological information in the socalled 
"sensitive technological areas". His 
delegation was concerned lest that extension of 
safeguards hindered the development of nuclear 
programmes of developing countries and would 
like to be assured that that would in no way be the 
case. It was also necessary to ensure that the 
well-established principles relating to the provision 
of technical assistance were preserved and 
that there was no discrimination in any form in 
the provision of technical assistance to all 
countries. 
36. His delegation noted that the Director 
General had constituted a Standing Advisory Group 
on Safeguards Implementation (SAGSI) to advise 
him on technical aspects of Agency safeguards. 
It was confident that that Group would concentrate 
on the important task of assessing the technical 
effectiveness of safeguards implementation within 
the scope of the present system and leave aside 
other issues, 
37. India's nuclear fuel fabrication complex at 
Hyderabad had now entered its second year of full 
commercial production. The plant manufactured 
uranium oxide pellets and a wide variety of 
zirconium alloy products from local ores. The 
plant had delivered all the tubes and calandria 
tubes for one of the Madras reactors. The 
complex fabricated all the fuel elements needed 
for the Tarapur and Rajasthan plants. Those 
fuel assemblies were performing satisfactorily at 
full rated irradiation conditions. 
38. The first commissioning run at the power 
reactor fuel reprocessing plant at Tarapur had 
been completed. The various systems were 
performing well and an initial campaign was 
currently being reprocessed. Expectation that 
fuel reprocessing costs, including waste management, 
would be much lower than the indicative 
costs of such services in other countries had 
proved to be correct. 

39. In conclusion, he wanted once again to 
stress the need for the Agency to give greater 
emphasis to its promotional activities, particularly 
the provision of technical assistance to 
developing countries. That was essential so as 
to accelerate and reinforce national efforts to 
harness nuclear technology for the improvement 
and betterment of their standards of living. The 
Agency had an important international responsibility 
in that respect, and he was confident that 
it would continue to meet its obligations with the 
sense of dedication it had always displayed. The 
Indian Government, on its part, pledged its 
continued support of and assistance' to the Agency's 
activities. 
40. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina) congratulated 
the President on his election, the 
Agency on its twentieth anniversary, and the 
Director General on the renewal of his appointment. 
At the previous session of the General 
Conference he had outlined the plans and objectives 
of the Argentine National Atomic Energy 
Commission (CNEA)[6], which had made much 
progress in the past year. The Atucha Nuclear 
Power Station had reached a capacity factor of 
over 87% in 1976; its nominal power had been 
increased by 8% to 370 MW(e). Atucha also 
served as a centre for training staff for future 
power stations. At the most recent meeting of 
the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Committee, 
it had been offered as the regional training centre 
for Latin America. 

41. The rate of construction of the country's 
second nuclear power station, at Rio Tercero, 
Cordoba, had been stepped up after renegotiation 
of the relevant contracts. Some components pressure 
vessel, steam generators and the turbo 
group base - would have been installed by the end 
of 1977, others were nearing completion in Europe, 
Local participation had been increased to over 50% 
of the total amount of work. Argentine engineers 
would make a considerable contribution towards 
the assembly of the plant. 
42. Much had been done with respect to nuclear 
supplies. Uranium exploration in Argentina had 
been intensified, especially in Patagonia. The 
capacities of the uranium concentrate plants had 
been trebled, reaching a total of 150 tonnes per 
year, and the basic structure and infrastructure 
for an ore and manufacturing complex in the 
Sierra Pintada were nearing completion. A 
uranium dioxide factory would soon start operating 
with a capacity of 150 tonnes per year. 
Construction work had begun on a fuel element 
fabrication plant that was to satisfy the needs of 
the first three nuclear power plants; experience 
in fuel element fabrication had been acquired by 
the production of two Atucha-type complete fuel 
element prototypes, which were being tested in 
the Atucha power station. More such units could 
[6] GC(XX)/OR. 186, paras 73-77. 
-5 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


be built in the future. With the assistance of the 
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, 
a high pressure and temperature loop for hydrodynamic 
and thermohydraulic tests on fuel 
elements had been installed; in addition, the plans 
for a laboratory for analysing irradiated fuel 
elements had been completed, and construction 
would begin in 1978. A pilot plant for Zircaloy 
tube fabrication would be completed in the course 
of 1977 and would gradually be expanded into an 
industrial plant. Finally, a technico-economic 
study had been made in order to contract abroad ' 
the construction of an industrial heavy water plant. 

43. The consumption and production of radioisotopes 
had continued to increase, and had 
reached about 300 Ci per year, excluding highactivity 
sealed sources. The construction of a 
pilot high-activity cell for the fabrication of sealed 
cobalt-60 sources had been undertaken - from 
imported materials - until the Embalse Nuclear 
Power Station was completed. There had also 
been a considerable increase in the irradiation 
services provided by CNEA's gamma-irradiation 
plant at the Ezeiza Atomic Centre. 
44. In nuclear safety and radiation protection 
Argentina had followed the Agency's recommendations 
and reorganized the activities which the 
CNEA had been carrying out in that sphere as the 
competent national authority since 1950. A 
regulatory control authority had been established 
which was independent of users or promoters of 
nuclear energy, consisting of an executive body 
and three advisory boards. Argentina had also 
hosted an Agency regional seminar on "Analysis 
of the Environmental Impact of the Nuclear Power 
Industry". In that connection Argentina hoped 
the Agency would intensify its provision of 
recommendations to national regulatory 
authorities. In particular, a common effort had 
to be made to implement the new recommendations 
of the International Commission on Radiological 
Protection (ICRP). Argentina was also interested 
in the Agency's nuclear safety guides. 
45. A number of laboratories were working on 
reactor physics, nuclear physics, physical and 
chemical effects of radiation, biological effects 
and so on. A 20-MV tandem accelerator for 
heavy ions had been acquired, which would help 
not only to raise the standard of science in 
Argentina, but also to strengthen ties with the 
rest of the scientific world. 
46. A university course in nuclear engineering 
was now available'at the Bariloche Atomic Centre. 
47. The Agency had provided much technical 
assistance in 1977; 21 experts had come to 
Argentina, and 15 fellowships and 6 scientific 
visits for Argentine experts had been granted. 
In addition, a further regional seminar would be 
held in Argentina in 1977. 
48. Argentina was proud to be providing its 
neighbour Peru with a complete atomic centre; no 
such transaction had ever before taken place 
between developing countries. 
49. Argentina viewed with concern the decline in 
the amount of technical assistance provided by the 
Agency, especially since that decline seemed 
likely to become more pronounced in the future, 
while safeguards were expanding disproportionately. 
In addition, some delays and difficulties 
had arisen in the recruitment of experts, the 
purchase of equipment and the use of nonconvertible 
currency. The provision of technical 
assistance by the Agency was very important for 
many countries, and Argentina was supporting 
that effort to the best of its ability. Argentina 
had been in 1976 the fourth supplier of experts 
for the Agency's technical assistance programme. 
50. Argentina noted with concern the tendency 
of the Agency towards exaggerated application of 
safeguards. The Agency provided its Members 
with information, e. g. bibliographies, which was 
no doubt used only for peaceful purposes but 
might be tendentiously misconstrued as furthering 
military purposes, and therefore triggering safeguards. 
If that absurd reasoning were carried 
too far, whole nations might be subjected to an 
unnecessary and irksome international supervision. 
But that was not just a hypothetical 
possibility: safeguards were already being applied 
to technical information, to certain so-called 
"critical" materials, and to conventional items 
of equipment used in connection with nuclear 
power or metallurgy. Although Argentina 
approved of the efforts to prevent both vertical 
and horizontal nuclear-weapon proliferation, they 
should not be allowed to interfere with peaceful 
nuclear energy projects. 

51. Argentina did not approve of the Agency's 
practice of accepting voluntary contributions 
made under the condition that they should be for 
the exclusive use of countries that had signed NPT. 
That was a discriminatory criterion, contrary to 
the letter and the spirit of the Agency's Statute. 
52. There were also positive aspects of the 
Agency that Argentina wanted to point out 
connected with nuclear power and reactor programmes, 
training of personnel, nuclear safety, 
environmental protection, food and agriculture, 
biology and physics, and so on. INIS and the 
Agency's nuclear data services were also praiseworthy, 
as was the training of scientists from 
developing countries in the International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. 
53. The Argentine delegation noted with satisfaction 
the increasing co-operation between the 
Agency and other United Nations organizations, 
the positive attitude of which to the Agency showed 
how valuable the development of nuclear energy 
was to the world. 
54. Mr. SALLEH (Malaysia) said that Malaysia, 
like other developing Member States which now 
comprised two thirds of the membership of the 
Agency, was constrained to ask how much the 
activities of the Agency over the past 20 years 
had helped in accelerating and enlarging the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world, on the one 
6 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


hand, and to security on the other. Those noble 
statutory objectives of the Agency were also very 
dear and close to the hearts of the Government 
and people of Malaysia. On the occasion of the 
Agency's twentieth anniversary, one could not 
but cast a second look at those fundamental 
objectives and utter the genuine hope that, in the 
organization's third decade, the pitfalls which 
had confronted it in the past would be circumvented 
and the true goals realized. Malaysia 
would join any international co-operative effort 
to strengthen the IAEA and NPT. So far, 
however, notwithstanding the wisdom of the 
founders of the Agency, the concise and clear 
language of Article II of the Statute and the equally 
clear and oft-quoted Article IV of NPT, to say 
nothing of the recommendations of the 1975 
Review Conference of the Parties to NPT, one 
could only record, with sadness, that the hopes 
of the Agency's founders had not been realized to 
any significant degree. 

55. On the contrary, one continued to see an 
upward spiral in both the nuclear and the conventional 
arms races; there had been no visible 
progress towards a comprehensive ban on nuclear 
tests, nor indeed any encouraging signs at all in 
conventional and nuclear disarmament. That 
impasse threatened world peace and security and 
was, to the vast majority that had forsworn any 
intention of acquiring nuclear weapons by 
adhering to NPT, a source of anxiety. Thus, to 
the developing Member States of the Agency, both 
the fruits of the Statute and the provisions of NPT 
remained, unfortunately, a distant hope. 
56. Concern over the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons had caused people, perhaps unwittingly, 
to lose sight of the disastrous repercussions of 
poverty, hunger, malnutrition and disease. All 
that was nothing new, but it was the view of his 
Government that the significance of those facts 
must not be underrated, belittled or ignored. 
57. It was true that a handful of nations had so 
far not found it opportune to accede to NPT. His 
delegation did not, however, share the view that 
NPT was a failure. All, but in particular the 
nuclear-weapon States party to NPT, should try 
to create a climate in which countries that had so 
far stood aside would find it attractive to accede 
to NPT. However that might be, his Government 
was happy to note that 102 Member States had 
become party to NPT and, moreover, that nearly 
all significant nuclear plants in countries not 
party to NPT were now covered by Agency safeguards. 
Obviously, NPT represented a broad 
international consensus against the spread of 
nuclear weapons. Given that wide consensus, 
the alarm in certain quarters about nuclear 
weapons proliferation had come to be suspected 
by developing Member States as an effort on the 
part of the industrialized countries to divert the 
attention of the Agency from its promotional 
functions, and thereby to deny the transfer of 
technology to developing countries, the majority 
of which were party to NPT. 
58. Article IV of NPT lucidly and quite rightly 
affirmed that countries which had forsworn 
nuclear weapons must not be denied their techno


logical rights. It underscored in no uncertain 

terms the moral and political responsibility to 

ensure that the benefits of the atom were 

universally shared, due emphasis being given to 

the needs of the developing areas of the world. 

Unless the requisite transfer of technology and the 

strengthening of the Agency's promotional functions 

were given serious attention immediately, there 

would ensue just the kind of alienation that the 
. international community had been trying so 

assiduously to avoid, 

59. Lest it be forgotten or misunderstood, it 
was his delegation's view that the Agency's 
regulatory activities should naturally increase in 
step with the increase in the facilities and 
material that needed to be safeguarded. His 
Government was firmly committed to ensuring 
that that equally important arm of the Agency 
received the attention it deserved. The proliferation 
problem, in the opinion of his delegation, 
could be surmounted only if realism and courage 
were shown by all concerned. The measures 
explored at the recent Salzburg Conference, like 
the recommendations of the 1975 NPT Review 
Conference, deserved serious study and support. 
However, if those proposals were to bear fruit, 
international co-operation above all would be 
required. It could come about only if there was 
a genuine effort on the part of both industrialized 
and developing Member States to ensure that the 
promotional and regulatory activities of the Agency 
were given balanced and fair treatment. 

60. So far that balance had certainly not come 
to pass. The Director General had himself 
demonstrated the stark disparity in the development 
of those two activities of the Agency since 
1957. The Regular Budget had increased by a 
factor of 12; the budget for technical assistance 
had increased only threefold or so, and given the 
crippling effects of inflation that meant virtually 
a nil growth rate. The Agency's membership 
of 54 in 1957 had risen to 110 at present, and the 
needs of Members were accordingly greater. 
Could one really say that nuclear facilities and 
material had increased enough in 20 years to 
justify the present preoccupation with questions 
of safeguards? 
61. It had been argued that the Regular Budget 
also covered areas involving promotional activities; 
while not denying that, one had to point out 
that, again, it had been the industrialized 
Member States that had profited most from such 
promotional activities. Only of late had those 
activities begun to trickle down to developing 
States. It was indeed disappointing to note that 
even such basic applications of radiations and 
isotopes as those in food and agriculture, life 
sciences and physical sciences had yet to become 
routine in developing countries. If that was true, 
what was one to think of nuclear research and 
training, to say nothing of nuclear power? All 
those promotional activities stemming from the 
Regular Budget had brought developing countries 
at best indirect benefits. 
-7 

GC(XXI)/OR. 195 

62. There was thus an urgent need to examineways and means of overcoming those inequalities.
The Conference should appeal to all, but inparticular to the industrialized Member States,
to display the political will needed to work out a 
mechanism which would ensure that the Agency 
was not perennially confronted by a lack of funds 
for its technical assistance programmes. His 
own Government was pleased to announce a 
pledge of US $7000 to the General Fund for 1978, 
the full amount commensurate with its base rate 
of assessment. 

63. He trusted that his delegation's frank 
comments on technical assistance would not be 
construed as meaning that Malaysia was not 
appreciative of the assistance granted by the 
Agency. On the contrary, it was that assistance, 
together with the noble objectives of the Statute 
and the provisions of NPT, that had prompted 
Malaysia to accord the Agency special importance 
among organizations in the United Nations family. 
Malaysia pledged unstinting support for the IAEA 
and its Statute, 
64. He trusted that the omission in the Director 
General's statement of any specific reference to 
the RCA Agreement established in 1972 did not 
reflect the attitude of the IAEA towards that 
regional mechanism for co-operation. His 
delegation considered the RCA an important 
landmark in the Agency's recent past. To his 
Government, it represented an excellent framework 
for collaborative efforts, largely among 
developing and industrialized Member States of 
the Asian and Pacific region, in research, 
development and training in nuclear science and 
technology. The RCA offered tremendous scope 
for a valuable exchange of ideas and experience 
among scientists of the large geographic area 
involved, concerning the introduction of both 
nuclear research and power programmes for 
peaceful purposes. He would not want to miss 
the present opportunity of expressing a warm 
welcome to Australia upon'its accession to the 
RCA. One could now look forward to other 
countries in the region, both developing and 
developed, joining that regional framework for 
nuclear collaboration. It was to be hoped that 
industrialized countries outside the region would 
also give material support to RCA. 
65. Malaysia was greatly encouraged by 
witnessing the importance the IAEA attached to 
its statutory role of assisting developing Member 
States in securing supplies of nuclear material, 
equipment and facilities for their peaceful nuclear 
programmes. The Agency had recently endorsed 
a project in a fellow developing country of Latin 
America, and the Government of Malaysia had 
itself requested the conclusion of a project agreement 
for the transfer of a TRIGA Mark II research 
reactor and its fuel from the United States of 
America through the Agency to Malaysia. That 
agreement, he hoped, would be presented for the 
Board's approval in February 1978. Malaysia 
attached great importance to that project as it 
would mark the first instance in which a nuclearweapon 
State had significantly assisted Malaysia, 
also a party to NPT, with a major nuclear effort 
that would enable it to play a more significant 
role in nuclear research for the common good of 
mankind, 

66. Mr. CHOI (Republic of Korea) said that the 
subject of atomic energy was no longer an esoteric 
one, for it had now become part of the day-to-day 
life of many countries, and that the demand for 
nuclear energy, particularly in areas where fossil 
fuels were in short supply, had taken on cardinal 
importance. Inasmuch as Korea represented a 
country where such needs were acutely felt, he 
wished to set forth some views on that subject. 
67. First, international co-operation to ensure 
a stable supply of nuclear fuel had become 
imperative. The uneven distribution of resources 
around the globe, and the precariousness of 
procuring them when required, had led many 
countries to become increasingly concerned. In 
the absence of efforts based on international cooperation 
to secure such supplies, the gap between 
the haves and have-nots was growing ever wider. 
Among the projects which merited consideration 
was the establishment of an international nuclear 
fuel supply organization as a possible mechanism 
for bridging that gap. 
68. Second, research and development in the 
field of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, 
particularly in the technologically advanced 
countries, should not be delayed or curtailed, but 
should rather be accelerated and expanded; 
furthermore, the gains derived from such activities 
should be disseminated efficiently and 
appropriately to those countries in need of them. 
69. The build-up of complex nuclear industries 
by the developing countries raised many difficulties 
from both the economic and technical standpoint. 
It was necessary to find ways of bringing technologically 
developed and developing countries 
together in terms of sustainable collaboration. 
When discussing the need for the transfer of 
nuclear power generation technology to developing 
countries it was essential to stress the importance 
of including methods of quality assurance in such 
transfers, irrespective of the technology or system 
involved. If accidents occurred through lack of 
the requisite quality assurance, the consequences, 
both from the economic and safety standpoint, 
would be catastrophic for developing as well as 
developed countries. That was an area where 
Governments and international organizations could 
play complementary roles in planning and implementing 
activities. 
70. The training of personnel for the proper 
operation of nuclear power plants and the associated 
quality assurance in developing countries could not 
be over-emphasized. 
71. But such tasks required experience beyond 
the capabilities of developing countries; they 
needed in fact the appropriate action on the part 
of the developed countries, since the standardization 
of safety engineering and power reactor 
construction had also to be given consideration in 
8 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


order to facilitate the transfer of such technology 
to the developing countries. 

72. Third, it was necessary to improve the 
Agency's safeguards system so that it could deal 
with the ever-increasing work load more promptly. 
The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should 
not be permitted to interfere with the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy, since its use was 
provided for under the terms of the Statute. That 
had been the Agency's mandate since its foundation 
and it should continue to be implemented. 
73. With regard to the stage reached in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in the Republic of 
Korea, he said that the first nuclear power station 
had attained initial criticality in June 1977. 
Commercial operation of the power plant was 
scheduled for the end of the year. A second and 
third nuclear power plant were currently under 
construction. 
74. Because of mounting difficulties in financing 
nuclear power projects with foreign credits, the 
localization of a substantial number of projects 
was considered desirable, which meant that 
future nuclear power projects would have to be 
implemented on a non-turn-key basis. The 
localization programme for nuclear power plants 
would be implemented more and more by the 
Korea Nuclear Engineering Service Inc., the only 
nuclear engineering firm in the country, with the 
participation of private industrial firms already 
producing, or about to start production of, 
equipment and supplies for both nuclear and nonnuclear 
power generation. Korea was implementing 
research and development programmes for 
fuel fabrication so as to improve its stable fuel 
supply and to back up its nuclear power programme. 
75. With regard to international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, more 
particularly among the developing countries, his 
Government was hosting a regional seminar, in 
conjunction with the Agency, on the economic and 
technical aspects of nuclear power with the 
emphasis on manpower development in Seoul in 
December 1977, which it was hoped that those 
developing Member States faced with the introduction 
of nuclear power technology would attend. 
76. Mr. SMOLDEREN (Belgium), recalling that 
the Agency's two essential functions were to 
promote the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy 
and to apply the safeguards necessary for preventing 
diversion, noted that doubts had recently 
been cast on the effectiveness of Agency safeguards 
and on the Agency's ability to detect in time a 
diversion of strategic nuclear materials. His 
delegation considered that there were no grounds 
for doubting the Agency's ability to perform its 
functions provided that all Member States really 
tried to strengthen its authority and effectiveness. 
That was why Belgium had always given the Agency 
its full support and would continue to do so. 
77. Casting doubt on the effectiveness of Agency 
safeguards would nullify NPT and open the door to 
bilateral safeguards - that is to say, to anarchy 
in international political and commercial relations 
in the nuclear field. 

78. In the opinion of his delegation, the best way 
of preventing nuclear proliferation was still the 
full application of the provisions of NPT in the 
sense intended by its authors. 
79. Admittedly, NPT discriminated between two 
categories of States and imposed initially certain 
constraints only on non-nuclear-weapon States. 
Nevertheless, 102 States had acceded to NPT and 
all action should be avoided which might discourage 
those countries which had not acceded from doing 
so or make the countries which had acceded 
regret their gesture of goodwill. His delegation 
therefore considered that the inequality to which 
NPT gave rise should not be accentuated, for it 
had been accepted only on a temporary basis. 
Stronger safeguards and the imposition of restriction 
would be accepted only in so far as they 
applied equally to all States. 
80. It was essential to seek the best solutions 
to the question of nuclear fuel cycle development 
in order to meet the legitimate needs of the many 
States wishing to employ nuclear power; at the 
same time, it was essential to limit as far as 
possible the risks of proliferation and diversion and 
those aims had to be pursued without granting 
a privileged status in respect of the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy to those States which 
possessed nuclear weapons. In that connection, 
States where the use of nuclear power could be 
restricted owing to a favourable energy resources 
situation were not entitled to force a policy of 
restriction on less privileged States. 
81. It was also essential to ensure that countries 
which had not acceded to NPT did not enjoy a more 
privileged position than those which had when they 
received technical assistance in the nuclear field 
or acquired nuclear equipment and materials in 
other ways. Hence, the supply of nuclear equipment 
and materials to such countries should be 
subject to conditions at least as strict as those 
applied in the case of countries party to NPT, 
and in particular to the condition that their entire 
nuclear fuel cycle be placed under Agency safeguards. 


82. Clearly, countries which refused to accept 
safeguards on their entire nuclear fuel cycle 
might be suspected of wishing to maintain the 
option of developing - apart from the nuclear 
facilities subject to safeguards - nuclear facilities 
for military purposes. 
83. Belgium was entitled to advocate safeguards 
on the entire nuclear fuel cycle as it had - long 
before signing NPT - established with its partners 
in the European Community a system of supranational 
safeguards to which all non-military 
nuclear facilities within the Community, whether 
or not situated in a State possessing nuclear 
weapons, had been subject since 1958. Moreover, 
in February 1977, Belgium had agreed to the 
application of Agency safeguards in its territory 
pursuant to an agreement between the European 
-9 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) and the 
Agency under which the Agency would be able to 
verify independently the accuracy of the results 
of EURATOM's safeguards. 

84. It was hoped that the drawing-up of 
subsidiary arrangements would be completed 
within the next few months. The process of 
drawing them up was taking rather a long time 
because the facilities and materials to be placed 
under Agency safeguards pursuant to the 
EURATOM-Agency agreement represented almost 
half of the facilities and materials to which the 
Agency would thenceforth be applying safeguards. 
85. Turning to the promotional side of the 
Agency's work, he said that the Salzburg Conference 
held in May had yielded a large harvest 
of information which might be of great value in 
the months to come, especially during the INFCE 
Programme announced by President Carter. 
86. With regard to technical assistance, he 
commended the Agency's efforts in promoting 
radioisotope applications and in training personnel 
required for the operation of research and power 
reactors. In that connection, he recalled that 
Belgium was very much involved in two ambitious 
projects in Africa - one in Zaire, under bilateral 
agreements concluded with the Kinshasa Nuclear 
Centre, and one in Nigeria, where great efforts 
were being made to eradicate the tsetse fly. 
87. Belgium's voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund in 1977 was considerably in excess, 
of the amount determined by application of the base 
rate of assessment. In 1978, his country would if 
parliamentary approval was given - make a 
contribution of about B. Fr. 3 million to the 
General Fund; in addition, it would make available 
B. Fr. 2 million for the project in Nigeria and six 
Type II fellowships. 
88. The Agency's twentieth anniversary was an 
occasion not only for satisfaction at the work 
accomplished in the past but also for hoping that 
the Agency would continue to carry out its 
important tasks with the sense of responsibility 
which it had displayed so far. 
89. Like all human institutions, the Agency 
could be improved. In particular, there was 
scope for intensifying its promotional activities 
and for making better use of the resources put at 
its disposal, 
90. The Agency was essentially a technical 
organization and, while due account should be 
taken of the need for equitable geographical 
representation, a balance should be maintained 
between those countries which had special 
responsibility in the field of nuclear technology 
and those which did not. Otherwise, the Agency 
would cease to be an important centre for decisionmaking 
in matters concerned with safeguards and 
the promotion of the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy. 
91. Mr. OSREDKAR (Yugoslavia) said it was the 
firm belief of the Yugoslav Government that the 
Agency's future activities would be directed more 
towards the ever-growing needs of the developing 
countries. That belief was based in part on the 
fruitful co-operation between Yugoslavia and the 
Agency in many areas of application of atomic 
energy and particularly in the field of nuclear 
power. 
92. The Conference agenda included several 
items of a delicate nature whose solution would 
require mutual understanding and co-operation. 
As always, there was the question of how to use 
the resources available to the Agency for the 
various tasks coming under its responsibility. 
Although it considered the annual report for 1976 
and the budget for 1978 to be acceptable, his 
Government wanted to urge the Agency to achieve 
a better balance between its promotional and its 
safeguards activities. It also believed that the 
promotional activities, particularly technical 
assistance, should be intensified in the case of 
the transfer of nuclear power technology in 
accordance with the national programmes of 
developing countries. 
93. One very important item on the agenda was 
the proposed amendment of the Agency's Statute, 
with which he fully agreed. Although his Government's 
views on the subject had been presented 
several times, he wished to reiterate that there 
was an urgent need for a systematic assessment 
of how the Agency had adapted to the changing 
world and to the needs of its Members. Some of 
the ideas incorporated in the Agency's Statute 
had not materialized and the reasons why they had 
not should be studied. Measures should be taken 
to ensure that .the Agency would conform to the 
desires and needs of the majority of its Members. 
94. The international problems of nuclear energy 
in general, and of peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
in particular, had recently become more acute. 
Nuclear technology was still the privilege of a 
small group of countries which, for historical 
and other reasons, maintained their monopoly. 
95. The growing need for new sources of energy 
in countries not possessing nuclear technology 
imposed the need for the transfer of nuclear 
technology. Such a transfer was not a simple 
matter, but it was of enormous importance to the 
developing countries. He was aware of the risks 
involved in the expansion of nuclear technology 
and believed that no country should be able to use 
nuclear technology without assuming a clearly 
defined responsibility to the whole of mankind and 
without adequate international monitoring. 
96. Yugoslavia had been among the first 
countries to ratify NPT and the Vienna Convention 
on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage[7], A 
large number of developing countries had signed 
NPT and assumed all the obligations under it in 
[7] Reproduced in Legal Series No. 2 
(STI/PUB/54). 
- 10 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 

the firm belief that the nuclear Powers also 
would fulfil their obligations. Unfortunately, 
however, the nuclear-weapon States, while still 
discussing their obligations regarding the cessation 
of the nuclear arms race, were improving 
and creating new nuclear weapons. At the same 
time there was a marked tendency towards 
extending safeguards even into the area of education, 
so to speak. 

97. Yugoslavia considered that additional efforts 
should be made to find new ways of helping those 
countries which were in need of nuclear energy as 
an energy source. They should be enabled to take 
care of all phases of the fuel cycle when the need 
arose. That meant long-term planning of nuclear 
fuel supplies and processing, an extremely 
important consideration for developing countries 
which had limited resources for their own development. 
Like other countries, Yugoslavia 
believed that solutions to problems related to the 
nuclear fuel cycle needed to be solved on a broad 
international scale and on the basis of equal rights. 
In accordance with the obligations assumed by 
the non-aligned countries, Yugoslavia would 
support and participate in activities contributing 
to such solutions, including those which would help 
developing countries to gain access to materials 
and fuel cycle technologies under normal commercial 
conditions. 

98. The concept of safeguards should not be 
limited, as at present, to preventing possible 
diversion for military purposes: it should also 
protect the right of all nations to secure their 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to ensure that 
they were not left without fuel one day. Safeguards 
of that kind could be created only by the 
joint efforts of nations which were willing to cooperate 
without any attempt to establish domination. 
It was only logical that such efforts should be 
supported by the Agency since they were fully in 
keeping with its statutory responsibilities and 
objectives. 
99. It was in that connection that Yugoslavia had 
proposed, at the 20th regular session of the 
General Conference, that the Secretariat should 
initiate an exploratory study of the economic, 
financial, technical, political and organizational 
problems involved in the possible formation of an 
international nuclear fuel cycle pool. [8] Unfortunately, 
in spite of many favourable reactions to 
the proposal, the idea had not been given due 
attention by the Secretariat, which had, at the 
same time, been engaged in certain significant 
and high-level - but for the developing countries 
perhaps less urgent - studies on the same subject. 
100. His delegation was confident that co-operation 
between Yugoslavia and the Agency would 
continue to develop successfully. He wished 
to express his country's appreciation for the 
assistance provided by the Director General and 
the Secretariat when certain supply problems 
[8] See document GC(XX)/OR. 189, paras 13 and 
14. 
arose in connection with the first Yugoslav nuclear 
power plant. 

101. Mr, GEORGE (Australia) said, in connection 
with the anniversary year, that Australia considered 
that the purposes and responsibilities of 
the Agency were more profoundly significant to 
humanity than ever before and that it pledged 
itself anew to assisting the Agency in its vital 
task of solving the world's energy needs, 
eliminating the risks of nuclear proliferation and 
providing technical assistance to the developing 
countries. 
102. Australia had recently announced very 
important decisions concerning the development 
of its uranium resources and the strengthening of 
non-proliferation and nuclear safeguards regimes. 
The decisions had followed very detailed and 
careful consideration by the Australian Government 
of a major public inquiry into Australian 
uranium development, namely, the Ranger 
Uranium Environmental Inquiry. 
103. The Inquiry had first been commissioned in 
April 1975 and had taken over 13 000 pages of 
evidence from more than 300 witnesses. It had 
presented two reports to the Government. The 
first report dealt with generic issues and was 
presented on 18 October 1976. The second and 
final report dealt largely with site-specific 
environmental issues relating to mining and milling 
operations and was presented on 17 May 1977. 
The last few years had seen increased public 
debate on the question of uranium development in 
Australia and there had been an intensification of 
that debate both in the parliament and in the 
public at large following receipt of the first 
report. 
104. The Australian Government's decision to 
proceed with the further development of the 
country's uranium resources had been announced 
in comprehensive statements to the Australian 
parliament by the Prime Minister and the 
ministers responsible for the administration of 
Australian policy on 25 August 1977. The 
decision had been based on four fundamental 
considerations: 
(1) 
The need to reduce the risk of nuclear 
weapons proliferation; 
(2) 
The need to supply essential sources of 
energy to an energy-deficient world; 
(3) 
The need to protect effectively the environment 
in which mining development would 
take place; and 
(4) 
The need to ensure that proper provision 
was made for the welfare and interests of 
the aboriginal people and of all other people 
living in the Alligator Rivers area and 
working on uranium development projects. 
105. The first two issues had played a very large 
part in the Government's decision. In his statement 
to parliament on 25 August, the Australian 
- 11 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 

Prime Minister had emphasized that the Government's 
decision had been taken with a deep sense 
of international responsibility, with a wish to 
strengthen Australia's voice in the moves against 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and with a 
realization of the obligation to provide energy to 
an energy-deficient world. Commerical 
considerations had not been the dominant motive: 
in themselves, they would not have been sufficient. 

106. On the subject of non-proliferation the 
Ranger Inquiry had reached the conclusion that at 
present Australia should not commit itself to 
withholding its uranium supplies for all time and 
that it should follow the course which was considered 
to be the most effective and most 
practical one for bringing about a favourable 
response to the proliferation problem on the part 
of other States. The Government had given the 
most careful attention to the question of nuclear 
non-proliferation before coming to its decision 
to proceed with further uranium development. 
107. The Australian Government realized that 
nuclear energy was the only readily available 
alternative that most countries had to meet their 
essential need for electric energy in the wake of 
the oil crisis. It was aware that nearly 200 
nuclear power units were already in operation in 
20 countries around the world and that a very 
considerable number of units were under construction, 
on order or planned, and it clearly 
understood that very substantial quantities of 
uranium were required to fuel those nuclear 
power units. It knew that there was a need for 
nuclear energy in a number of countries poorly 
endowed with fossil fuels, that the nuclear industry 
was growing throughout the world and that there 
was widespread concern about whether uranium 
would be available to satisfy those needs. It was 
also alive to the fact that, because of their concern 
about uranium supplies, some countries were 
turning to those nuclear technologies involving 
reprocessing and the fast breeder reactor which 
would achieve a more effective use of available 
uranium but would increase the risk of nuclear 
weapons proliferation. 
108. Australia possessed 20% of the Western 
world's known reserves of low-cost uranium. In 
view of that fact, the Government realized that 
Australia was in a special position to influence, 
and had a corresponding moral responsibility to 
maximize, protection against nuclear weapons 
proliferation by responding to the needs of many 
countries for adequate assurances of uranium 
supplies. By taking the decision to export 
uranium, the Australian Government believed it 
could slow down the movement towards the use of 
plutonium as a nuclear fuel and lessen the 
attendant increased risks of nuclear weapons 
proliferation, Australia would work vigorously 
at the international level for a regime providing 
the best solutions to the risk of nuclear weapons 
proliferation. 
109. Australia was dedicated to the improvement 
and strengthening of nuclear safeguards and, 
following the presentation of the first Ranger 
Inquiry report in October 1976, it had entered 
into consultations with major consumers and 
suppliers around the world and with the Agency 
in regard to the safeguards which should be 
applied to further exports of Australian uranium. 
The result was the elaboration of a comprehensive 
and stringent policy of nuclear safeguards based 
on four essential elements: first, NPT (which in 
the Australian view was the most important 
international non-proliferation instrument and 
the one on which any safeguards policy must be 
based); second, bilateral agreements between 
Australia and uranium-importing countries; 
third, the central role of IAEA safeguards; and 
fourth, Australian participation in multilateral 
efforts to strengthen safeguards and the nonproliferation 
regime. 

110. The Government had carefully considered a 
number of international efforts in which it might 
participate, exert its influence or lend its support: 
for example, INFCE, preparation of a draft 
convention on physical security, development of a 
common approach to sanctions and achievement of 
the widest possible consensus amongst both 
nuclear supplier countries and nuclear importing 
countries on the controls to apply to the world 
nuclear industry. It had concluded that 
Australia's ability to influence those developments 
would depend to a great extent on whether or not 
it was a major supplier and producer of uranium. 
Only in that role could it have a voice in the 
achievement of improved international safeguards 
and control. 

111. In view of the importance which Australia 
attached to NPT, its safeguards policy was 
designed to further the goal of universal accession 
to that instrument. It realized that the Treaty 
brought with it obligations under Article IV, The 
country's policy offered tangible benefits, namely, 
access to Australian uranium, to those countries 
which did not have nuclear weapons and which had 
been willing to renounce nuclear weapons by 
becoming parties to the Treaty. The policy also 
offered countries which were not now parties 
incentives for acceding to it. 
112. He had already mentioned the Australian 
Government's recognition of the important role of 
Agency-administered safeguards. That role was 
central not only to Australia's own policy but also 
to the international non-proliferation regime. In 
announcing the Government's safeguards policy, 
the Prime Minister had said that an effort would 
be made to determine whether there were specific 
areas in which Australia could usefully reinforce 
the Agency's capacity to apply increasingly 
effective safeguards. Preliminary discussions 
on the matter had been held in June. The 
Australian delegation would be holding further 
consultations on the subject with the Secretariat 
during the present session of the General Conference, 
113. Australia also attached major importance to 
the activities of the Agency in the provision of 
technical assistance for the development of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes and would be meeting 
- 12 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


in full its assessed contribution, both to the 
General Fund and to the special appeal. 

114. The Government had also decided to accede, 
as a donor country, to the Asian Regional Co-
operative Agreement of the Agency. Under that 
Agreement, Australia would provide assistance of 
various types to particular projects in developing 
countries which were members. It was to be 
hoped that that action would encourage other 
developed countries in the region to become 
members and induce developed countries elsewhere 
to lend their financial support. 
115. Mr. ADENIJT (Nigeria) said that some 
Members of the Agency had lamented that the 
decisions taken at Rio de Janeiro had begun the 
process of the politicization of the Agency, but he 
wondered how an international organization whose 
membership was open only to States could be 
apolitical. What had happened to the Agency over 
the past year was a matter for congratulation, for 
the Agency was getting into step with its sister 
organizations in the United Nations family, rather 
than for an anxious wringing of hands. The 
process of adjustment had not been accompanied 
by the trauma that had been forecast; rather, the 
Agency had become a more responsive organization 
as could be seen from the record of the 
successive meetings of the Board of Governors 
since the last session of the General Conference. 
116. That process of adjustment must continue, 
for it was a process whose ultimate result could 
only be an open organization with which all its 
Members could identify closely. Democratization 
of the IAEA was in keeping with its principal 
objective which, as set forth in Article II of its 
Statute, was "to seek to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world". During 
the general debate many speakers had spoken of 
the need to ensure that the benefit of nuclear 
technology should not continue to be limited to a 
few industrialized countries. His delegation fully 
shared that view. That had indeed been its chief 
motivation in seeking to obtain a better hearing 
for the voice of the developing countries within 
the Agency. It was not enough to express pious 
hopes for greater benefit for the underprivileged 
Members of the Agency; it would be more 
productive if all accepted the basic tenet that each 
Member or group of Members of the Agency was 
the best advocate of how the maximum benefit 
could be obtained from its membership. 
117. When Nigeria joined other Member States to 
propose an amendment to the Statute of the Agency 
to give a few more seats to two grossly underrepresented 
regions, it had been its aim to make 
the Agency grant to those two regions adequate 
representation for more advantageous participation. 
The sovereign equality of States enshrined in 
Article IV of the Statute was not meant to be an 
empty form of words to which Members paid lip 
service; it was meant rather to be one of the 
cardinal principles with which the Agency was 
expected to comply. Therefore, even if Nigeria 
did not belong to one of the two grossly underrepresented 
regions, his delegation would still 
have enthusiastically supported the proposal to 
amend Article VI. On the occasion of the Agency's 
twentieth anniversary, he hoped that the Conference 
would present it with an appropriate gift in the form 
of a resolution which would achieve a more 
equitable representation on the Board of Governors. 

118. The potentials of nuclear technology for 
filling the energy gap, which would become 
increasingly obvious as more and more countries 
were industrialized, had been recognized. Being 
an oil-producing country, Nigeria was interested 
in the promotion of increased use of nuclear energy 
to generate power. Petroleum in its natural form 
was too precious a resource for the world to 
continue using it in the wasteful manner of the past. 
For one thing it was non-renewable, which was a 
matter of concern to the oil-producing countries. 
For another, it could form the basis of countless 
products which would contribute more to the quality 
of human life than its use to generate power for 
which alternative sources could be found. 
119. The development and wider use of nuclear 
technology was, however, being inhibited by two 
developments which had recently been assuming 
alarming proportions. One of those developments 
was the organized opposition of citizens, spearheaded 
by environmentalists, who were concerned 
about the danger of accident and the consequent 
disaster. The Nigerian delegation thought that a 
certain amount of exaggeration might be responsible 
for the growing organized opposition. The safety 
record of nuclear power plants did not seem to 
justify the campaign against their wider use. His 
delegation also thought that the Agency should 
assume a more dynamic role in the dissemination 
of more accurate information on nuclear power, 
thus promoting greater public understanding. 
Otherwise, if the present campaign resulted in 
retarding research and growth in the field of 
nuclear technology, the consequences would 
perhaps be felt more severely in developing 
countries, which might have few alternative 
sources of energy. 
120. The other development which might inhibit 
wider use of nuclear technology was the increasing 
stringency being exercised by suppliers with 
regard to the transfer of nuclear equipment. 
Nigeria was a party to NPT and therefore accepted 
the basic provisions of the Treaty. It considered 
that the denial of technology and equipment for 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy was itself inconsistent 
with undertakings given by nuclear-weapon 
States in NPT. Subject to reasonable safeguards, 
it believed that there should not be any attempt to 
inhibit the development of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy by the developing countries. 
121. Over the years, and with the active 
encouragement of suppliers of nuclear materials, 
the safeguards operations of the Agency had grown 
phenomenally. The Director General had himself 
said that safeguards which had begun in one 
Division of the Secretariat had grown into a 
Department of four Divisions. While the 
Nigerian delegation realized that the responsibility 
- 13 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


for safeguards given to the Agency under NPT was 
in part responsible for that growth, it regretted 
that the promotional activities of the Agency had 
not grown simultaneously. That imbalance had 
been to the disadvantage of the greater part of the 
Agency's membership. In the introduction to his 
annual report for 1976, the Director General 
stated quite rightly that for the great majority of 
the Agency's developing Member States application 
of nuclear science and techniques in food and 
agriculture, medicine and development of water 
resources represented the main, if not the only, 
tangible benefits that could be achieved at the 
present time from the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. Yet it was in those same areas of the 
Agency's programmes where development was 
rather slow in terms of resources to meet the 
ever-growing needs. The peaceful battle that 
had to be waged annually in the Board of Governors 
over the target for the voluntary contributions to 
the General Fund was an indication of the different 
ways two groups of Agency Members saw the 
fulfilment of its dual mandate. Given the general 
support the regulatory activities of the Agency had 
received, there could be no justification for the 
conscious effort to limit the resources available 
for its promotional duties. The annual budget of 
the Agency had increased from $4 million in 1958 
to a proposed $51 million in 1978., which was 
more than a twelvefold increase. In the same 
period, however, the General Fund, which was 
for technical assistance, had increased from 
$1.5 million to only the $7 million proposed for 
1978, which was only a fivefold increase. Considering 
the number of countries amongst which 
that rather small amount was shared, perhaps 
greater understanding of his delegation's preoccupation 
about a greater increase in the rate of 
growth of the technical assistance fund would be 
forthcoming. 

122. After congratulating the Director General 
and his staff on their accomplishments in the past 
year and noting with appreciation their enthusiasm 
for the promotion of the Agency's functions in 
areas of interest to developing countries, he said 
that the Nigerian delegation had always considered 
that the Agency's Secretariat could play a dynamic 
role, even within the resources available to it, in 
stimulating interest in developing countries in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. Occasional 
visits by the Director General and his lieutenants 
to developing countries would certainly have the 
same beneficial effects as their regular visits 
to developed countries. In that connection, 
Nigeria had been happy to play host that year to 
one of the Deputy Directors General. His visit 
had provided him with an opportunity to see something 
of the developing nuclear programme in 
Nigeria, and had provided Nigeria with an 
opportunity to benefit from the wealth of his 
experience and advice. 

123, In the year since the twentieth session of 
the General Conference, Nigeria had continued to 
make steady progress in the development of its 
programme of peaceful uses of nuclear technology. 
An agreement between the Agency, the Food and 
Agricultural Organization (FAO) and Nigeria had 

been signed three months previously for a largescale 
project for suppressing tsetse fly by the 
sterile-insect technique. That was the first 
project involving a wide-scale use of that technique 
and it was hoped that the results would be of 
world-wide benefit. His delegation wished to 
express its appreciation to those Member States 
of the Agency which had agreed to contribute 
funds to the project. 

124. With regard to Resolution GC(XX)/RES/336 
concerning the designation of Members to the 
Board of Governors, his delegation noted with 
considerable satisfaction that the Board of 
Governors, alive to its responsibility to rid the 
executive organ of the Agency of the cancer in its 
body politic, had taken the only wise course. It 
had designated another African country in place 
of South Africa, which had curiously managed to 
cling to that African seat for so long. It was a 
happy coincidence that the Agency was celebrating 
its twentieth anniversary with a considerably 
improved image, having dissociated itself from 
apartheid. If South Africa would not behave like 
the rest of the world, then it should be isolated 
from the rest of the world, 
125. Mr. BARABAS (Czechoslovakia) said that 
the Agency, during the twenty years of its 
existence, had undoubtedly become the most 
important specialized organization within the 
United Nations system and that its activities were 
connected above all with the maintenance of world 
peace, 
126. The Agency's twentieth anniversary was 
being celebrated in the same year as the sixtieth 
anniversary of the Great October Socialist 
Revolution, and the peace-loving forces in the 
world - including his own country - were taking 
major steps in the interests of a further strengthening 
of international detente. In that connection 
he wished to emphasize that the Leninist principle 
of peaceful coexistence, which derived naturally 
from the foundations of the socialist system, had 
begun to be translated into reality sixty years 
before by the Soviet people. 
127. Despite certain setbacks, developments 
since the Conference on Security and Co-operation 
in Europe[ 9] had in general been positive. 
However, it was necessary to continue with efforts 
to strengthen security and co-operation, and to 
extend such efforts beyond Europe to the other 
continents of the world. The champions of peace 
and disarmament had recently been confronted 
with a new, extremely important task - to avert 
the threat of the production of new types of 
weapons of mass destruction. If that threat was 
not averted, the process of political detente 
would not go very far. 
128. The Agency was continuing to play an 
important role in connection not only with techno[
9] Opened at Helsinki on 3 July 1973, continued 
at Geneva from 18 September 1973 to 21 July 1975 
and concluded at Helsinki on 1 August 1975, 
- 14 



GC(XXI)/OR. 195 


logical developments and multilateral scientific 
and technical co-operation in the peaceful 
utilization of atomic energy but also with efforts 
to ensure that nuclear energy served exclusively 
peaceful purposes. As one of the founder 
Members of the Agency, his country had over the 
past twenty years always supported it in its 
responsible and difficult work. 

129. In that connection he emphasized the 
importance of the Agency for the implementation 
of NPT through the application of its safeguards 
on the basis of agreements concluded between the 
Agency and individual Member States. With the 
development of the peaceful application of nuclear 
technology - and especially with the development 
of nuclear power generation - there was clearly 
a growing risk that nuclear technology would come 
to be used in non-peaceful areas. He appealed to 
the Secretariat and to Member States to do everything 
necessary to stop any such development. 
130. Although 102 Member States had acceded to 
NPT, satisfactory progress had not yet been 
made in negotiations with the non-nuclear-weapon 
countries of EURATOM and with Japan concerning 
safeguards inspections; his delegation attached 
particular importance to the principle of independent 
verification by the Agency through inspections 
at nuclear facilities in those countries. 
131. His country considered NPT one of the main 
instruments for averting a nuclear war and 
accordingly believed strongly in the idea of the 
universality of NPT and in the need to strengthen 
the non-proliferation regime. 
132. Of the positive steps taken within the 
Secretariat during the past year in the field of 
safeguards, he was particularly pleased to note 
the significant improvements in the automatic 
processing of safeguards information and a] so a 
large number of organizational measures which 
would no doubt greatly raise the quality of the 
work done in the Department of Safeguards. 
133. The Agency was also playing an important 
role in the field of PNEs, and the Board had 
recently received a report from its Ad Hoc 
Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful 
Purposes. Although the legal and economic 
aspects of PNEs had undergone thorough examination, 
his delegation recommended that the mandate 
of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group be extended so that 
it might complete its examination of questions 
such as the radiological and seismic safety aspects 
of PNEs. 
134. The Salzburg Conference held in May had 
shown that nuclear power generation was the only 
technically feasible and economically acceptable 
alternative to the use of fossil fuels and that its 
safety record over the past twenty years had been 
excellent; it had also highlighted the need for 
broader international co-operation in the nuclear 
field. An important feature of the Conference 
had undoubtedly been the stress placed on the 
political aspects of the development of nuclear 
power generation in discussions concerning nuclear 
safety, the physical protection of nuclear materials 
and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
135. His delegation fully supported the programme 
proposed for 1978, especially in so far as it 
related to safeguards, nuclear power generation, 
nuclear safety and INIS. 
136. Emphasizing the importance of the Agency's 
role in the field of technical assistance, he said 
that Czechoslovakia - like the other countries of 
the socialist community - attached great 
importance to the efforts of developing countries 
to achieve economic and technical growth and 
fully supported them in their struggle against neocolonialism. 
Given the progressive tendencies 
in those countries, they undoubtedly also saw in 
the policy of detente the basis for realizing their 
wishes in the field of economic and social 
development. With that in mind, Czechoslovakia 
had always done everything it could to co-operate 
with the Agency in implementing its technical 
assistance programme - by making financial 
contributions, by accepting fellows for training, 
by hosting technical meetings and by making 
available the services of experts. In line with 
its past policy, his Government had decided to 
increase its voluntary contribution to the General 
Fund by 20% - to 300 000 korunas - in 1978; in 
the light of past experience, he was sure that 
the money would be put to good use. In addition, 
it proposed to offer in 1978 five long-term and 
four one-year fellowships for study in 
Czechoslovakia and to contribute to three oneyear 
fellowships financed by the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP). 

137. In conclusion, he emphasized the significance 
of the agreement between the Agency and the 
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA), 
in the implementation of which several important 
steps had been taken during the past year. 
• The meeting rose at 6. 15 p.m. 
- 15 



GC(XXI)/OR.196 

International Atomic Energy Agency April 1978* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-30 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Wednesday, 28 September 1977, at 10.10 a.m. 

President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 

Item of the 

agenda** Subject Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report 1 -133 
for 1976 (continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Poland 1 -7 
Holy See 8 -23 
Philippines 24-34 
Israel 35 -40 
Hungary 41 -52 
Bulgaria 53 -60 
Iran 61 -68 
Cuba 69 -75 
Sweden 76 -85 
Mexico 86 -89 
Egypt 90-110 
Japan 111 -133 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 11 October 1977. 

** GC(XXI)/591. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR.196 

THE RECORD 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT 
FOR 1976 (GC(XXI)/580) (continued) 

1. Mr. FELICKI (Poland) observed that, 
historically speaking, 20 years was not a long 
period. Considering, however, the changes 
which had recently taken place in the world, the 
preceding 20 years had been a period of unusual 
economic and social development. The world's 
population had nearly doubled, reaching a figure 
of 4000 million, world income had trebled and 
industrial production had increased by a factor 
of 3. 5, The development of nuclear energy had 
been spectacular. Whereas prior to the creation 
of the Agency only one 5-MW(e) experimental 
nuclear power plant had been in operation, in the 
Soviet Union, there were now 230 such facilities, 
with a total installed capacity of 110 000 MW(e). 
2. That development had not taken place without 
difficulties, most of which were due to the 
military origin of atomic energy. During the 
past 20 years it had nevertheless been possible 
to take some steps directed against the military 
applications of atomic energy. Treaties providing 
for partial or total banning of nuclear weapons 
had been concluded. One of the most important 
such instruments was the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[1], which 
conferred a new and vitally important role on the 
Agency. Thus changes had progressively 
occurred in the Agency's activities. From an 
essentially technical world organization at the 
outset, observing trends in research and applications 
and promoting the exchange of information 
and the preparation of standards and recommendations, 
it had come to be concerned with 
nuclear power plants and their fuel cycle and with 
radiation protection and the safety of nuclear 
facilities, and it had acquired a reputation for a 
high standard of competence. 
3. Owing to the development of nuclear energy 
and the growth in the number of facilities producing 
and reprocessing fissionable material, 
the Agency had been obliged to turn its attention 
to the problem of safeguards. The application of 
safeguards, which had been entrusted to it under 
NPT, had strengthened its role as an instrument 
for maintaining security in the world. It had been 
claimed by some that the system of safeguards 
was in the interest of a small group of the most 
developed countries. Poland did not share that 
view. The importance of peace was a factor 
independent of the degree of industrial development 
achieved and the steps taken towards 
establishing universal peace were in the interest 
of all countries. 
4. Another of the Agency's functions was to 
provide technical assistance to developing 
countries and, in that sphere too, it had extended 
its activity to matters of nuclear power. The 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
great dynamism characteristic of the past 
20 years had subjected it to several tests from 
which it had emerged with honour. The founders 
of the Agency had demonstrated wisdom and farsightedness 
in drafting the articles of the Statute, 
which had always proved timely. 

5. The conditions under which nuclear energy 
developed would determine future trends iri the 
development of the Agency. Apart from fulfilling 
its well-established role as a clearinghouse 
for scientific and technical information in 
the atomic field, the Agency should concentrate 
on three sectors. First, it should ensure that the 
fissionable material produced for peaceful 
purposes was not diverted for military ends. He 
fully agreed with the Director General's view 
that the Agency's Safeguards System as defined 
in document INFCIRC/66 should be replaced in 
the countries which had not acceded to NPT by a 
new system covering all nuclear activities. He 
was also in favour of introducing supplementary 
systems for ensuring non-proliferation, such as 
the establishment of regional fuel cycle centres, 
the storage of plutonium under IAEA control and 
the like, in the application of which the Agency 
should play a predominant part. Second, the 
organization should continue to carry out research 
and to prepare standards and recommendations 
on the reliability and safety of nuclear reactors 
and fuel fabrication facilities, devoting particular 
attention to the problems of radioactive waste 
management and radiation protection. Lastly, 
the Agency should intensify its assistance to the 
developing countries. 

6. In consideration of the growing needs, the 
Polish Government had decided to increase its 
voluntary contribution to the Agency's technical 
assistance programme by 50%, bringing it to a 
total of 1. 5 million zlotys. He welcomed the reappointment 
of Mr. Sigvard Eklund as Director 
General for a further term of four years. His 
(Mr. Eklund's) knowledge and experience were a 
guarantee that the new tasks facing the Agency 
at the beginning of the next 20-year period would 
be carried out with success. 
7. Poland, together with other socialist 
countries, was celebrating the 60th anniversary 
of the October Revolution, which had proclaimed 
the ideals of brotherhood and co-operation among 
nations; it would do everything in its power to 
give practical expression to the idea of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
8. Mr. ABS (Holy See) said that his delegation 
had carefully considered the documents prepared 
by the Board and by the Director General and 
found them excellent sources of reference which 
would make it possible to hold a dialogue on 
issues to which the Holy See attached the greatest 
importance. 
9. On the occasion of the Agency's twentieth 
anniversary, he recalled that the Holy See had 
not only followed the Agency's work with great 
interest during the past 20 years, but it had also 
-2 



GC(XXI)/OR.196 


encouraged it in its task which was "to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world". 

10. The twenty-first session of the General 
Conference provided the Holy See with an 
opportunity to restate that it participated in the 
life of the Agency as part of its spiritual mission. 
The role of the Holy See in the Agency was to 
remind it of its moral obligations in order that it 
could carry out its responsibilities satisfactorily. 
11. His delegation wanted to comment briefly 
on two of the topics on the agenda of the 
Conference, namely peace and nuclear energy as 
a factor of development. 
12. With regard to peace, his delegation wished 
once again to express its well-grounded fears 
about the vulnerability of peace. As the Holy 
Father had pointed out in his message for the 
celebration of the World Day of Peace in 1976: 
"On this implacable theme, our feelings are of 
twofold nature, being both at variance one with 
the other. On the one hand, it is to be seen with 
pleasure and hope that activities are developing 
in the direction indicated by peace ... . but 
unfortunately, at the same time we see the 
manifestation of phenomena contrary to the content 
and purpose of peace ... . " Among some 
examples of efforts directed to peace was the 
decision taken by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations in 1976 to convene a special 
session on disarmament in 1978 and its condemnation 
of all nuclear weapon tests and its 
invitation to the parties to the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe[2] to implement 
fully all the provisions of the Final Act of 
that Conference. 
13. However, the spread of nucler technology and 
the technical knowledge regarding nuclear weapon 
production could have dangerous consequences. 
Moreover, in the competition to sell nuclear technology, 
plant and equipment, too little attention 
was given to the consequences for non-proliferation. 
Commercial interests and short-term political 
considerations consequently threatened to take 
precedence over the security of the international 
community as a whole. 
14. With regard to disarmament, his delegation 
wished to express its anxiety at the scale 
assumed by the arms trade, which could be controlled 
only through a general commitment to 
diminish the role of force in international 
relations and through the effective control of 
arms and through coherent disarmament 
measures. One fairly alarming indicator was 
the continuous modernization of armed forces 
and the growing demand for armaments. It was, 
moreover, noteworthy that forecasts of the 
[2] Opened at Helsinki in 1973, continued at 
Geneva from 18 September 1973 to 21 July 1975 
and concluded at Helsinki on 1 August 1975. 
market for armaments were prepared by 
commercial agents. More than 30 years after 
the end of the most destructive war in human 
history, the majority of nations continued to 
believe that military strength was the best means 
of preserving national security and promoting 
national interests. Paradoxically, they did not 
seem to be more secure as a result. Indeed, 
national insecurity seemed to be the more widespread 
sentiment. 

15. The second point to which his delegation 
wished to refer was the general implications of 
nuclear energy in the technological, economic, 
political and social fields. Since the autumn of 
1975, public interest in nuclear proliferation 
issues had been growing. In many industrialized 
countries, controversy over planned nuclear 
power plant construction had been directed 
mainly to the relationship between nuclear power 
and nuclear weapons. The International 
Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle 
(the Salzburg Conference), organized by the 
Agency in 1977 at Salzburg, had enabled a wide 
spectrum of views to be heard, according to the 
most pessimistic of which proliferation could 
only be avoided by complete renunciation of 
nuclear power. 
16. The Holy See delegation encouraged the 
Agency to keep the nuclear debate open; it was 
convinced that in the close international links 
between nuclear industry and world security, no 
country could be an island. It was becoming all 
the more important to examine the implications 
of nuclear energy thoroughly, particularly if 
present-day society had no alternative, in order 
to determine the social and political conditions 
under which it might be used. Suppliers and 
recipients of nuclear technology must therefore 
work together to give nuclear power a meaningful 
role in the developing world. 
17. He wished to draw attention to three aspects 
of the question, the first of which was the need 
to inform the public of the issues involved in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. Public debates 
were currently being held in Western developed 
countries. As nuclear technology was made 
available to the developing countries, the 
opportunity should not be lost to learn from the 
lessons of the past, to encourage the diffusion 
of information on nuclear energy and to inform 
public opinion, so that the citizenry could participate 
in decision-making in full knowledge of the 
facts. 
18. That led, secondly, to the need to clarify 
the hazards involved in the use of nuclear 
resources for various projects. The reality of 
those hazards, often undetermined, placed an 
obligation on the Agency and on all States that 
were considering such projects to proceed with 
the utmost caution and realism so that the 
population did not suffer. 
19. Thirdly, all States, whether suppliers or 
recipients, participating in peaceful nuclear 
explosion projects should scrupulously avoid the 
-3 



GC(XXI)/OR.196 

temptation to make unconsidered use of nuclear 
explosives, which might lead to the waste of 
resources in a pointless international competition. 
An appraisal should be made, without overlooking 
environmental protection considerations, of the 
best ways of ensuring proper growth for individual 
States and the world as a whole. 

20. However, the Holy See insisted that if 
nuclear energy was to contribute to ordered 
development, the superiority of spiritual values 
over merely temporal ones had to be recognized. 
It was not enough to give economic and technical 
aid. The conscience of men must also be imbued 
with the principles of social justice. A just and 
equitable distribution of wealth was an essential 
condition for the foundation of a better world, 
because without that, development was not progress 
but exploitation. 
21. He recalled that during the last visit of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations to the 
Vatican, on 9 July 1977, the Holy Father had 
insisted on the responsibility of men in the last 
quarter of the present century. He had stated 
that the resolutions of States should not be 
determined by nationalistic perspectives or by 
purely economic interests, but by a concern to 
assist the populations most affected by hunger, 
injustice' or ill-usage, which was to suppose a 
political will of the States, firmly resolved to 
prevent conflicts or find reasonable solutions for 
them, 
22. The Holy See encouraged the Agency to 
continue its efforts to provide all possible sources 
for technical assistance to developing countries, 
particularly when the concern of those countries 
was not centred solely on basic aspects of nuclear 
energy, but on the more practical problems of 
how to implement nuclear programmes, particularly 
in such fields as medicine and agriculture. 
23. It was the Holy See's most earnest wish to 
strengthen the bonds of universal brotherhood 
and to ensure for all people peace and the benefits 
of close collaboration in science, technology and 
culture. In that common task, the Holy See 
offered its collaboration to the Agency. It would 
continue to work for peace and development, 
which constituted the aim of the United Nations 
and its specialized agencies. 
24. Mr. SIAZON (Philippines) congratulated 
the President of the General Conference on his 
election; as a man well known for his efforts to 
promote the peaceful use of atomic energy and a 
citizen of a country which was actively cooperating 
with the Agency to that same end, he 
(Mr. Ktemad) was certain to make a beneficial 
contribution to the deliberations of the Agency at 
the dawn of its third decade. 
25. During the 20 years of its existence, the 
Agency, under the leadership of the Director 
General, had assisted many developing countries 
which were now using nuclear energy, some of 
them for the production of electricity and others 
for agriculture and medicine, or which were 
-

planning the start-up of nuclear power plants 

within a short time. The technical assistance 
programmes had been a success not only for the 

recipient countries, but also for the donor 

countries and the exporters of nuclear materials 

and technology. 

26. Having witnessed the constructive results 
of using atomic energy for peaceful purposes, 
many developing countries had joined the Agency 
and the influx of new Members in that category 
could be expected to lead to certain changes in its 
organization. The Director General had stressed 
at the opening of the session that the Agency could 
not limit its activities to the technical domain nor 
live in a political vacuum. The developing 
countries did not intend to remain silent partners 
in the Agency; they expected to take a greater 
part in its activities, not only on the Board of 
Governors and at the General Conference, but 
also in the higher echelons of the Secretariat, 
where administrative functions had to be shared 
between nationals representing different geographical 
regions. For its future role, the 
Agency required above all the active support and 
complete confidence not only of a few of the 
bigger countries, but of all its Member States. 
27. The Philippines, which had acceded to NPT, 
strongly supported the action taken by the Agency 
and would warmly welcome any new step that 
might be taken along those lines under existing 
international agreements, or within the context 
of Agency activities. Any such action could be 
considered during the next Review Conference of 
the Parties to NPT[3] as could the outcome of the 
international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation contemplated 
at the present time. 
28. While his country was strongly in favour of 
nuclear non-proliferation, he did not share the 
view of the advocates of non-proliferation who 
would like to see the stoppage of all transfers of 
technology in the nuclear fuel cycle. In many 
developing countries that restrictive policy was 
viewed as a devious device for keeping them 
economically dependent on the developed countries, 
and might encourage them to band together against 
that form of capitalistic imperialism. A policy 
of that kind would not solve any of the proliferation 
problems; it might even induce some countries to 
speed up the development of their nuclear 
activities by themselves without the application 
of international safeguards, which were undoubtedly 
the only way of solving the problems of nuclear 
proliferation. 

29. With regard to the supply of nuclear 
materials, he pointed out that, contrary to the 
provisions of Article IV of NPT, a number of 
Member States who were parties to the Treaty 
and were applying all the safeguards envisaged 
had been experiencing delay in the delivery of 
nuclear materials or were threatened with an 
[3] The first Review Conference was held at 
Geneva in 1975. 
4 



GC(XXI)/OR. 196 


embargo on them. Insome cases, for example 
following a change of Government, the supplier 
States parties to NPT had refused to honour contracts 
with another State also a party to it until 
renegotiation and acceptance of additional conditions. 
Such behaviour could only bring about a 
deterioration in international relationships and 
undo all the efforts made for the purpose of nonproliferation, 
which required a modicum of trust 
between different countries. 

30. The first special safeguards implementation 
report, which had just been put before the Board 
of Governors, called the Board's attention to a 
variety of problems, such as the difficulties 
encountered by the inspectorate in reaching conclusions 
based solely on quantitative verification, 
the deficiencies involved in safeguarding on-loadrefuelled 
reactors, and the shortcomings in some 
of the safeguards agreements concluded in 
accordance with document INFCIRC/66/Rev. 2. 
The report made it clear that the establishment 
of effective international safeguards required the 
co-operation of all the States concerned and also 
greater financial resources. His Government 
was willing to support all the measures aimed at 
improving the Agency's safeguards activities, 
although it felt that an expansion of its functions 
should be matched by a commensurate increase in 
technical assistance activities. Furthermore, 
there was urgent need to work out a universal 
scheme for financing safeguards that took into 
account the financial status of the developing 
countries. The present methods of financing 
safeguards needed to be reviewed. A note by the 
Director General dealing with the principles for 
the assessment of Members' contributions towards 
the Agency's Regular Budget brought out the fact 
that some industrialized countries, including a 
nuclear-weapon State, would be given preferential 
treatment in the same way as the developing 
countries. That was an abnormal state of affairs 
which had to be set right if the Agency wished to 
be sure of the permanent support of countries 
making the greatest contribution to safeguards 
financing. 

31. As far as nuclear disarmament was concerned, 
he stressed that in spite of the provisions 
of Article VI of NPT and the fact that the Treaty 
had been in force for seven years, the only 
progress made towards nuclear disarmament by 
the Depositary Governments engaged in negotiations 
was a half-hearted agreement to extend 
SALT 1, which went back to 1972. 
32. Although his country supported the draft 
programme and budget for 1978[4], it could not 
hide its concern at the considerable increase in 
the Regular Budget. Furthermore, he urged the 
Director General to improve the representation 
of the developing countries in the higher echelons 
of the Secretariat. As of June 1977, only three 
posts of Director out of 21 were held by nationals 
from those countries, and as of 23 September 
not one of the 19 Units in the Department of 
Safeguards was headed by a national from a 
developing country. That situation had to be 
rectified as the Agency was the only specialized 
body within the United Nations where so few posts 
of Director and P-5 posts were held by nationals 
of the developing' countries. 

33. Since the signing of the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA)[5] in June 1972, 11 Member 
States from Asia and the Far East were cooperating, 
under Agency sponsorship, in various 
fields of research in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. The co-operation had made it possible 
to draw up six minor projects relating mainly to 
the use of radioisotopes in fisheries, agriculture, 
environmental pollution control, and industry. 
Other countries were planning to accede to the 
Agreement and new projects were under study. 
He wished to thank the Director General for his 
support of the activities launched under the RCA 
and hoped that adequate funds would be provided 
for that purpose. 

34. He congratulated the Director General on 
his reappointment to office and expressed the 
Philippines' appreciation of the technical 
assistance provided by the Agency in 1977; in 
conclusion, he announced that, as testimony of 
its interest in the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, his Government would contribute 
more than its normal share to the General Fund. 
35. Mr. EILAM (Israel) wished to state, on the 
occasion of the Agency's twentieth anniversary, 
that the Salzburg Conference had been a perfect 
example of the Agency's endeavours and achievements; 
it was also worth noting that the 
Conference had taken place at a most appropriate 
time. 
36. Everyone knew that the world's problems 
in connection with energy were becoming ever 
more acute and complex. Their impact on the 
prosperity, on the growth, and sometimes even 
on the daily economic life of countries was 
constantly increasing. The matters discussed by 
the Conference were of particular importance for 
countries that had not been blessed by nature with 
sources of energy. Even a partial solution of 
those vital problems would require of all the 
protagonists, not only research, development, 
science and technology, but also the qualities of 
understanding, sincerity, courage and trust. 
37. What was needed more than ever was real 
progress through international co-operation. 
Such progress was not merely a prerequisite for 
the prosperity of the international community; 
it was also the way to peace. For that reason 
Israel, as a developing country, would continue 
to pursue its traditional policy of co-operation 
with other developing countries. 
[5] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 
[4] GC(XXI)/582. document INFCIRC/167. 

GC(XXI)/OR.196 

38. One of the most important problems with 
which society was currently confronted was the 
scarcity of water. That problem particularly 
affected developing countries in arid or semiarid 
zones. The State of Israel had made, and 
continued to make, considerable efforts to contribute 
to the solution of such problems by desalination 
techniques. Some aspects of work in 
that field had been described during the Salzburg 
Conference. Israel had already built semiindustrial 
models which were in use in various 
countries, and it was constructing a large-scale 
pilot plant. Those installations were currently 
attached to fossil-fuel power plants, but the 
ultimate goal was the desalination of 100 million 
cubic metres of water per year in each dualpurpose 
900-MW nuclear power plant. 
39. The State of Israel was eager to share the 
know-how it had so far accumulated in that field 
with all nations, in particular with the countries 
of the Middle East. It also wished to share with 
those countries in the implementation of future 
projects. 
40. The Agency should increase its own efforts 
in that particular field and lead the way during 
the next decade, without prejudice to other 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
41. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary) congratulated 
the President on his election and expressed the 
gratitude of his delegation to the Director General 
and the Secretariat for the preparations for the 
General Conference. On the occasion of the 
sixtieth anniversary of the Great October 
Socialist Revolution, he expressed his delegation's 
warm greetings to the Soviet Union and recalled 
that it was in the Soviet Union that the world's 
first nuclear power plant had been built, as the 
first example of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
42. During the 20 years of its existence, the 
Agency had pursued a dual aim: to contribute to 
the peaceful use of atomic energy and to oppose 
its use for other purposes. On the whole, the 
Hungarian delegation was satisfied with the results 
obtained by the Agency, which it considered to be 
one of the most effective international organizations. 
Those results had been possible thanks 
to the co-operation of Member States in the 
Agency's policy-making organs, and also thanks 
to the excellent work done by the Secretariat 
under the guidance of the Director General. The 
Hungarian delegate congratulated Mr. Eklund on 
his re-election and assured him of the cooperation 
of the Hungarian Government. 
43. The primary objective of the Hungarian 
Government in the domain of foreign policy was 
to contribute to the strengthening of international 
peace and security and to promote detente. In 
the opinion of the Hungarian delegation, detente 
had contributed to international co-operation, had 
made it possible to adopt important measures 
with a view to disarmament, and had facilitated 
the work of the Agency. Unfortunately, a revival 
could be observed in the activities of the opponents 
of detente. The Hungarian Government would 
continue to support all action favourable to detente, 
which was essential to the interests of humanity. 
In that context it attached great importance to the 
Belgrade conference, at which the signatories of 
the Final Declaration of the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation would meet again. 
The full application of the provisions of that 
declaration would have a favourable effect not 
only on Europe but on the entire international 
situation. 

44. The Hungarian Government supported all 
constructive proposals aimed at disarmament, 
and welcomed the signing in 1977 of a convention 
prohibiting the use for military purposes of 
measures affecting the natural environment. But 
it was nuclear disarmament which he considered 
most important. The parties to NPT would have 
to fulfil their obligations completely. The 
Hungarian people was deeply concerned at the 
rumours about the nuclear programme of the 
racist regime in South Africa. However, some 
responsibility attached to the exporting States 
as well. 

45. A major step might be made towards nuclear 
disarmament in the form of a general and complete 
nuclear weapons test ban which all States possessing 
such weapons would have to sign. In that 
connection the States members of the Warsaw 
Pact had made an interesting proposal according 
to which the States that had signed the Final 
Declaration of the Helsinki conference would 
undertake not to use nuclear weapons against 
each other. 
46. The Hungarian delegation was convinced that 
the cause of disarmament could not fail to be 
advanced if every party refrained from seeking 
unilateral advantages. Therefore, it was deeply 
concerned over the American projects in connection 
with the neutron bomb, as they confronted 
the world with the threat of a renewal of the arms 
race, 
47. The Hungarian delegation had studied the 
annual report for 1976 (GC(XXI)/580) with great 
interest and agreed with the analysis of the 
budget presented by the Board of Governors, 
The Salzburg Conference had been very useful for 
the examination of the problems presented by the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In view of the 
predicted energy requirements the whole world 
was agreed that nuclear energy and techniques 
were of great importance, particularly for the 
developing countries, Hungary acknowledged the 
great value of the technical assistance provided 
by the Agency, and contributed more than its due 
share; it was paying into the General Fund an 
amount of one million forints, 
48. The Hungarian delegation considered that 
the Agency's allocation and execution of technical 
assistance projects were satisfactory. That 
assistance involved not only distribution but also 
control activities to ensure that the equipment 
and materials provided were actually used for 
peaceful purposes. In addition to the technical 
6 


GC(XXI)/OR. 196 


assistance provided by the Agency in the form of 
equipment and experts, Hungary attached great 
importance to the training of specialists. It 
recognized that as nuclear energy developed the 
Agency was obliged to deploy activity on a worldwide 
scale without parallel in the technical, 
scientific and political fields. The Hungarian 
delegation thought that it might be possible to 
expand the Agency's technical assistance where 
the cost of joint programmes, such as in the case 
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 

United Nations (FAO) and the IAEA, was shared 

by the two organizations. 

49. The Hungarian delegation recognized the 
valuable assistance rendered by the International 
Nuclear Information System (INIS) to scientists, 
and attached particular importance to the Agency's 
safeguards activity. The safeguards system 
should be strengthened, particularly in the light 
of certain recent agreements which established 
safeguards systems outside NPT. 
50. Nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
(PNE) and supervision of them was a new field 
of activity for which the Agency had immediately 
set up an Ad Hoc Advisory Group. That Group 
had just submitted its report, which contained 
some highly interesting proposals. Nuclear fuel 
fabrication should also confer new tasks upon the 
Agency. The Hungarian delegation considered 
that regional fuel cycle centres offered great 
prospects for the future. 
51. Some examples of co-operation between 
Hungary and the Agency had been the following: 
experts' missions and study visits allocated to 
Hungary in connection with the construction of its 
nuclear power plant; the construction at 
Debrecen of a powerful radiation source with the 
joint assistance of the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) and the IAEA; and the 
applications of radioisotopes in industry, medicine 
and research. A number of Hungarian research 
centres were performing work under contracts 
with the Agency. His country appreciated that 
co-operation and would continue it in the future. 
52. He wished to express the hope and conviction 
that the Agency would not relax its efforts 
in the direction of more effective safeguards, the 
implementation of NPT and increasing diversity 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In those 
efforts it could rely on the support of Hungary. 
53. Mr. KOSTADINOV (Bulgaria), noting that 
it was the twentieth anniversary of the Agency, 
recalled that Bulgaria had actively supported the 
implementation of the noble aims of the organization 
from the beginning. He wished to congratulate 
the President of the Conference on his 
election and the Director General of the IAEA on 
his reappointment. He considered it appropriate 
to draw attention to the importance of the Great 
October Socialist Revolution, the sixtieth 
anniversary of which would take place in 
November, not only for the economic and social 
development of the Soviet Union but also for the 
creation of a new type of international relations 
which were characterized by the peaceful 
settlement of all disputes. The Soviet Union and 
the other socialist countries were working unremittingly 
to that end. 

54. In that context the universal and total 
prohibition of nuclear weapons testing should be 
an urgent objective and Bulgaria was following 
the negotiations between the Soviet Union and the 
United States of America with great interest. 
55. The reports that were circulating on the 
nuclear weapons of the Republic of South Africa 
were very worrying. If they were confirmed, the 
security of African States would be directly 
threatened and the risk of nuclear war increased. 
The Bulgarian delegation stressed the responsibility 
of certain Western countries which, while 
declaring themselves in favour of non-proliferation, 
had helped the Republic of South Africa to acquire 
a nuclear potential, 

56. In view of that situation the Government of 
Bulgaria believed that it was necessary for all 
countries, the United Nations, the IAEA and other 
specialized institutions to take firm steps to 
prevent dangerous developments in South Africa. 
Bulgaria had supported the appeal launched 
during the Conference on Apartheid calling for a 
halt to the provision to South Africa of arms and 
of all assistance facilitating the acquisition of a 
nuclear potential. It was urgent that Agency 
safeguards be applied to all the peaceful nuclear 
activities of non-nuclear-weapon States which 
were receiving assistance from the Agency. 
57. In the present world situation taking firm 
steps against the proliferation of nuclear weapons 
was the most urgent task in the interest of universal 
and total disarmament. Yet one Member 
State of the Agency was considering the manufacture 
of a new type of nuclear weapon, the 
neutron bomb, which might well result in a 
resumption of the arms race and which was 
clearly at variance with efforts being made within 
and outside the United Nations. 
58. Bulgaria was grateful to the Agency for the 
technical assistance it received, particularly in 
connection with the training of specialists and 
with certain peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. For its part, the Bulgarian Government 
was supporting the Agency with the organization 
of meetings of experts, improvement of INIS 
techniques and the development of devices for the 
application of safeguards. 
59. The Bulgarian delegation also stressed the 
permanent co-operation maintained between the 
Bulgarian Committee for Peaceful Applications of 
Atomic Energy and the Agency in matters relating 
to the application of safeguards within the framework 
of NPT. At present Bulgaria had one 
2000-kW research reactor and two 440-MW 
power reactors (Kozloduj power station). It had 
always co-operated in the holding of inspections 
and in its installation of safeguards control 
devices. 
-7 



GC(XXI)/OR. 196 

60. On the subject of the Agency's budget for 
1978, he emphasized the need to expand activities 
relating to safeguards, nuclear safety, environmental 
protection and INIS. Bulgaria, which 
paid its assessed and voluntary contributions 
regularly, expressed its appreciation of all the 
Agency's technical assistance activities and 
wished to announce a voluntary contribution of 
$10 000 in national currency to the General Fund 
for 1978. 
61. Mr. NAMDAR (Iran) said that he wished, on 
behalf of the Iranian delegation, to extend congratulations 
on the occasion of the Agency's 
twentieth anniversary to its Member States, the 
Director General, the Secretariat and the whole 
of the United Nations family. He also wished to 
congratulate the Director General on his reelection 
and wish him every success in the 
execution of the difficult tasks entrusted to him 
which could only become more onerous. He 
noted with satisfaction that in the course of its 
first two decades the Agency had made a significant 
contribution to the promotion of nuclear 
energy and to the cause of non-proliferation. 
62. The implementation of the nuclear power 
programme in Iran had proceeded apace in the 
past year. The construction of Iran's first 
nuclear power station with a total capacity of 
2400 MW had continued on schedule. Construction 
work had also begun on a second site where a 
total capacity of 1800 MW was to be installed. 
Site selection studies for Iran's fifth and sixth 
nuclear power stations were already being conducted 
and it was hoped to start construction work 
on those sites in the spring of 1978. Altogether 
those six power plants would generate 6600 MW. 
At the same time Iran was intensifying its efforts 
in the field of uranium prospecting. A ten-year 
programme making use of the most advanced 
techniques was being implemented. 
63. In order to meet the needs of the nuclear 
energy programme it had become necessary to 
reorganize the Atomic Energy Commission of 
Iran only three years after its creation. The 
capability of the research and development 
apparatus had been improved by structural 
reorganization, recruitment of additional staff, 
procurement of more equipment and the establishment 
of closer relations with various scientific 
institutions abroad, and some positive results 
had already been achieved. In addition, work on 
what would be one of Iran's principal research 
and development institutions, the Nuclear 
Technology Centre, was proceeding smoothly, 
64. In order to provide the technicians and 
managers required for its nuclear development, 
Iran was currently reshaping its educational and 
training facilities. Turning to the area of international 
relations, he observed that the past year 
had witnessed a further crystallization of some of 
the prevailing trends in the nuclear energy field. 
65. On the one hand, there was a greater 
awareness that nuclear power was the most 
viable source of energy available to the world 
-

community, and an increasing number of countries 
had shown an interest in its utilization. On the 
other hand, all countries were showing increasing 
concern about the dangers of proliferation 
inherent in the spread of nuclear technology and 
the possible impact of that technology on the 
quality of the environment. Those two seemingly 
conflicting preoccupations presented a constant 
challenge to statesmen the world over. In that 
connection Iran was convinced that that challenge 
could be met only by collective action undertaken 
in a healthy and constructive spirit, and those 
considerations caused it to feel that the Agency 
had an even more vital role to play. 

66. It was to be hoped that during the third 
decade of its existence the Agency would be given 
a greater capability to deal with the realities and 
increasing problems of international life. Iran 
was convinced that, if the Agency was not given 
the support it needed to negotiate the difficult 
passage ahead, precious time would be lost, 
problems would remain unsolved, and confusion 
and discord would result. 
67. However, in seeking stronger universal 
support for the Agency, he stressed that the 
organization must pursue universal objectives 
and not be guided by particularistic tendencies. 
He felt sure that all were aware of the dangers 
inherent in the latter approach for a world 
institution striving to preserve its integrity and 
its mission. 
68. In conclusion he wished to thank the Agency 
sincerely for the support it had given to Iran in 
developing its nuclear power programme. 
69. Mr. CARDENAS VALDES (Cuba), quoting 
figures to illustrate the significant progress made 
in the Agency's activities during its first twenty 
years, praised the efforts the Agency had made to 
increase technical assistance in the nuclear field 
to Member States with only limited resources 
and facilities. In Cuba, the use of nuclear 
techniques in medicine had undergone rapid 
development, as had also the research connected 
with introducing those techniques in agriculture, 
ore extraction and metallurgy, industry, 
hydrology and biomedicine. 
70. The decision to construct - with the help of 
the Soviet Union - the country's first nuclear 
power station, which was to be subject to the 
Agency's safeguards system, had revealed the 
need for a complete reorganization of the scientific 
and technical infrastructure in the nuclear 
domain; that was why in 1974 Cuba had established 
a National Commission for the Peaceful 
Utilization of Atomic Energy. The technical 
assistance provided by the Agency for medical, 
agricultural and industrial applications of 
radioisotopes had helped Cuba to establish the 
necessary infrastructure for introducing nuclear 
techniques and training specialists. In 1978, the 
country would start to benefit from a UNDP 
assistance project which would further widen the 
applications of nuclear techniques. 
8 



GC(XXI)/OR.196 


71. Although it recognized the value of Agency 
assistance, Cuba, like many other developing 
countries, believed that that assistance was not 
adequate. In 1978 the Cuban Government would 
increase its voluntary contribution to the General 
Fund and it urged the industrialized countries to 
increase their financial support of the Agency so 
that it would be able to expand its technical 
assistance. 
72. At the preceding session of the General 
Conference, the Cuban delegation had condemned 
the "binary" bomb, as a weapon which was 
capable of jeopardizing peace and international 
security. In 1977 it associated itself with worldwide 
protests against the decision of the United 
States Government to develop and manufacture the 
neutron bomb and guided missiles. That decision, 
which was absolutely incompatible with the Final 
Act of the Helsinki conference, created new 
difficulties in the struggle for peace. The Cuban 
Government fully supported the proposal of the 
Soviet Union, discussed in the Disarmament 
Committee at Geneva, which expressed opposition 
to the manufacture of new types of weapons for 
mass destruction, and he appealed to all Member 
States to pool their efforts in the interest of the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy. The Cuban 
Government, which regarded as justifiable the 
stand taken by all those scientists and technical 
organizations that were trying to bring about 
peace and world disarmament, welcomed the 
decision to exclude the regime of South Africa 
from the Board of Governors. 
73. In spite of the difficulties it encountered, 
Cuba was experiencing a definite economic upswing. 
The 24th anniversary of the start of the 
revolutionary movement had been celebrated by 
the entry into service of a number of manufacturing 
plants and of agricultural installations which 
were of great importance for the country. In 
addition, the first steps had been taken towards 
the construction of Cuba's first nuclear power 
station. 
74. Cuba, which was one of the Agency's 
founder Members, had been a pioneer in the 
introduction of nuclear techniques in biomedicine 
in the geographical region to which it belonged; 
it had also established important centres for 
research on the applications of those techniques. 
At the moment, the number of research workers 
and scientists in the nuclear domain was more 
than 150 and a large number of students would be 
specializing in particular branches of nuclear 
science in the socialist countries and in other 
advanced countries. Although atomic energy and 
nuclear techniques as yet played only a modest 
part in its economy, Cuba was paying special 
attention to the training of scientists and 
specialists because it realized the special 
importance of those techniques in many sectors. 
Against that background, Cuba considered that it 
could legitimately claim a seat on the Board of 
Governors in 1978. 
75. Nuclear energy had proved capable of 
making an effective contribution to economic 
development in a climate of peace, but unfortunately 
it had also been shown that it could 
be a weapon of large-scale destruction. Delegates 
should bear that duality in mind and do everything 
possible to step up the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 

76. Mr. ALER (Sweden) wanted first of all to 
congratulate the Agency on the occasion of its 
twentieth anniversary. The Agency had been for 
its Members a valuable instrument for the exchange 
of knowledge and experience as well as a centre 
for discussions and consultation. It was regarded 
as an essential vehicle for true international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
77. The Government of Sweden also wished to 
pay a tribute to the Director General, 
Mr. Sigvard Eklund, whose capacity and skill 
were highly valuable for the Agency's work. 
78. Energy and the problems it gave rise to 
were commanding increasing interest throughout 
the world and many countries were aware of the 
importance of energy planning on a national scale 
not only to meet their essential needs but also to 
conform to the requirements of safety and 
environmental conservation. That was the case 
in Sweden, where the question of nuclear energy, 
which was at the centre of the discussions on 
energy, also gave rise to grave concern at the 
political level. Opinions were divided as to what 
its future should be; some quarters feared the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons while the 
opposition of others was based on considerations 
of an ecological character, which should not be 
overlooked. 
79. The situation had changed greatly since the 
time when the Agency had been founded to further 
the contribution of atomic energy to world peace. 
Safety in nuclear matters had become a more 
urgent consideration than ever and had to be 
conceived in the broadest possible sense, covering 
all matters relating to the environment, health, 
operation of installations, physical protection 
and prevention of nuclear arms proliferation, 
theft, sabotage, and blackmail. The development 
of nuclear energy was contingent on the solution of 
all those problems. That was a challenge which 
the Agency had to face up to and which demanded 
further efforts on its part as well as an intensification 
of international co-operation. 
80. The Swedish Government, realizing the risks 
involved in the use of nuclear energy, especially 
in regard to the processing of spent fuel and the 
disposal of radioactive waste, did not intend to 
make increasing use of that form of energy until 
those problems had been solved. Six nuclear 
power stations now in operation were producing 
one fifth of Sweden's electricity supply. New 
legislation imposed conditions on the entry into 
service of additional power stations, especially 
in regard to the reprocessing of spent fuel and 
the storage of radioactive waste. A special 
commission had been entrusted with the task of 
preparing a set of alternative plans for the 
production of energy during the period 1978-90. 

-9 



GC(XXI)/OR.196 


At least one of those solutions envisaged the 
gradual phasing out of nuclear power during the 
next decade. In reaching a decision, the commission 
would draw on the lessons of experience 
and take into account the results of research on 
the safety of nuclear power stations and their 
effects on the environment, 

81. The Swedish Government shared the anxiety 
of a great many countries concerning the danger 
of nuclear weapons proliferation, which in 
reality was of concern to the safety of all 
countries, advanced or developing, with or without 
nuclear weapons. It was in the interest of 
all to participate actively in the international 
efforts to minimize that danger. The system of 
safeguards administered by the Agency was 
certainly one of the most important elements in 
that effort. In view of advances in technology 
and of the growing number of nuclear installations, 
the system deserved to be supported by all 
Member States and accorded top priority. For 
the Swedish Government, NPT marked the path 
to be followed. 
82. Before exporting nuclear materials, 
Sweden felt bound to ensure that the recipient 
had ratified NPT or was applying the Agency's 
safeguards in all its nuclear installations. In 
that connection it had been glad to learn that the 
"London Guidelines" would be communicated to 
the Director General who, in turn, would make 
those documents available to all interested 
Member States. Sweden also considered that, 
in deciding between various technical alternatives 
in the nuclear field, non-proliferation considerations, 
environmental concerns and safety 
were the essential elements to be taken into 
account. Sweden would gladly make its contribution 
to the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
Evaluation (INFCE) in which the Agency could 
play a very important part and which would help 
in eliminating the dangers of nuclear proliferation 
and the threats to the environment and to safety 
associated with fuel reprocessing and the storage 
of nuclear waste. 
83. In the matter of technical assistance, too, 
Sweden considered that the Agency should be 
guided by safety considerations and by the desire 
to prevent proliferation, especially when responding 
to the increasing energy needs of 
developing countries. Sweden also recognized 
the important role of the Agency in regard to 
nuclear applications in medicine and agriculture. 
84. The Swedish Government had for a long 
time supported the technical assistance programme 
and the training programmes of the 
Agency and was able to make a contribution to the 
General Fund for 1977 in the amount indicated by 
the Director General in his letter to Member 
States. The Swedish Government would also 
pursue its technical assistance and training 
activities on behalf of developing Member States, 
with the support of the Swedish International 
Development Authority (SIDA). The funds that it 
made available through the IAEA were intended 
principally for use of nuclear techniques in 
agriculture. 
85. In conclusion he mentioned that the Agency's 
future programme might call for some reassessment 
in order to give higher priority to the 
question of nuclear safety. 
86. Mr. VIZCAINO MURRAY (Mexico) said he 
was convinced that the future of the world 
depended on the development of nuclear power 
and the peaceful or non-peaceful use made of it. 
The present regular session of the General 
Conference was opening auspiciously - with the 
election of Mr. Etemad, the delegate of Iran, to 
the presidency and the appointment once again of 
Mr. Eklund to the post of Director General of 
the Agency, 
87. Mexico was in favour of amending 
Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute so as to achieve an 
equitable representation of the different geographical 
areas on the Board of Governors and 
thereby increase the effectiveness of its work 
and decisions, and hoped that the representation of 
Latin America would be enlarged. In that 
connection, he considered that decisions committing 
the Agency should be taken by the Board, 
which - after the General Conference - was the 
organ most representative of the international 
community within the Agency. In all international 
bodies, Mexico had always supported efforts to 
ensure the well-being of mankind and respect for 
spiritual values. It had constantly endeavoured 
to promote a doctrine of peace based on mutual 
respect which would guarantee the dignity and 
the right to self-determination of all peoples. 
The principle of sovereignty was the basis of 
modern political thought. The least violation of 
that principle jeopardized peace. Hence, Mexico 
considered that the application of safeguards to 
technical assistance - a question which had been 
discussed in the Board of Governors - would run 
counter to the free exchange of information, 
which had been enshrined as a principle in 
Article IV of NPT and might also detract from 
his country's sovereignty, which would be a 
violation of Article III of the Agency's Statute. 
The Mexican delegation strongly urged delegates 
to oppose the application of safeguards to technical 
assistance. When considering the utilization of 
atomic energy, it was necessary to make a careful 
distinction between the end and the means. 
Nuclear energy, which had appeared on the world 
scene in a dramatic and inhumane manner, should 
now be used only in fields where it could do good, 
such as industry, medicine, agriculture and 
biology. 
88. For peace to be preserved - and it seemed 
to be somewhat in jeopardy - substitutes would 
have to be found for the conventional forms of 
energy. Mexico did not believe that man must 
fight man and that war reflected some basic 
human instinct; on the contrary, it believed that 
mutual support was a means of defence and a 
guarantee of survival. Mexico was convinced of 
the need to prevent nuclear proliferation, although 
it believed that those countries which had embarked 
on the arms race had done so for the 
purpose of dissuasion. With total disarmament, 
it would be possible to use the vast resources 
- 10 



GC(XXI)/OR.196 


otherwise spent on arms in solving the problem way of meeting the ever-growing needs of the 
of hunger. whole world. 

89. In the field of international law, Mexico was 
endeavouring to ensure that the provisions of the 
Treaty fort the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America (the Tlatelolco Treaty) were 
complied with. The Tlatelolco Treaty reflected 
the desire of countries in the region to use atomic 
energy solely for peaceful purposes in accelerating 
the economic and social development of the people 
of the 22 Latin American States which had signed 
it. The provisions of Articles 13, 14 and 23 of 
the Treaty had been put into effect, and Mexico 
had learned with considerable satisfaction that 
the United States had signed Additional Protocol I; 
he hoped that its example would be followed by 
other countries. As far as Mexico was concerned, 
the obligations which the Organization for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
imposed in the safeguards area and those which 
derived from NPT constituted a double guarantee 
of non-proliferation and denuclearization. The 
Mexican Government was pursuing a nuclear policy 
based on peaceful principles and social morality; 
it believed that, through nuclear energy, mankind 
could achieve well-being, security and solidarity. 
90. Mr. EL-GUEBEILY (Egypt) congratulated 
the President of the Conference on his unanimous 
election and expressed the conviction that the 
General Conference, under his wise and able 
guidance, would reach constructive decisions 
enabling the Agency to proceed further with its 
mission. He also thanked the Government and 
people of Austria for their unfailing hospitality 
over the years. He also wished to congratulate 
the Director General on his re-election for a 
further term of office. For the period of nearly 
20 years during which he had been head of the 
Agency, the Director General had earned the 
respect and confidence of all; as an outstanding 
scientist and capable administrator, he had been 
able to make the Agency one of the most smoothlyrunning 
organizations in the United Nations family 
and the Egyptian delegation was confident that he 
would continue to deal competently with the 
challenging tasks confronting peaceful nuclear 
development today and in the future. On the 
occasion of the twenty-first anniversary of the 
Agency, the entire staff was to be congratulated 
on its devotion and unflagging efforts. 
91. Nuclear energy at the present juncture gave 
rise to a number of fundamental issues requiring 
important decisions and constructive action. The 
most important problem was to ensure that nuclear 
power could provide for future energy needs and, 
as a consequence, it was necessary to ensure 
the supply of the required amounts of nuclear 
material. 
92. Added to that was a pressing need to set 
up fuel cycle facilities of sufficient capacity for 
the available resources to be used efficiently 
and for the safe disposal of radioactive wastes. 
Over the past few years nuclear energy had shown 
itself to be a safe, reliable and competitive source 
for energy production, as well as an indispensable 
93. If the rate of progress of modern civilization 
was to be maintained, nuclear energy was the only 
viable alternative to conventional energy. That 
was what in fact had emerged from the Salzburg 
Conference held in May. 
94. Despite the doubts and uncertainties that 
had been expressed, the reassessments and the 
slowing down of nuclear programmes, he was 
convinced that in the near future more concentrated 
efforts would be made towards settling 
the major issues on the technological, political 
and financial fronts. The estimates of nuclear 
power capacity presented at Salzburg were of the 
order of 200 000 MW(e) by 1980, 900 000 MW(e) 
by 1990, and 1 300 000 MW(e) by the year 2000. 
Whereas nuclear energy now accounted for less 
than 10% of electricity production and 3% of 
primary energy generation, the figures would 
climb to 35% and 15% respectively, by the turn of 
the century. 
95. As a result, there would be new tasks and 
obligations for the Agency to deal with, such as 
suitable programmes for coping with requirements, 
adjustment of priorities, planning of 
financial resources, safeguards, the environment, 
prospecting for nuclear materials, fuel cycle 
facilities, radioactive waste management and 
disposal, and the use of nuclear explosive devices 
for peaceful purposes; the special needs of 
developing countries and their desire for increasing 
aid by the Agency in those fields were selfevident. 
96. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
the Agency's programmes for the past few years, 
and also the programme for 1978 now under consideration, 
placed greater emphasis on those 
matters. Nevertheless, the Agency should 
expand those activities still further. It should 
consider ways of helping suppliers and beneficiaries 
to ensure the timely supply of materials 
and fuels required for the uninterrupted operation 
of nuclear power plants. The Agency should be 
urged to make provision for the conclusion of 
international arrangements which would enable 
developing countries to be sure of supplies of 
uranium and fuel cycle services on a long-term 
basis. In view of the political and economic 
constraints imposed upon the nuclear fuel market 
today, that was one of the most pressing needs 
for the future development of nuclear energy. 
97. Another important area to which the 
Agency should direct its efforts was the exploration 
for and exploitation of primary nuclear 
materials. It was to be noted that the consumption 
of uranium would rise sharply over the coming 
two decades. It was estimated that by the year 
2000 the total uranium requirements of the world 
(exclusive of countries with centrally planned 
economies) would average 2.2 million tons with 
recycling, and 2. 9 million tons without recycling. 
The new nuclear policy recently announced by 
the United States of America would increase the 

- 11 



GC(XXI)/OR. 196 

world demand for uranium still further. Unless 
new uranium resources were made available, the 
entire future of nuclear energy would be endangered. 
Furthermore, if that situation continued, 
sharp increases in the prices of uranium 
and services could be expected, to the detriment 
of the favourable economic position of nuclear 
energy at present. 

98. Although intensive prospecting for uranium, 
thorium and other nuclear materials was under 
way in a number of countries, that activity was 
still limited by a shortage of funds and by a lack 
of experience in quite a few developing countries. 
The reserves existing in those countries, which 
covered a major portion of the globe, were still 
largely unexplored. The Agency was urged more 
than ever before to promote co-operative efforts 
in large-scale uranium exploration and exploitation 
projects and to provide appropriate technical 
assistance in that work. It should also study ways 
and means of ensuring the availability of financial 
resources at the international level and of implementing 
new, large-scale projects in the developing 
regions. 
99. With regard to the use of nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes, it was common knowledge 
that that potentially important type of peaceful 
nuclear application stemmed from the obligations 
undertaken by nuclear-weapon States under 
Article V of NPT. Such applications had a great 
economic potential for important engineering 
projects, an example of which had been given in 
a document that his delegation had circulated for 
the General Conference in 1976, namely the 
Qattara Depression Project[6]j which concerned 
a solar-hydroelectric power generation project 
permitting a peak electrical capacity of 
10 000 MW to be reached. 
100. The General Conference was well aware of 
the complexity of the situation that had led to a 
slowing down in the development of that important 
sector of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Nevertheless, Egypt was confident that those 
difficulties were not insurmountable and it therefore 
believed that the time had come for the 
Agency to adopt an acceptable and well-defined 
policy to assist in overcoming the difficulties 
involved and to devise a programme by which the 
objectives set forth in Article V of NPT could be 
implemented, a task which had rightly been 
entrusted to the Agency. 
101. It was gratifying to note that the Ad Hoc 
Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for 
Peaceful Purposes set up by the Board had 
submitted its report. It was to be hoped that the 
Group would continue its efforts to find a solution 
to the important problems which, according to 
the report, were still outstanding. It was 
essential for the Agency to define the steps 
necessary for making a comprehensive survey 
of possible projects, for encouraging feasibility 

[6] Document GC(XX)/INF/165/Add. 1. 
studies in connection with specific projects and 
for preparing the ground for the implementation 
of projects which were found to be technically 
and economically feasible and environmentally 
acceptable. It was encouraging to see that the 
Director General had called for an advisory 
group meeting to brief the Agency, among other 
things, on procedures for taking action in 
connection with the later stages of PNE projects. 

102. In his opening statement the Director 
General had referred to NPT as a milestone in 
the efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation, an 
opinion which was shared by his delegation. 
Egypt had taken an active part in negotiation of 
NPT at all its stages. It had also co-sponsored 
a resolution in the General Assembly of the 
United Nations commending the Treaty and 
urging that it be opened for signature by all 
States; Egypt had been amongst the first to sign. 
His country considered full accession to NPT by 
all countries to be a prerequisite for lasting 
peace in the Middle East. Egypt, for its part, 
would spare no effort to achieve that objective. 
103. His country's policy of non-proliferation 
had been demonstrated by the co-sponsoring of 
two resolutions in the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, the first relating to the denuclearization 
of Africa and the second to the 
creation of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle 
East. 
104. Egypt had joined with other States in submitting 
a draft amendment to Article VI of the 
Statute in an effort to achieve a limited increase 
in the number of seats on the Board for the regions 
"Africa" and "Middle East and South Asia". The 
matter was to be discussed as item 11 of the 
agenda, but his delegation wished to make it 
clear even at the present stage that the amendment 
was based on the principle of equitable 
representation. That principle, which was 
mentioned in Article VI, had not been applied to 
the two regions under consideration and it was 
to be hoped that the General Conference would 
set right that injustice. 
105. Egypt had continued to promote the peaceful 
uses of nuclear techniques. It was making 
progress towards the construction of its first 
nuclear power plant, with a capacity of 600 MW(e). 
The bilateral co-operation agreement between 
the United States of America and Egypt, already 
initialled, was expected to be signed in the near 
future and negotiations for finalization of the 
contract with the construction firm were nearly 
complete. 
106. The power plant was only the first of a 
series which, by the end of the century, would 
represent a total output of 5000-6000 MW, i.e. 
40% of the country's total installed capacity. For 
that reason a Nuclear Power Authority had been 
set up. Uranium prospecting and mining had 
continued and, to cope with the estimated need 
for some 16 000 tons of uranium by the end of 
the century, a Nuclear Materials Authority had 
also been established. The latter was in the 
- 12 



GC(XXI)/OR. 196 


process of implementing national programmes 
and negotiating with foreign firms on the same 
basis as in the oil sector. 


107. A National Centre for Radiation Technology-
was to start operation in the present year. It 
would include a cobalt-60 source, with an ultimate 
capacity of 1 million curies, and a 1. 5-MeV linear 
accelerator. The equipment would be used to 
sterilize medical equipment as well as for 
research and development. 
108. The Egyptian delegation shared the view 
that there was an imbalance between the regulatory 
and promotional activities of the Agency. While 
fully supporting the former, it noted that the 
target for voluntary contributions was still far 
below the expectations and needs of the developing 
countries. It urged the Agency to seek ways and 
means of raising the target, including the setting 
up of criteria (which took account of rates of 
inflation and fluctuations in exchange rates) as a 
basis for calculating it, and to consider, if 
necessary, supplementing the voluntary contributions 
by other resources. 
109. His Government had always supported the 
Agency's activities, particularly where technical 
assistance was concerned. It had therefore 
decided to maintain its voluntary contribution for 
1978 at the same level as for 1977, which 
amount represented a payment greatly in excess 
of its assessed contribution. 
110. On the occasion of the Agency's twentieth 
anniversary, the Egyptian delegation wished to 
record its deep appreciation for the Agency's 
achievements. It felt sure that, thanks to its own 
experience and to the support given it by the 
international community, the Agency would consolidate 
its mission in the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. 
111. Mr. KATORI (Japan) congratulated 
Mr. Etemad on his unanimous election as 
President of the twenty-first regular session of 
the General Conference of the IAEA. He firmly 
believed that the Conference would be a success. 
112. The General Conference was celebrating 
the Agency's twentieth anniversary in 1977. 
During those twenty years there had been remarkable 
progress, quantitatively, as well as 
qualitatively, in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy. When the IAEA had been established, its 
Members had expected it to achieve great results 
in that field although at that time those had been 
only pious hopes. At present, the peaceful use 
of atomic energy had become a reality in various 
parts of the world thanks to the international cooperation 
established by the Agency. The peaceful 
use of atomic energy could not be promoted without 
international co-operation, and the IAEA had 
played a major role in that respect. 
113. In Japan, promotion of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy had always been inseparably 
linked with the Agency. In 1959 the country had 
obtained, through the IAEA, three tons of natural 
uranium for its first domestically built research 
reactor; it had also been the first country to 
conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
Since then, Japan had accepted IAEA safeguards 
voluntarily and had co-operated in their application. 

114. During the same period, Japan had made 
great progress in the use of atomic energy for 
peaceful purposes. Construction of the advanced 
Calder Hall type reactor power plant had begun in 
1960 and in 1966 the plant had become operational. 
Since then, Japan had been making efforts to 
construct light-water reactor power plants. At 
present, 13 nuclear power plants with a total 
output of 7430 MW were supplying 7% of the total 
electric power produced in Japan. According to 
Japan's programme, that figure was expected to 
reach 24. 4% in 1985, or 7. 4% of the total primary 
energy demand. As Japan was not endowed with 
any significant energy resources such as oil, 
coal, natural gas etc., it had to develop nuclear 
power generation, establish a nuclear fuel cycle 
and introduce fast-breeder reactors. In fact, 
his Government regarded it as indispensable for 
a complete nuclear fuel cycle to be established in 
order to benefit from nuclear energy to the 
maximum extent possible and to assure its use 
on a long-term basis. 

115. With regard to uranium resources, Japan 
was instituting prospection for uranium resources 
overseas. He could not but hope that uraniumproducing 
countries would remain conscious of 
their international responsibilities and would make 
efforts to provide a stable supply of uranium to 
meet international needs. As far as uranium 
enrichment was concerned, Japan was dependent 
on overseas facilities. However, research and 
development work on enrichment technology had 
been carried out and the expected results had 
been achieved. It had thus been possible to 
embark on the construction of a centrifuge pilot 
plant at the beginning of 1977. 
116. Regarding the construction of power 
reactors, light-water reactors were being developed 
mainly by private companies, and 
advanced reactors such as the advanced thermal 
reactor and fast-breeder reactor were being 
studied in the Government sector in close cooperation 
with private companies. The experimental 
fast-breeder reactor JOYO had become 
critical in April 1977, and construction of a 
fast-breeder reactor was expected to start in 
1978. Construction of a prototype advanced 
thermal reactor was under way and the reactor 
was expected to become critical in 1978. 
117. To establish the nuclear fuel cycle, it was 
necessary that the reprocessing of spent fuel 
and management of radioactive waste should be 
carried out in a suitable manner. To that end, 
Japan had been making enormous efforts to consolidate 
those back-end elements of the nuclear 
fuel cycle. It had had to wait ten years and to 
spend $200 million to complete construction of 
the Tokai reprocessing facility at the end of 
1976. A cold test had been successfully carried 
out and the facility had begun hot operation on 
22 September 1977. 
- 13 



GC(XXI)/OR. 196 


118. Japan, while attempting to set up a nuclear 
fuel cycle as part of its long-term energy policy, 
recognized that many other countries were also 
facing the nuclear fuel cycle problem. The 
Director General had shown commendable foresight 
when he had chosen, two years previously, 
that particular problem as the main subject for 
the Salzburg Conference. 
119. The Agency's study of different aspects of 
a regional nuclear fuel cycle concept would have 
to be conducted in the light of changes and 
development in the world situation. In that connection 
Japan was convinced that the problem of 
reprocessing irradiated fuel was an important 
aspect of that concept: it would have to be 
studied in the context of the established programme 
of peaceful nuclear applications and 
should correspond to the actual demand for 
energy. 
120. As to radioactive waste, and in particular 
high-level waste, there were various urgent 
problems to be solved: solidification of waste, 
burial, disposal at sea etc. The Agency's 
activities in those fields were very important, 
and international co-operation was essential there 
as well. 
121. The establishment of the nuclear fuel cycle 
was vital for the development of the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy. However, the maintenance of 
world peace and security also required that 
nuclear materials used or produced in the course 
of peaceful nuclear activities should not be 
diverted for military purposes. Japan was convinced 
that all those who intended to construct 
nuclear power plants had the obligation of ensuring 
that proliferation was prevented. NPT 
played a fundamental part in that endeavour and 
was widely recognized throughout the world at / 
present. Nevertheless, in order that the effectiveness 
of NPT might be further enhanced, Japan 
earnestly hoped that it would become more universal 
and therefore urged those States that 
were not yet parties to NPT to accede to it. 

122. The Japanese Government considered it 
essential that, in accordance with the provisions 
of NPT, the inalienable right of non-nuclearweapon 
States parties to NPT to develop the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be preserved, 
and that there should be no discrimination 
between nuclear-weapon States and nonnuclear-
weapon States with respect to the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. 
123. The Agency had, by its safeguards activities, 
contributed to preventing the diversion of nuclear 
energy for military purposes. Nevertheless, in 
view of the rapid development of the applications 
of atomic energy, the Agency should further 
improve the safeguards system. The Japanese 
Government was determined to co-operate fully 
with the Agency in that endeavour. For instance, 
the Japanese Government had concluded with the 
Agency a cost-free research contract on the 
application of safeguards to reprocessing 
facilities, and had undertaken to develop a better 
control method for reprocessing facilities at the 
Tokai pilot plant. 

124. A further important problem was the management 
of plutonium. The study undertaken by 
the Agency on that subject was very interesting. 
In connection with the international fuel cycle 
evaluation programme, a study would commence 
in October on the possibility of establishing a 
cycle that would satisfy the demand for power 
while allowing the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
to develop as fas as possible and assuring the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The 
Japanese Government was willing to take an 
active part in that work. It also welcomed the 
Agency's participation in the programme; the 
Agency's long experience and competence in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy should enable it 
to make a valuable contribution. 
125. As to the practical measures to be taken, 
it would be necessary to avoid compromising the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy by imposing 
duplicating or unnecessarily complicated regulations 
or by unilaterally interrupting the supply 
of nuclear fuel. 
126. One of the other important problems in 
that respect was the physical protection of nuclear 
materials. The internationa flow of nuclear 
materials was increasing rapidly and the transport 
of those materials presented particular 
difficulties since their physical protection needed 
to be ensured. Japan therefore considered it 
necessary to set up as soon as possible an international 
programme to provide for the protection 
of those materials during international transfer. 
The Government of Japan was ready to co-operate 
fully with other States and with the Agency in 
drafting an international agreement to deal with 
that question, 
127. Nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes 
also posed an important and complex problem. 
The report on economic, safety and legal aspects 
of nuclear explosions submitted by the Ad Hoc 
Advisory Group was of great value since it made 
it possible to understand the situation better. He 
wished to thank the members of the Ad Hoc 
Advisory Group and in particular its Chairman, 
Mr. Wilson, who had directed the work of the 
Group with the greatest competence and had 
succeeded in drawing up a very comprehensive 
report. On a number of occasions the Japanese 
Government had stressed that nuclear explosive 
devices, whatever peaceful purposes they were 
intended for, could not from the technical point 
of view be distinguished from nuclear weapons 
and that the proliferation of PNE devices was no 
different from the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. The Government of Japan also believed 
that no project should be carried out except under 
the appropriate international control and he 
therefore took the present opportunity to reiterate 
that those aspects should never be lost sight of 
when questions relating to PNE were considered. 
He hoped that the Agency, with the help of the 
report submitted by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group, 
would continue to play an important role in the 
- 14 



GC(XXI)/OR. 196 


international efforts which were aimed at 
achieving universal acceptance of those basic 
principles concerning PNE. 

128. In order to set up a nuclear fuel cycle it 
was also necessary to bear safety problems in 
mind. Practice and experience had shown that 
nuclear energy production was safe, even when 
compared with that of other types of energy. 
However, it should be recognized that, in the 
mind of the general public, nuclear energy had 
certain esoteric characteristics which gave rise 
to apprehension. Japan therefore approved the 
action taken by the Director General to intensify 
the public relations activities of the Agency, 
Those activities should be supplemented by the 
application of security standards eleborated by 
the Agency, in particular by safety codes and 
safety guides for power reactors, which would 
provide Member States with useful guidelines. 
129. Energy from nuclear fission was, of course, 
not the only way of applying nuclear energy. The 
use of nuclear fusion was the dream of all 
humanity. The hope of achieving that dream was 
cherished particularly in a country like Japan 
which had hardly any sources of energy within 
its territory. It was therefore perfectly natural 
that Japan should undertake intensive work on the 
practical application of nuclear fusion. The first 
stage of research and development work aimed at 
achieving a controlled nuclear fusion reaction had 
been completed in 1974 and the expected results 
had been obtained. Since 1975 Japan had been 
engaged on the second stage and, after drawing 
up detailed plans for a large-scale facility, the 
JT60, it had begun the construction of the plant 
at the beginning of 1977. With regard to future 
research and development work on nuclear fusion, 
Japan believed that close international cooperation 
was indispensable. For its part, 
Japan was ready to co-operate, through ex-
changes of information and in other ways, with 
countries such as the United States of America 
and the Soviet Union, which were also understood 
to be considering the construction of large-scale 
installations. 
130. Nuclear energy contributed to the well-being 
of humanity in ways other than that of power 
production. For example, isotopes and radiation 
found practical applications in agriculture, biochemistry, 
industry and basic science. Those 
were areas in which the atom had contributed, and 
continued to contribute, to the well-being of mankind. 
Japan was convinced that the importance of 
the contribution of the atom in those spheres 
would increase rapidly in the future. Japan 
would give firm support to the activities of the 
Agency designed to meet that growing need and 
would therefore welcome the opportunity to 
continue providing the services of experts in 
those fields. 

131. The contribution of the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy to the well-being of mankind 
manifested itself in many forms. Japan was 
convinced that one of the most important tasks 
of the Agency and of Member States was to enable 
all countries, whatever their level of development, 
to gain access to those advantages. The technical 
assistance of the Agency to developing countries 
was at present playing an essential role by transferring 
achievements in the nuclear field, by 
raising the technical level of those countries and 
by facilitating the assimilation of those advantages. 
In the past, Japan had not only paid all its 
voluntary contributions but had also provided 
technical help in the nuclear field by spending 
approximately $350 000 every year on bilateral 
technical co-operation. In 1978, Japan intended 
to pay a contribution of $650 000 whereas the 
total amount set as the target was $7 million. 
132. Japan would also help strengthen bilateral 
co-operation. It intended to participate in the 
RCA programme in Asia and proposed to provide 
positive support to projects undertaken under that 
programme by supplying equipment and experts. 
He was pleased to note that, during the five years 
that had elapsed since the beginning of RCA, the 
research projects were beginning to bear fruit. 
He hoped that Japan's co-operation would contribute 
to the achievement of the programme's aims. 
133. During the past few years, as the activities 
of the Agency increased, the organization's 
budget had assumed immense proportions. It 
was clear that recent price increases and 
fluctuations in the exchange rate had had a considerable 
effect and he was compelled to note 
that the rate of increase of the budget was much 
greater than that of the national budgets of 
Member States. Recognizing the importance of 
the Agency's activities, Japan was perfectly 
willing to co-operate with it. However, the 
financial burden had become very heavy for 
Member States. For that reason he stressed the 
need to keep the Agency's budget within the 
necessary and justifiable limits. The Government 
of Japan hoped sincerely that the Secretariat 
would do everything possible to execute its budget 
efficiently and thereby to lighten the burden on 
Member States. 
• The meeting rose at 1. 30 p.m. 

GC(XXI)/OR. 197 
May 1978* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 29 September 1977, at 10. 20 a.m. 

President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 

Item of the 

agenda** 
Subject Paragraphs 

5 
Arrangements for the Conference 1 -5 

(b) 
Closing date of the session and 1 -5 
opening date of the next session 
(continued) 

- 
Announcement by the President 6 

7 
General debate and annual report for 1976 7 - 126 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Zambia 
7-17 

Finland 
18 - 35 

Turkey 
36 - 43 

Bangladesh 
44 - 56 

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
57 - 76 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea 77 - 83 

Indonesia 
84 - 101 

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
102 - 105 

Afghanistan 
106 - 111 

Netherlands 
112 - 117 

Romania 
118 - 126 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 13 October 1977. 
** GC(XXI)/591. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR. 197 

THE RECORD 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND 
OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
(continued) [1] 
1. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 
of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to 
fix a closing date for the session, on the recommendation 
of the General Committee. 
2. The General Committee had considered the 
matter and had authorized him to recommend on 
its behalf that 30 September 1977 be fixed as the 
closing date. 
• 3. The recommendation of the General 
Committee, was accepted. 
4. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference 
that the General Committee had recommended 
fixing Monday, 18 September 1978, as the opening 
date of the twenty-second regular session, which, 
in accordance with Rule 7 of the Rules of 
Procedure, would be held in Vienna. 
• 5. The recommendation of the General 
Committee was accepted. 
ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT 

6. The PRESIDENT said that, before turning 
to the general debate, he wished to inform the 
Conference that pledged voluntary contributions 
to the General Fund for 1978 currently amounted 
to US $5 696 088, namely 81% of the target of 
$7 million that had been fixed. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 
1976 (GC(XXI)/580) (continued[2]) 

7. Mr. SIBAJENE (Zambia) congratulated the 
President of the twenty-first session of the General 
Conference on his election and assured him of the 
support of the Zambian delegation. 
8. Like most developing countries that were 
Members of the Agency, Zambia had received 
technical assistance from the Agency in 1976 and 
1977. A large portion of the sums provided had 
gone into prospecting for radioactive minerals. 
While Zambia welcomed the fact that notwithstanding 
its limited resources the Agency had 
given its assistance in that field, it would like to 
see the Agency show the same responsiveness to 
other requests it had submitted with a view to 
developing the country's capacity to exploit nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. For some time, 
Zambia's energy requirements would have to be 
[1] GC(XXI)/OR. 195, para. 3. 
[2] GC(XXI)/OR. 196. 
met from conventional sources, so that in the 
immediate future the application of nuclear 
techniques would be mainly in the fields of 
medicine, agriculture, industry and basic 
research. Thereafter, however, the country 

would have to turn to other sources of energy, 

including nuclear energy. For that reason Zambia 
would make frequent appeals for Agency assistance 

and he hoped its appeals would be heard. 

9. Since many developing countries had needs 
similar to those of Zambia, the Agency should 
devise new ways of meeting such requests for 
assistance. For that reason Zambia was anxiously 
awaiting the report of the ad hoc committee 
that had been set up to study problems of technical 
assistance, and he hoped that the positive recommendations 
of that committee would be implemented, 
taking fully into account the appeals often 
made by the developing countries in the past. 
10. Zambia was concerned about the permanent 
imbalance between the promotional and the regulatory 
functions of the Agency. While not discouraging 
the Agency's efforts in respect ot its 
regulatory functions, Zambia strongly believed 
that the Member States in which the greatest need 
existed for regulation could easily bear most of 
its cost, which would enable the Agency to concentrate 
its efforts on its promotional activities. 
Zambia adopted that attitude because the majority 
of developing countries, if not all, depended on 
assistance from the Agency and would continue to 
do so for developing their nuclear programmes. 
11. At the twentieth session the Zambian delegation 
had requested the Agency not to sign any 
agreement with South Africa concerning that 
country's acquisition of nuclear facilities and had 
also informed the Agency of the political situation 
created by the South African regime in southern 
Africa. He was not surprised to learn that South 
Africa had used those facilities for military purposes. 
Being a neighbour of that country Zambia 
knew the military intentions of South Africa, which 
were principally to defend the infamous apartheid 
policy and to commit acts of aggression against 
the neighbouring black States. He thanked the 
USSR for the timely action it had taken in revealing 
sites in Namibia for testing nuclear weapons. 
12. He reminded delegates that Namibia was 
illegally held by South Africa in order to oppress 
and exploit the black majority. He reiterated 
what had been said by his delegation both in the 
Board and the General Conference and in other 
international forums, namely that the presence of 
racist South Africa in the Agency and its acquisition 
of nuclear technology had been and continued 
to be an inimical act and a danger to peace not 
only in southern Africa but in the world at large. 
Those who had given assistance to the racist 
regime to enable it to acquire nuclear weapons, 
those who had shut their eyes to the diabolic 
nature and activities of that regime, those who 
overtly or covertly had defended white supremacy, 
those who had strengthened the economic muscle 
of that regime, could not escape blame now or in 
the future for the consequences being witnessed in 
-2 



GC(XXI)/OR. 197 


that part of the world. Against whom were South 
Africa's nuclear weapons intended to be used? 
Against the black peoples of Africa. Proponents 
of apartheid would stop at nothing to maintain their 
ill-conceived supremacy. 

13. To put an end to that dangerous and vile 
system, his delegation proposed that the Board of 
Governors should, at its next session, look at the 
provisions of the Agency's Statute and amend them 
so as to ensure the expulsion of the racist regime 
of South Africa from the Agency, with all the 
attendant consequences. He thanked all those 
Members of the Board who, in June, had voted to 
remove South Africa from the Board of Governors 
and appealed to countries which had sided with 
South Africa to search their consciences and align 
themselves with the majority. 
14. The fears and suspicions of his country 
regarding the proliferation of nuclear weapons had 
continued to increase and to be confirmed since 
1968. The latest developments in racist South 
Africa demonstrated what a mockery was being 
made of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)[3J: indeed, one could not 
but note that South Africa had actually been helped 
by countries that had signed NPT. Zambia would 
support all efforts aimed at the total destruction 
of nuclear weapons. 
15. His delegation had taken note of the 
Secretariat's reply to the questions it had raised 
at the fourth meeting of the Committee of the 
Whole with regard to the possible use for military 
purposes by South Africa of nuclear facilities 
covered by the Agency's safeguards. Since then, 
his delegation had studied the reply which, in its 
opinion, cast no light on a disturbing situation. 
16. The Zambian Government noted with satisfaction 
that during the twenty years of the Agency1 s 
existence its membership had grown from 54 to 
110. It was against that background that his delegation 
supported the resolution aimed at increasing 
the number of Members of the Board of Governors. 
Being convinced that the proposed increase would 
in no way compromise the effectiveness of the 
Board, his delegation had concluded that there was 
a need to increase the membership of the Board in 
order to ensure equitable representation of the 
regions of Africa and of the Middle East and South 
Asia. 
17. The Secretariat should not feel discouraged 
if more criticism than applause was levelled at it; 
it should continue to fulfil its functions with 
increased determination and punctiliousness. His 
delegation wished to thank the Director General and 
his staff, and also to thank Austria for the part it 
had played in the organization of the present 
session and, generally speaking, for its hospitality. 
18. Mr. PIETINEN (Finland) said that, twenty 
years after the Agency had been founded, its 
[3] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
objectives as defined in the Statute were more 
pertinent than ever. There was an increasing 
trend to strengthen the contribution of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy to world peace, health and 
prosperity, and the public had also realized that 
those uses should serve no military purpose. The 
Finnish Government recognized the complexity of 
most of the questions relating to nuclear energy, 
especially the proliferation of nuclear explosives, 
and it commended the Agency for the work it had 
performed to attain its objectives. By its very 
nature and by virtue of its Statute, the Agency was 
the principal international body concerned with 
non-proliferation, and its past performance could 
only serve to strengthen that role. 

19. World peace and international security were 
the common objectives of all present. Confrontation 
was no longer a rational solution to international 
problems. The Finnish Government was 
convinced that detente was the only realistic basis 
for international relations. There was a definite 
interaction between disarmament and de'tente, and 
the Finnish delegation believed that in the long run 
detente could only subsist if the arms race were 
curbed. 
20. The year 1977 had with reason been called 
the year of negotiations. Practically all crucial 
questions, not only disarmament, had been 
discussed during the year in various international 
assemblies, and it had been recognized that consensus 
could result only from dialogue. A 
strategic arms limitation treaty and a complete 
ban on nuclear tests would help to prevent the 
spread of nuclear arms. Other negotiations on 
disarmament would certainly facilitate the process 
of detente. 
21. In regard to the crucial problem of nonproliferation, 
the past year had been marked by 
important events. Two more States, Panama and 
Switzerland, had ratified NPT, thus bringing the 
total membership to 102. Several new safeguards 
agreements had also been approved by the Agency. 
22. In agreements relating to the transfer of 
nuclear materials and technology, more and more 
attention was being paid to non-proliferation, 
although the main nuclear exporters had not yet 
come to an agreement on that issue, which was 
regarded by many as essential to the success of 
non-proliferation efforts. 
23. The Finnish Government regretted that a 
number of important States carrying out intensive 
nuclear programmes were still not parties to NPT. 
The Finnish Government had on many occasions 
stressed the non-proliferation question and asked 
that measures be taken to strengthen the nonproliferation 
regime and to give full effect to NPT. 
Finland's aim was to help in creating conditions 
in which no State at present outside NPT could 
reasonably argue that remaining outside the Treaty 
was compatible with its national interests. 
24. In June 1976, the Finnish Government had 
submitted to the Agency's Board of Governors a 
memorandum entitled "Strengthening of the 
-3 



GC(XXI)/OR. 197 

Agency's Safeguards on a Comprehensive Basis". 
In that memorandum, the Finnish Government had 
expressed its conviction that the Agency's safeguards 
system should be consolidated in a con


structive manner. That conviction had been 

shared, moreover, by the Agency's Member States. 

25. At the thirty-first session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations, Finland had submitted 
a draft resolution relating to the strengthening 
of IAEA safeguards which had been adopted 
by a very large majority. The adoption of that 
resolution was a reaffirmation of the goals of NPT 
by the international community and an expression 
of the urgency of strengthening the non-proliferation 
regime. The resolution called upon the Agency to 
report on the progress of its work on that question 
to the thirty-second session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations. 
26. The Finnish Government was glad that the 
study of safeguards control methods and related 
measures was continuing and making progress. 
The Agency had concluded agreements with certain 
States that were not party to NPT. The Agency's 
work had provided a useful instrument for those 
countries that wished to commit themselves to the 
principle of non-proliferation. Finland was fully 
aware that certain elements of NPT had not met 
with the desired success; several non-nuclearweapon 
States had been disappointed at the results 
achieved so far. Nevertheless, Finland believed 
that NPT was the best instrument available, if 
properly used, to arrest the inherent dangers of 
nuclear proliferation and it hoped that a balance 
between the elements of NPT could be attained 
before the Second Review Conference in 1980. 
27. Finland welcomed the Agency's recently 
published study on the establishment of regional 
fuel cycle centres and the efforts it had made to 
solve the problems of plutonium management. 
Regional and multinational agreements on fuel 
cycle management could be economically advantageous 
to the participating States and could also 
diminish risks. Stockpiling of plutonium and 
fuel from conventional reactors presented the 
greatest risk of proliferation in the near future 
and adequate measures should be taken in the 
framework of the Agency's safeguards system to 
improve safeguards for those two sensitive points 
in the fuel cycle. 
28. Another important problem was the physical 
protection of nuclear materials. Finland believed 
that a particularly urgent task was to prepare an 
international convention in which the minimum 
standards for physical protection wese clearly 
defined; the draft convention presented by the 
Agency's Secretariat constituted a good basis for 
work on a final text. 
29. The Agency's programme on establishing 
safety codes and guides for nuclear power plants 
had made good progress and the Finnish 
Government looked forward to the first published 
version of that work. It also approved of the 
decision to publish a series of guides on the disposal 
of radioactive wastes. 
30. In the face of the rapid increase in the 
exploitation of nuclear energy and the adoption of 
new nuclear techniques, efforts would have to be 
made to enable the Agency to develop appropriate 
safeguards systems. The system of sanctions for 
international safeguards should also be improved. 
31. During recent years, there had been a rapid 
growth of bilateral and multilateral agreements 
between suppliers and recipients of nuclear 
materials and technology. The provisions of 
those agreements went beyond the stipulations of 
NPT. Although those agreements were essential 
in stopping nuclear proliferation, they needed to 
be streamlined. Indeed, several States considered 
that the existing system was too cumbersome and 
bureaucratic, and that it adversely affected their 
mutual transactions. 
32. There was a pressing need to increase the 
Agency's activities in another sector, namely 
technical assistance to developing countries within 
the framework of a comprehensive safeguards 
system. That would obviously necessitate an 
increase in the financial resources available to 
the Agency. It was unfair, however, to say that 
co-operation as envisaged by Article IV of NPT 
had failed to materialize to any substantial extent. 
33. It was clear that the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy was shrouded in uncertainty. The 
problem of non-proliferation was exacerbated by 
constant technological development and by harsh 
commercial competition. The environmental 
risks of nuclear energy were giving rise to public 
debate. For all those reasons, Finland welcomed 
the proposal of the Government of the United States 
of America for an international programme on 
evaluation of the nuclear fuel cycle. That programme 
aimed at ensuring the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes without proliferation 
risks. Finland intended to participate in that 
programme, which it believed should be conducted 
in close co-operation with the Agency in the hope 
that it could benefit from the participation of all 
major nuclear energy countries. 
34. The international arrangements necessary 
to establish an international service for nuclear 
explosions for peaceful purposes had been the subject 
of intense study by the Agency. Although, to 
some extent, opinions varied as to the economic 
benefits of such explosions, the question had been 
treated in a constructive spirit and a consensus had 
been reached on the report of the ad hoc advisory 
group set up by the Board of Governors to discuss 
the factors involved in the establishment and 
operation of an international PNE service.. The 
establishment of an international PNE service, 
with all its technological, economic and proliferation 
aspects, should continue to be studied in the 
framework of NPT. 
35. With regard to the budget for 1978[4], the 
Finnish Government supported the principle that 
[4] GC(XXI)/582. 
-4 

GC(XXI)/OR.197 


serious efforts should be made to curb the rise of 
administrative costs and keep them at a moderate 
level. Finland had already informed the Director 
General that it would pay its share of voluntary 
contributions to enable the Agency to reach its 
target of $ 7 million. Its Government was also 
taking steps to pay the additional voluntary contribution 
recommended by the Board. The Agency 
should have a stronger role in the common 
efforts to establish a new international economic 
order. 

36. Mr. INHAN (Turkey) observed that in the 
present phase of development many countries were 
attaching great importance to the peaceful uses of 
atomic energy, especially for the production of 
nuclear power. The Turkish delegation shared 
the Director General's opinion that it was necessary 
to provide the developing countries with 
access to nuclear power technology at a reasonable 
price. The interests of those countries should be 
considered when taking decisions concerning the 
structure and direction of an international nuclear 
energy policy. Turkey was happy to note that 
the high-level consultants' report implied that the 
Agency must remain constantly attuned to the 
changing requirements of developing countries. 

37. It was a fact that many developing countries 
had embarked on intensive nuclear power programmes. 
That was also true of Turkey, whose 
first nuclear power plant, with a capacity of 
600 MW(e), was to become operational in 1985. 
The site had been chosen and the licence granted 
by the Turkish Atomic Energy Commission. The 
preliminary projects had been completed, and 
construction on the main units was to start in 1979. 
38. Turkey continued to believe that the Agency 
was the most significant instrument for international 
co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. 
The controversy engendered by the conflict 
between the growing needs for peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy on the one hand and increasing 
concern about proliferation, with resultant restrictions 
on the transfer of what was termed sensitive 
nuclear technology, on the other, meant that the 
Agency would inevitably become increasingly 
involved in international nuclear affairs. In those 
circumstances the Agency's technical assistance 
programme would play a valuable role in the 
introduction of nuclear technology in developing 
Member States. 
39. He wished to take the opportunity to thank 
the Agency, on behalf of Turkey, for the fellowships 
awarded and for the various training courses 
held. Such assistance contributed much to the 
implementation of the different phases of the 
Turkish nuclear programme, designed to meet 
the country's rapidly increasing energy demand. 
40. He wished to associate himself with the 
comments made by some other delegates about 
further improvement of the Agency's technical 
assistance programme. The target set for 
voluntary contributions was $ 7 million, a figure 
which appeared to be insufficient to meet the 
requirements for assistance to the ever-growing 
number of countries launching nuclear programmes. 
The target should therefore be substantially 
raised. It was also desirable that the Agency's 
technical assistance should continue to be provided 
from the General Fund and distributed on a 
non-discriminatory basis among its Members, as 
provided in the Statute. In that connection, the 
Turkish Government had decided to raise its 
voluntary contribution to the General Fund. 

41. As for the implementation of the technical 
assistance programme, he considered that 
experts should be sent to the recipient countries 
during execution of the various phases of their 
nuclear programmes. It was also important to 
concentrate the technical assistance on areas 
related to a major development programme. That 
purpose could be achieved by increasing the 
number of experts in the Division of Technical 
Assistance and by providing more equipment. 
42. The Agency's safeguards functions would 
expand in proportion to the growth of commercial 
transactions in the nuclear industry. It seemed 
important therefore to improve national accounting 
and control methods within the framework of the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
43. In conclusion, he drew the attention of the 
Conference to the importance which his Government 
attached to the distribution of Professional posts 
in the Agency in conformity with the provisions of 
the Statute, and hoped that the Agency would maintain 
a fair balance in the distribution of those posts 
as well as in staff promotions. The Turkish 
Government was convinced that the Agency would 
brilliantly fulfil its role of contributing to world 
peace by satisfying the needs of the developing 
world. 
44. Mr. KIBRIA (Bangladesh), after congratulating 
the President of the Conference, the members 
of the General Committee and the Director General 
on behalf of his delegation and expressing his good 
wishes for the success of the Conference, outlined 
his country's atomic energy programme. 
45. During the past year, the Bangladesh Atomic 
Energy Commission (BAEC) had continued its 
activities in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
Priority had been given to long-term activities 
and the highlight of the year had been the discovery 
of uranium and the start of work on an atomic 
energy research establishment at Savar, not far 
from Dacca. 
46. With regard to nuclear power generation, 
BAEC had prepared a plan for a 125-MW(e) 
nuclear power station with provision for a second 
unit of the same capacity. The feasibility study 
for the project had been entrusted to a French 
firm. 
47. BAEC geologists, with help from the Agency, 
had carried out an extensive survey which had confirmed 
the presence of uranium deposits in certain 
areas of Bangladesh. A plan for the exploration 
and assessment of uranium and thorium deposits 
had been drawn up. 
5 



GC(XXI)/OR. 197 

48. The systematic investigation of heavymineral 
beach sands along the coast and on the 
off-shore islands was continuing and a pilot plant 
had been established at Cox's Bazar. An 
Australian firm had submitted a preliminary 
report to the Government on the feasibility of 
commercial exploitation. 
49. BAEC was providing industrial radiography 
services to various industrial units in the country 
using non-destructive radioisotope techniques. 
Furthermore, it was beginning to use nuclear 
techniques to study underground water resources. 
50. The Dacca Atomic Energy Centre was successfully 
carrying out multidisciplinary basic and 
applied research. In the field of experimental 
physics, research work was mainly on nuclear and 
solid-state physics, and the proton-induced X-ray 
emission technique had now been fully developed 
for applied work. In theoretical physics, 
research was being carried out on low energy 
nuclear physics and solid-state physics; extensive 
work had been done on nuclear structure and 
nuclear reaction problems. Work on technical 
physics dealt with the operation and maintenance 
of the 3-MeV Van de Graaff accelerator. Manufacture 
of essential electromechanical instruments 
was in progress and ferrite was starting 
to be used for the first time. Chemical techniques 
were applied in the investigation of beach 
sand minerals, the processing of uranium and 
trace element analysis by X-ray fluorescence 
spectroscopy. 

51. Physics had been put at the service of health 
and research in various ways, notably in environmental 
radioactivity monitoring and sterilization 
of medical products by irradiation. 
52. An Institute of Nuclear Agriculture had been 
set up and was to be inaugurated in December 1977. 
Its work was mainly concerned with the breeding 
of new varieties of crop plants characterized by 
high yield and early maturity with fibre having 
greater resistance to disease and pests, etc. 
Particularly interesting varieties of rice and jute 
had been obtained. 
53. Furthermore, encouraging results had been 
obtained in the preservation of vegetables and 
foodstuffs. A 50 000 Ci cobalt-60 gamma 
irradiator had been ordered and the Irradiation 
and Pest Control Institute was collaborating with 
the national health authorities on regulations to 
be applied to irradiated food. Lastly, three 
nuclear medical centres were continuing their 
research activities on the application of nuclear 
techniques in the diagnosis and treatment of 
disease; a fourth medical centre was under construction. 
54. Bangladesh, like many other countries, was 
aware of the imminence of a world energy shortage 
and was seeking new sources of energy. It 
thought that the Agency could play a vital role in 
that respect. With a still small electric grid 
system, Bangladesh was planning to integrate 
small and medium-sized reactors into it but was 
hampered by the high cost of such facilities and 
the difficulty of obtaining financing assistance on 
reasonable terms. The Agency should not only 
encourage the manufacturers of that type of 
reactor to respond to the needs of the developing 
countries, but should also encourage the financing 
agencies to offer special terms for their purchase. 

55. The Government of Bangladesh welcomed 
the extension of the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(RCA)[5] between the Agency and Member States in 
Asia for another five years. BAEC was participating 
in the programme of industrial application 
of radioisotopes launched within the framework of 
that agreement and hoped to benefit a great deal 
from it. Bangladesh hoped to take part in other 
regional programmes, especially in regard to fish 
preservation and the training of electronics technicians. 
It would like to have a medical sterilization 
plant installed, which would be valuable in 
connection with its health and family planning programmes. 
The Agency had established three 
research institutes in Europe, but none in Asia. 
His delegation hoped that the suggestion that a 
research centre and laboratory should be 
established in Asia within the framework of RCA 
would be studied with the greatest attention. 
56. In expressing his gratitude to the Agency for 
assistance given to his country during the past 
year, he said he hoped that a proper balance 
could be achieved between expenditure on the 
application of safeguards and expenditure on 
technical assistance, the two aspects of the 
Agency's work being of equal importance. He 
assured the General Conference that his country 
would continue to support and co-operate in the 
implementation of the Agency's programmes. 
57. Mr. NEMETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic), after congratulating the President on 
his election, said that during its 20 years' 
existence the Agency had acquired great authority 
in regard to the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy, technical assistance, nuclear safety, 
environmental protection, nuclear documentation, 
and research on plasma physics and controlled 
thermonuclear fusion, as well as in the vital area 
of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
58. He noted that considerable progress had been 
made during recent times in the cause of peace 
and disarmament, largely thanks to initiatives of 
the socialist countries. During the 60 years which 
had elapsed since the October Revolution, the 
foreign policy of the USSR had been oriented 
towards the establishment of peace and security 
for all nations. Adequate proof of that was provided 
by the many Soviet initiatives reflected in 
the agenda of the thirty-second session of the 
General Assembly of the United Nations. Those 
noble objectives were incorporated in the new 
[5] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 
document INFCIRC/167. 
-6 



GC(XXI)/OR. 197 


constitution of the USSR, one of whose chapters 
was devoted to foreign policy. He also referred 
to the Franco-Soviet documents on deHente and 
non-proliferation signed during the recent visit of 
Mr. Brezhnev to France, the declaration of the 
member States of the Warsaw Pact on detente, 
and the application of the principles embodied in 
the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference. 

59. The Ukrainian delegation associated itself 
with the terms of the message of Mr. Brezhnev 
and considered that it was a matter of urgency to 
take effective measures to prevent the spread of 
nuclear arms and the risks of a nuclear war. It 
saw there, too, a vital role for the Agency; and 
in that context his delegation took note of the 
extensive work the Agency had done in relation to 
the application of safeguards within the framework 
of NPT. 
60. That atomic energy was used largely for 
peaceful purposes was partly to the credit of the 
Agency. Unfortunately, however, that energy 
could be used for other purposes and recently the 
neutron bomb bore witness to the fact - certain 
western groups had embarked on a course which 
could lead the world to a nuclear catastrophe. 
Similarly, the intentions of the Republic of South 
Africa to develop nuclear arms stood in flagrant 
contradiction with NPT and constituted a threat 
not only for the African States but also for the 
whole of humanity. 
61. His country considered that at the present 
time the development of the nuclear power industry 
was the only rational course. Energy from solar, 
hydroelectric and geothermal sources could cover 
only 10% of the world's increasing energy needs, 
while reserves of fossil fuels were destined to 
decrease abruptly after the end of the century. 
62. More and more experts agreed on that point, 
as had been shown at the IAEA Conference on 
Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle (the Salzburg 
Conference)[6]. Work would therefore be continued 
on the construction of many high-power 
thermal reactors and on the development of fast 
reactors based mainly on the uranium-plutonium 
cycle. That latter solution was necessary also, 
in his country1 s opinion, in view of the risk of 
exhaustion of uranium resources, even taking into 
account the advantages of reactors operating on 
the uranium-thorium cycle. The Agency should 
therefore assume an important role in controlling 
the utilization of plutonium. 
63. Many proposals had been advanced with a 
view to ensuring that fissile materials were used 
exclusively for peaceful purposes, especially by 
the socialist countries: IAEA control should be 
extended to all nuclear installations in non-nuclearweapon 
States, not only to materials supplied to 
them; the safeguards system should be improved; 
the establishment of regional fuel cycle centres 
should be studied; and the physical protection of 
nuclear materials should be ensured. 
[6] Held in Salzburg in May 1977. 
64. Noting that in the course of the debate many 
delegations had described their countries' 
achievements in the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy and that that information was 
propitious for the widening of international cooperation, 
he wanted to review the main results 
obtained in fundamental and applied studies 
carried out in the Ukrainian SSR. 
65. Referring first to energy production, he 
said that the total installed capacity in the Ukraine 
was 36 million kW and that it was increasing by 
7-8% annually. Nuclear energy was destined to 
play an increasing part in that expansion. On 
the occasion of the 60th anniversary of the October 
Revolution, the Ukraine would put into service 
the first unit of the Chernobylsk power station with 
an installed capacity of 1 million kW. Three more 
power stations were being constructed in the 
Ukraine, and all featured high unit capacity. 
66. He also stated that the Ukrainian SSR was 
carrying out long-term studies, in collaboration 
with the Republics of Byelorussia and Moldavia, 
amongst others, on new types of power reactor, 
especially fast reactors and high-power breeder 
reactors. He recalled that his delegation had 
distributed a brochure giving fuller details of 
nuclear power production in the Ukraine. 
67. His country was carrying out important 
studies on low-, medium- and high-energy nuclear 
physics, for which it was using the biggest isochronic 
cyclotron in Europe. 
68. Sources of ionizing radiations had been widely 
used in many areas. For instance, the Institute 
of Biology of the South Seas had specialized in 
studying the pollution of water and had laid down 
criteria and standards for evaluating the degree 
of radioactivity in water. Those documents had 
been used in preparing the international Convention 
on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping 
of Wastes and Other Matter (the London 
Convention) [7]. 
69. The results of many studies were already 
being used in the national economy, in particular 
for the design of new nuclear power stations, but 
also in all branches of industry, where tens of 
thousands of radioisotope instruments were in 
use. 
70. About 30 experimental and plant selection 
centres were using nuclear techniques in mutagenesis 
to obtain new varieties of useful plants. 
71. Nearly all the medical centres and large 
hospitals in the Ukraine possessed a radioisotope 
laboratory, where radioisotopes were used for 
diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Studies 
under way on neutron activation analysis should 
facilitate the early diagnosis of malignant tumours, 
and the possible uses of neutron sources for their 
treatment were being studied. 
[7] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/205. 
-7 



GC(XXI)/OR. 197 

72. His delegation welcomed the development of 
relations between his country and the IAEA. In 
1976, a study tour had brought a group of 
specialists from developing countries to Kiev, and 
in 1977 an IAEA meeting of representatives of 
nuclear data centres had also been held in Kiev. 
73. His country was participating actively in the 
exchange of scientific and technical information 
with the IAEA, within the framework of the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS) 
and the Computer Index of Neutron Data (CINDA). 
The IAEA had concluded several research contracts 
with Ukrainian institutes. 
74. In June the Director General of the IAEA had 
visited the Ukraine, and he (Mr. Nemets) welcomed 
the constructive spirit of the talks which 
had opened the way to more extensive co-operation 
between his country and the IAEA. 
75. The Ukrainian SSR, for its part, wanted to 
strengthen those bonds still further. In 
November 1977, an IAEA advisory group would 
meet in Kiev and, in 1978, the IAEA intended to 
organize training courses in the Ukraine on 
national systems for accounting and control of 
nuclear materials, as well as two study tours. 
All those activities would be financed from the 
Ukrainian voluntary contribution to the Agency's 
technical assistance fund. In that connection, 
his delegation wanted to announce that his country 
would contribute a sum of 80 000 roubles to that 
fund for 1978. 
76. In conclusion, he hoped that the Agency's 
work in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy 
would continue to meet with success. 
77. Mr. SON HO (Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea) congratulated the President on his 
election and Mr. Eklund on his reappointment as 
Director General of the Agency. He noted with 
satisfaction the efforts made by the Director 
General and his staff in pursuance of the Agency's 
goals. Over the 20-year period of its existence 
the Agency had performed useful work for 
humanity in promoting atomic energy, developing 
safeguards, providing technical assistance and 
training specialists. 
78. Rapid strides were now being made throughout 
the world in the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy, which was attracting the interest 
of the developing countries. Many newly independent 
nations, faced with the energy problem, 
were turning to nuclear power as a means of 
assuring the economic development and technical 
progress of their country. 
79. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
could report significant progress in the application 
of nuclear energy, particularly in industry, agriculture, 
medicine, biology, hydrology and construction. 
It was also paying great attention to 
educating its youth and training it in modern techniques, 
particularly nuclear techniques, inspired 
by the Communist education programme elaborated 
by President Kim Ir Sen. Having established a 
sound economic base and trained sufficient 
numbers of scientific and technical personnel, the 
country would be able to draw even more benefit 
from the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 

80. He drew attention to the gravity of the situation 
in the Korean peninsula, which ran counter to 
the principle of the application of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. Recalling the American 
neutron bomb project and the deployment of 
nuclear weapons by the United States in South 
Korea, he said that the build-up of tension on the 
Korean peninsula was a great impediment to the 
cause of an independent reunified Korea. 
81. Despite the principles and programmes for 
reunification propounded by President Kim Ir Sen, 
the support of many friendly countries within the 
United Nations, the appeals made by the Korean 
people and the resolution passed at the 30th session 
of the General Assembly calling for the withdrawal 
of American forces, the United States continued, 
despite official declarations that it was reducing 
its land forces in South Korea, to strengthen and 
diversify its military potential in that region in 
such a way as to place it under a "nuclear 
umbrella". That situation was a grave threat to 
peace in Korea, Asia and the whole world. In 
order to reduce the tension, the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea demanded the withdrawal 
of American forces and the removal of the 
nuclear weapons which the United States had 
installed in South Korea. He felt sure that his 
country was supported in its aims by the 
Governments and peoples of friendly nations. 
82. Recalling that the Agency had been set up to 
serve the interests of peace-loving peoples, he 
said that its task now should be to continue to 
promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy and, 
in addition to its current safeguards activities, to 
take steps to prevent the manufacture of new types 
of nuclear weapons by countries already having a 
nuclear arsenal. 
83. In conclusion he said that his delegation 
approved the annual report and the accounts for 
1976[8] as well as the budget for 1978. 
84. Mr. KAMIL (Indonesia) said that, having 
presented the candidacy of the President, his 
delegation was gratified to see him in the Chair, 
guiding the General Conference to a successful 
conclusion in its deliberations. 
85. He extended sincere thanks to the Austrian 
Government and people for having given the 
Agency a home in the historic capital city of 
Vienna. The commemoration of the Agency's 
twentieth anniversary gave added significance to 
the current session of the General Conference. 
A backward glance over the past two decades 
provided grounds for satisfaction at the growth 
and development achieved in the Agency. 
[8] GC(XXI)/581. 
-8 



GC(XXI)/OR. 197 


86. The United Nations, in its famous "Atoms with satisfaction that the Director General had 
for Peace" resolution of December 1954, had laid promised to remedy the situation, 
the groundwork for the establishment of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, which had 
formally come into being with the adoption of its 
Statute at the United Nations in New York in 1956. 
A year later, it had concluded an agreement with 
the United Nations, thus becoming part of the 
United Nations system. 

87. As a loyal member of the United Nations 
family, the Agency should not and could not afford 
to isolate itself from the mainstream of ideas 
developed and actions taken by the United Nations 
itself and the specialized agencies. He was 
referring, in particular, to the new international 
economic order, to the establishment of which 
members of the world community were irrevocably 
committed. At the risk of being repetitive, he 
would recall that the establishment of a new international 
economic order was aimed at eliminating 
the widening gap between the developed and the 
developing countries, and at ensuring steadily 
accelerating economic and social development and 
peace and justice for present and future generations. 
88. According to the Statute, the Agency's role 
in that endeavour was "to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world". In the 
Declaration relating to the new order, adopted in 
May 1974, it was resolved to give added urgency 
to the accelerated promotion of the economic 
development and well-being of the developing 
countries, thereby narrowing the gap between the 
developed and the developing world. 
89. All those ideas and activities would have a 
direct bearing on many aspects of the Agency's 
organization and programmes, including the 
composition of the Secretariat, the membership 
of the Board and the various committees, cooperation 
among Member States, policies concerning 
technical assistance and its financing, and the 
transfer of technology. It was the firm belief of 
his delegation that the Agency, together with other 
members of the United Nations family, had a major 
role to play in the establishment of a new world 
society based on equity and justice. 
90. Touching briefly on the question of the 
composition of the Secretariat, he pointed out that 
for the past several years representatives of the 
developing countries had been expressing their 
dissatisfaction at what they regarded as a lack of 
equitable geographical representation in the 
Secretariat. A few days earlier, the Governor 
from the Philippines had stressed in the Board 
that none of the twenty posts of heads of Units in 
the Department of Safeguards was filled by a 
national of a developing country. Admittedly, 
vacancies should be filled by qualified personnel, 
but he was of the belief that developing Member 
States could provide candidates having the required 
skill. And, as the Governor from Argentina had 
suggested, training courses could, if necessary, 
be instituted to provide candidates with the 
necessary additional skill. His delegation noted 
91. The same regrettable imbalance was to be 
seen also in the composition of the various bodies 
of the Agency. Members of the General 
Conference surely had not yet forgotten the difficulties 
there had been the previous year in Rio de 
Janeiro in respect to the election of Members of 
the Board of Governors and of the General 
Committee. The same difficulties had again 
arisen during the election of the General Committee 
for the present session. A remedy would have to 
be found. And it was in that spirit that his delegation 
supported the inclusion in the agenda of the 
item on Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute, together 
with the draft resolution seeking an expansion of 
the membership of the Board. In fact, his delegation 
would go even further and would favour a 
thorough study and review of the overall size and 
composition of the Board, so that a fair distribution 
might be achieved. Likewise, his delegation 
believed that the related problems in regard to the 
General Committee should be seriously studied 
with a view to rectifying present shortcomings 
once and for all. It was obvious that arrangements 
made two decades ago for a membership of 
some 50 countries were not adequate for a membership 
twice that size today. 
92. According to its Statute, the Agency, in 
seeking to achieve its objectives, should give equal 
emphasis and priority to aiding the developing 
countries and to implementing safeguards. In the 
annual race for appropriations for technical assistance 
and safeguards respectively, it was noteworthy 
that safeguards had constantly come out the 
winner and technical assistance a poor loser. The 
increasing number of Member countries coming 
from the developing world had not resulted in a 
proportionate increase in the appropriations for 
technical assistance and many speakers at the 
General Conference had drawn attention to that 
anomaly. Having for several years already 
expressed their dissatisfaction, developing Member 
States should now seek ways and means to redress 
the imbalance and should enter into discussion 
with the more prosperous countries in a serious 
effort to increase the funds to be devoted to 
technical assistance. 
93. In his statement on Monday, the Director 
General had revealed the general agreement 
among Member countries in acknowledging that 
nuclear energy was a necessary and irreplaceable 
source of energy for mankind, both in the short 
and in the long term. The underlying implication 
was that nuclear energy was indispensable for the 
well-being of the developing countries. But the 
developing countries should not remain mere onlookers 
or mere consumers, without eventually 
becoming producers as well. Effective transfer 
of technology should be carried out so that they 
might gain the scientific skill and technical knowhow 
needed to promote their peaceful nuclear 
development. 
94. His delegation was of the belief that the transfer 
of technology so urgently needed by the devel-
9 

GC(XXI)/OR. 197 


oping countries could not be successfully effected 
if unreasonable barriers to it were instituted under 
the guise of safeguards against the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. It would underline the necessity 
for effective safeguards against proliferation and 
possible diversion from peaceful uses of nuclear 
technology, but the safeguards should be such as 
not to hamper the needed transfer of technology. 

95. For decades, and perhaps even centuries, 
developing countries had been the producers of 
raw materials, which had been cheaply acquired 
by the industrialized countries and which, in turn, 
had been bought back as processed or manufactured 
goods by developing countries at enormously 
high prices. In the new area of nuclear development, 
developing countries were again destined to 
become the producers of raw materials but, now, 
they were determined not to remain for ever mere 
consumers and buyers of the end-product of the 
nuclear manufacturing process. 
96. His Government expected that the Agency 
would facilitate the acquisition of the appropriate 
technology and know-how by the developing countries 
and would take the necessary steps to that 
end. It was with that in view that Indonesia was 
against the automatic application of safeguards in 
the case of scientific visits and fellowships. It 
also reserved its position in regard to part of the, 
list of so-called "sensitive technological areas", 
approved by the Board of Governors at its latest 
series of meetings. 
97. Coming to the question of co-operation among 
Member States, he said that his Government, while 
fully committed to international and global cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
nevertheless recognized the importance of, and 
gave its support to, full-scale regional and bilateral 
co-operation. 
98. Indonesia was located in a region consisting 
of countries which were endeavouring to improve 
the living conditions and health of their peoples, 
and to broaden the horizon of their knowledge. 
Those countries recognized the importance of the 
role that nuclear energy could play in such endeavours. 
Accordingly, they had agreed to work together 
and had established the Regional Co-
operation Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology for South Asia, South East Asia, and 
the Pacific. 
99. Under that Agreement, the participating 
countries were concentrating their efforts in the 
areas of health, agriculture, the life sciences and 
the physical sciences. In 1978, the Agency 
intended to allocate some $100 000 to finance one 
new project and five projects already in progress. 
Considering the modesty of that sum and the small 
number of projects being undertaken, Conference 
delegates might tend to regard the programme as 
an insignificant co-operative endeavour in a 
secluded part of the world. A few facts and 
figures might be of some help in providing a more 
correct picture: the programme was being carried 
out by eleven countries, i. e. not less than 10% of 
the Agency's membership, and it embraced a total 
population of about 1000 million or some 30% of the 
total world population. 

100. The Agreement was a unique form of cooperation 
in a specific region where the same 
problems had to be faced by all, problems which 
could best be resolved by working together. His 
delegation considered that the venture was deserving 
of adequate financial, moral and technical support 
from the Agency as well as from donor countries. 
Support should be extended also to implementation 
of the decision to hold a consultative 
meeting of the participating countries somewhere 
in the region during 1978, for the purpose of 
drawing up a long-term plan of action and of focusing 
attention on the activities in question. His 
delegation believed that success in the programme 
would act as a catalyst for similar co-operation 
among other Member countries of the Agency 
belonging to regions in other parts of the world. 
101. In conclusion, he reaffirmed that his Government 
was committed to full support of a total 
nuclear test ban, to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, and to international and regional cooperation 
in the nuclear field, for advancement of 
the welfare of mankind. 
102. Mr. AL-ESKANGI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) 
congratulated Mr. Etemad on his election as 
President of the General Conference and 
Mr. Eklund on his re-election as Director General 
for yet another period of four years. 
103. He considered that the Agency should play a 
far more effective role in the field of nuclear technology. 
During recent years the developing 
countries had shown a strong desire to pursue 
activities in that field and to intensify them. That 
interest could be expected to grow as the energy 
problem became more pressing. The developing 
countries accordingly placed great hope in the 
Agency's assistance and urged the advanced 
countries to increase their technical assistance. 
The Libyan delegation particularly deplored the 
palpable and unjustified imbalance between the 
funds allocated for technical assistance and for 
safeguards. If that situation were remedied the 
Agency would gain in effectiveness. That did not 
mean, however, that his delegation underestimated 
the importance of safeguards. 
104. The nuclear technology programme of the 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was being implemented 
according to schedule. Most of the nuclear physics 
laboratories of the Al-Fateh University in Tripoli 
were already in operation. The hot plasma 
laboratory, which was equipped with the latest 
diagnostic apparatus, had recently been inaugurated. 
Morever, an intensive training programme 
within the country and abroad was being 
conducted to meet the growing need for experts 
and technicians in the field of nuclear technology. 

105. The delegation of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
attached the greatest importance to the question of 
the inadequate representation on the Board of the 
regions "Africa" and "Middle East and South Asia". 
10 


GC(XXI)/OR. 197 


It considered that the situation required correction 
and urged delegates to examine it with the greatest 
care. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya would make a 
voluntary contribution of US $ 50 000. 

106. Mr. NAZIFI (Afghanistan) said that his delegation 
was attending the present session of the 
General Conference after an absence of several 
years. That absence had not, however, been due 
to a lack of interest in the Agency's work; on the 
contrary, the Government of Afghanistan had carefully 
observed the Agency's activities and its 
efforts to increase the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity. 
107. On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary 
of the Agency his delegation wished to congratulate 
the Agency on what it had done to ensure that 
atomic energy was used to further peace and the 
prosperity of mankind. His delegation also commended 
the Director General on his devotion and 
tireless activity in pursuit of those objectives, and 
on his outstanding leadership qualities. 
108. Afghanistan was one of the least developed 
countries. It was facing enormous problems of 
social and economic development, and its position 
as a land-locked country had further hampered its 
development. Nevertheless, the Government and 
people of Afghanistan were continuing their efforts 
to achieve social and economic progress, as the 
country fortunately had potential for agricultural 
development and for the exploitation of mineral 
resources. Those efforts had been accelerated 
after the establishment of the Republican order on 
17 July 1973. A seven-year development plan had 
been launched and was in the process of implementation. 
109. The activities of the Afghan Atomic Energy 
Commission were limited in scope, but nevertheless 
promoted the socio-economic development of 
the country. Education in nuclear science was an 
immediate goal. Basic nuclear physics was being 
taught in the Faculty of Science at the University of 
Kabul, and a nuclear science laboratory was to be 
established in 1977 with the Agency's assistance. 
Afghan scientists still had to go abroad, however, 
to receive higher academic education. A first 
seminar on "application of radioisotopes" had been 
organized at the University of Kabul with the 
sponsorship of the Agency; it was aimed at enlarging 
the knowledge of the country's scientists in the 
field of nuclear science. A cobalt-60 radiotherapy 
unit had been installed at the University hospital 
with the aid of the Hungarian Government and the 
Agency. 
110. Several other projects involving nuclear 
techniques were soon to be undertaken at the Faculty 
of Agriculture of the University of Kabul. Eventually 
it would be necessary to organize, throughout 
the country, mass vaccination programmes against 
lungworm, which affected sheep; the radiationattenuated 
vaccine would prove useful for future 
stock-breeding in Afghanistan. 
111. The detection and utilization of ground water 
was another field worth examining. It was not 
always known how surface water and ground water 
interacted, and there were underground infiltrations 
of salinated water. Isotope techniques were relatively 
cheap, simple and fast, and might be useful 
in solving such problems. Afghanistan was also 
interested in unexplored mineral resources on its 
territory which might be studied by means of 
nuclear techniques. Preliminary studies had been 
conducted with the assistance of the United Nations 
with a view to finding potential sources of uranium 
in Afghanistan. The results had been encouraging 
and it was hoped that uranium would in fact be 
found. Afghanistan was a signatory of, and also a 
party to, NPT. It believed that atomic energy 
should be used for peaceful purposes and for the 
benefit of mankind as a whole, and it had firmly 
supported efforts aimed at complete disarmament, 
in particular nuclear disarmament. However, 
since every State had the right to use nuclear 
energy and technology in the fields of agriculture, 
health, mining, food production and life sciences, 
Afghanistan hoped to be able to expand, with the 
Agency's assistance, the currently limited activities 
of the Afghan Atomic Energy Commission. 
Afghanistan hoped that the Agency would assist it 
in conducting studies of nuclear energy and other 
forms of energy. In conclusion the Afghan delegation 
wished to express its appreciation of the 
assistance provided by the Agency under the 
regular programme and hoped that the Agency 
would continue to expand that assistance in the 
field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

112. Mr. de BOER (Netherlands) congratulated 
Mr. Etemad on his election as President of the 
General Conference, and Mr. Eklund on his reelection 
as Director General of the Agency for a 
further four years. He considered that the 
twentieth anniversary of the Agency coincided with 
a highly critical phase in the development of 
nuclear energy. 
113. Great changes had taken place during those 
twenty years. The safety systems used in nuclear 
installations were perhaps not yet foolproof, but 
satisfactory progress had been made. There 
had been a time when the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy had not been controversial: efforts had 
been made to solve the problems connected with 
safety; there had been an awareness of the risks 
inherent in any misuse of that form of energy, but 
it had been hoped that they could be avoided by 
means of the safeguards system and the provisions 
of NPT. At the present time, however, the impact 
of atomic energy on the environment and, in particular, 
the disposal of nuclear waste were giving 
rise to lively debate in many Member States that 
had already embarked on nuclear programmes. 
114. Moreover, public opinion was concerned - to 
a lesser extent - about the use that terrorist groups 
might make of nuclear energy. However, it was 
attitudes to non-proliferation which had undergone 
the most pronounced change. The Netherlands 
Government attached exceptional importance to 
the Agency's safeguards and associated activities. 
There was no doubt that the safeguards system 
needed to be improved and its effectiveness 
enhanced. In conjunction with NPT the safeguards 
- 11 

GC(XXI)/OR. 197 


system was the surest method of preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and it should be 
strengthened as far as possible, especially since 
an effective safeguards system was in the interest 
of all countries, whether or not they had facilities 
to submit to them. It had been realized that an 
agreement on peaceful nuclear activities might 
enable a country possessing certain facilities to 
obtain materials that would enable it to manufacture 
nuclear weapons. Therefore attempts had been 
made to reinforce the system designed to prevent 
proliferation. Thus, the countries exporting 
nuclear installations, materials and technology 
regularly met in London; the Government of the 
Netherlands considered that importing States which 
did not possess nuclear weapons should also take 
part in those negotiations. 

115. The establishment of regional nuclear fuel 
cycle centres might also contribute to the cause of 
non-proliferation. The study conducted by the 
Agency would constitute an important point of 
departure for subsequent work on such centres. 
In addition, the Government of the United States of 
America had proposed that an international study 
of the nuclear fuel cycle should be arranged to 
examine present and future proliferation risks 
while meeting world energy demands. The 
Netherlands Government hoped that a large number 
of countries would take part in the search for a 
safer fissionable materials cycle, and that the 
Agency would play an important part in those 
activities. . 
116. The Netherlands Government considered that 
the Agency was performing its tasks satisfactorily. 
However, the Agency would, in close collaboration 
with all its Member States, have to face the new 
situation that had arisen in the field of nuclear 
energy. It was in the interest of all Member 
States that the peaceful use of nuclear energy 
should meet the needs of various countries, yet 
without leading to unacceptable risks. The 
Netherlands Government was pleased to learn that 
the Agency had completed a preliminary study of 
an international system of plutonium control in 
which the Netherlands had repeatedly shown great 
interest. The report of the Ad Hoc Advisory 
Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes 
was an excellent document representing a first step 
towards the solution of the problems that had arisen 
in that sphere. The Netherlands agreed that the 
benefits derived from peaceful uses of nuclear 
explosions should be available to non-nuclearweapon 
States party to NPT. However, the potential 
advantages of any given peaceful nuclear 
explosion should be carefully weighed against the 
dangers of horizontal and vertical proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. For the Netherlands, the 
adoption in the immediate future of a total ban on 
nuclear tests was far more important than any 
benefits that might be derived from nuclear explosions 
for peaceful purposes, the economic usefulness 
of which had yet to be proved convincingly. 


117. The Netherlands Government welcomed the 
preparation of a first draft for a physical security 
convention, and hoped that that important task 
would soon be successfully dealt with. The 
Salzburg Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fue 
Cycle had been impressive; however, it was to be 
feared that it had somewhat neglected the principal 
problems that were worrying the public. The 
Netherlands were pleased to declare that, subject 
to parliamentary approval, they would contribute 
US $111 000 to the General Fund for 1978, a sum 
which was in accordance with their assessment for 
the Regular Budget. 

118. Mr. MIHULECEA (Romania) joined other 
delegations in congratulating the President of the 
Conference on his election. The Director 
General1 s untiring efforts in promoting the noble 
objectives of the Agency, too, deserved mention, 
and he was to be congratulated on his reappointment. 
119. Reviewing, on the occasion of its twentieth 
anniversary, the Agency's achievements and the 
main directions of its future activity, he said that 
on the whole the Romanian Government judged the 
work of the Agency positively: it had obtained 
important results, especially in technical assistance, 
the promotion of research and the training 
of specialists, even though it had been hampered 
by certain shortcomings. In international life the 
preceding few years had been marked by the will 
of the peoples of the world to achieve independent 
economic and social development, and also by 
fresh progress in detente and co-operation among 
all States. The peaceful uses of atomic energy 
had made great advances, giving further proof of 
the advantages it offered for economic and social 
development. Romania therefore emphasized 
that the Agency should respond more fully to the 
aspirations of the developing countries, which 
wished to utilize nuclear energy for the purpose of 
eliminating underdevelopment. 
120. On the basis of its experience and achievements, 
the Agency should, in Romania's opinion, 
make its third decade that of the peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy. For that purpose, it was 
necessary to guarantee to all peoples access to the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy, to establish 
and apply a code of principles for co-operation in 
that field and to give effective support to the efforts 
of the developing countries. It was also important, 
more than ever before, to stop the nuclear armaments 
race, including the development of new 
weapons such as the neutron bomb, and to undertake 
disarmament so that the fissionable materials and 
other resources thus released could be used for 
peaceful applications. It was essential that in 
applying NPT the rights and obligations of all 
countries be taken into account. 
121. The Agency had important responsibilities 
under its Statute. Romania therefore considered 
that the Agency should further improve its 
functioning and structure, democratize its organization 
and focus its activities on the peaceful uses 
of atomic energy and on the provision of technical 
assistance in that field. In Romania's view, the 
Agency was an essential international forum 
where States could discuss on an equal footing all 
questions relating to co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and the transfer of 
nuclear technology. 
12 



GC(XXI)/OR. 197 


122. Being interested in rapid economic development, 
Romania attached particular importance to 
practical uses of nuclear energy such as power 
generation and the introduction of nuclear techniques 
in industry, agriculture, medicine and 
biology, because in the present-day world real 
economic and social development could not be 
achieved by any other means. 
123. Romania approved the draft programme for 
1978, which took account of the latest achievements 
in the nuclear field and the needs of Member 
States. It favoured in particular the programmes 
relating to nuclear power, training, promotion of 
applied research, nuclear safety and radiological 
and environmental protection. 
124. His country also endorsed the budget for 1978 
and the target for voluntary contributions. It 
would contribute to the technical assistance fund in 
proportion to its base rate of assessment, but felt 
that the use of resources should be rationalized. 

125. Romania supported the proposal to amend 
Article VI of the Statute, which aimed at a fairer 
representation of certain developing regions. 
126. In conclusion, he expressed his firm belief 
that during the third decade of its existence the 
Agency would be able to respond still better to 
Member States' needs and that international cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
would continue to develop. Romania would not 
fail to contribute to the fulfilment of those objectives. 
• The meeting rose at 1. 5 p. m. 
13 



GC(XXI)/OR. 198 

International Atomic Energy Agency May 1978* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Thursday, 29 September 1977, at 3.15 p.m. 

President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Parag] raphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 197 6 

i—i 

- 130 


(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Ecuador 
South Africa 
Chile 
Ghana 
Mongolia 
Austria 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Portugal 
Uruguay 
Venezuela 
Thailand 
Greece 

i 

10 
28 
43 
58 
63 
78 
91 
98 
109 
120 
126 


9 


- 27 


- 42 


- 57 


- 62 


- 77 


- 90 


- 97 


- 108 


- 119 


- 125 


- 130 


A provisional version of this document was issued on 4 October 1977. 
GC(XXI)/591. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR. 198 
THE RECORD Committee, which, it was hoped, would be able, 
with the Agency's support, to prepare specific 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR programmes which would benefit the countries of 
1976 (GC(XXI)/580) (continued) Latin America. 

1. Mr. RODRIGUEZ PALACIOS (Ecuador), 
after congratulating the Director General and the 
Secretariat on the spirit of co-operation they had 
shown in plans and activities carried out jointly 
by his country and the Agency, which in its 
20 years of existence had contributed effectively 
to the peaceful development of nuclear energy, 
said that the Ecuadorian authorities were 
conscious of the need to promote the atomic 
energy factor as an indispensable element in the 
socio-economic development of the people of 
Ecuador. 
2. That consideration had been reflected in 
various measures adopted by the Government 
designed to strengthen the Ecuadorian Atomic 
Energy Commission, which had a constitution, 
which was financed from the general budget of the 
State and which had experienced staff to implement 
short-, medium- and long-term programmes. 
3. Since he had become President of the 
Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission, efforts 
had been made to fulfil the country's obligations 
vis-a-vis the Agency so that the technical 
assistance coming from that source flowed 
smoothly in the national institutions that had 
requested it. Co-operation offered to radiotherapy 
centres had been started through treatment 
schedules and radiological protection 
measures which the Commission's staff had 
introduced, as emphasis had to be put on the 
drawing-up of radiological safety regulations 
which, when revised by officials of institutions 
involved in that field, would be submitted to the 
Government for promulgation. 
4. The impetus given to the Commission in the 
last 20 months had already gained it national 
recognition as an institution which had provided 
itself with a basic structure and which could 
direct itself positively in future to accomplishing 
its special tasks. In that context, it had cooperated 
with various Ecuadorian institutions, 
concentrating its activities on the preparation of a 
new law on mining - with the Ministry of Natural 
and Energy Resources - and on the setting up of a 
centre for integrated sampling of renewable and 
non-renewable natural resources by remote 
sensor. 
5. The technical assistance requested by 
Ecuador from the Agency for 1978 would be 
intended, in particular, for institutions in 
Ecuador's main port, Guayaquil, and would serve 
to encourage the development of nuclear sciences, 
especially at the educational level, and of certain 
technical projects considered to be of high 
priority. 
6. At the last meeting of the Inter-American 
Nuclear Energy Commission held in Lima, a 
distinguished Ecuadorian scientist had been 
appointed a member of that body's Advisory 
7. During 1977, technical and economic cooperation 
agreements had been signed with 
Argentina and Spain, under which appropriate 
action was being taken so that Ecuador would have 
suitable facilities available within the next five 
years in which the peaceful atom could be used for 
the benefit of Ecuador and its people. The 
Commission was grateful for the co-operation of 
those countries and for the hospitality it was going 
to be offered by the Spanish Nuclear Energy Board 
during a visit officials were to make to Spanish 
facilities. 
8. His Government recognized the importance 
of the Agency's safeguards programmes, but it 
thought that they should be kept at appropriate 
levels so that the technical assistance programmes 
so urgently needed by the less-developed countries 
in such fields as health, agriculture and nutrition, 
which would raise the standard of living of their 
inhabitants, would not suffer. 
9. It also suggested that the existing unused 
balances in the Agency's budget which had been 
frozen for several years should be used for 
selected programmes of direct benefit to countries 
that were starting their activities in the field of 
nuclear energy. That could result in more funds 
being available for assistance in the preparation 
of medium- and long-term programmes and for 
increasing training of human resources in the many 
different aspects of scientific research. 
10. Mr. VON SCHIRNDING (South Africa) said 
that it was appropriate on the twentieth anniversary 
of IAEA that the Conference should reflect on the 
extent to which the Agency had fulfilled the 
objectives set forth in its Statute: "..., to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy 
to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world". 
11. Evidence of the Agency's achievements in 
promoting those goals was to be found in its 
technical assistance programme under which 
countries less advanced in the field of atomic 
energy were assisted to develop their own peaceful 
nuclear capabilities for the benefit of all their 
peoples. Through such Agency projects as the 
International Food Irradiation Project, better 
utilization of the world's agricultural resources 
was promoted and the safeguards system 
developed under the auspices of and administered 
by the Agency provided a strong deterrent to the 
possible diversion of nuclear material to nonpeaceful 
purposes. 
12. The numerous technical meetings organized 
by the Agency provided an opportunity for the 
world's nuclear scientists and experts to exchange 
their ideas freely on various aspects of nuclear 
science and undoubtedly fostered a spirit of international 
co-operation in that respect. 
2 


GC (XXI)/OR. 198 


13. After paying tribute to the Director General 
and staff of the Agency, he said that when his 
Government had been invited in 1954 by the 
Government of the United States of America to 
participate in the drafting of the Statute of the 
Agency, it had responded with enthusiasm. It had 
done so not because of any direct benefit South 
Africa could derive from the Agency but rather, as 
one of the world's major uranium producers, 
because it wished to make a contribution to the 
objectives for which the Agency had been envisaged. 
14. South Africa had identified itself closely with 
those objectives and ideals, as was demonstrated 
by the contribution it had made to the establishment 
of the Agency's safeguards system, by the 
tangible support it had given to the technical assistance 
programme and through its ongoing 
active participation in various Agency projects 
including the International Food Irradiation 
Project. Furthermore, South Africa's scientists, 
who had regularly attended Agency-sponsored 
meetings, had contributed constructively to the 
furtherance of knowledge on nuclear science. 
15. South Africa's own nuclear energy 
programme bore witness to its stated policy of 
peaceful uses of the atom. It had been in 
pursuance of that policy that South Africa, a 
major producer of uranium, had undertaken to 
supply its uranium to non-nuclear-weapon States 
only under Agency or equivalent safeguards. 
16. The 20-MW research reactor, SAFARI I at 
Pelindaba, which was fuelled under a Co-operation 
Agreement with the United States of America, was 
subject to IAEA safeguards, as was the 2000-MW 
nuclear power station at present being constructed 
at Koeberg in the Western Cape Province, It was 
well known that the SAFARI research reactor was 
used solely for peaceful scientific research and 
for the production of radioisotopes for medical 
diagnostic and therapeutic application in all 
sections of the South African population and, upon 
request, in neighbouring African countries. It was 
also employed in research and development related 
to the preservation of agricultural products by 
sterilization. 
17. The announcement in 1970 that South Africa 
had developed its own uranium enrichment process 
had been accompanied by an expression of willingness 
to place the proposed commercial enrichment 
plant under Agency safeguards. Steps 
towards that end had already been initiated by the 
South African Atomic Energy Board in conjunction 
with the IAEA. 
18. Notwithstanding repeated assurances about 
its commitment to peaceful uses of the atom and 
despite regular inspections by the IAEA inspectors 
of the South African research reactor SAFARI I at 
Pelindaba to the full satisfaction of the Agency, 
tendentious allegations had been made, with 
tiresome frequency, that South Africa had either 
developed or was developing a nuclear weapon. It 
had always been possible, however, to trace such 
allegations to highly suspect sources seeking 
political advantage. 
19. Such had been the recent patently spurious 
allegation by the Soviet Union that South Africa was 
about to explode an atomic device - an allegation 
made with the utmost cynicism at a time when the 
Soviet Union itself was engaged in such activities! 
20. Once again the South African Government had 
given assurances that it did not have or intend to 
develop a nuclear explosive device for any purpose, 
peaceful or otherwise; that it had no testing 
facility for nuclear explosives and that there would 
not be any nuclear explosive testing of any kind in 
South Africa. But South Africa knew from experience 
that such allegations would again be made 
by those who preyed on the fears of mankind. 
21. In reflecting on the Agency's achievements, 
he felt bound to draw attention to those aspects 
where the Agency had failed to come up to expectations. 
22. An important statutory function of the 
Agency was to promote and further the establishment 
of safeguarded world-wide disarmament, 
particularly nuclear disarmament. The lack of 
progress in that field gave greater cause for 
concern today than twenty years previously. After 
twenty years the nuclear armaments race was as 
active as when the Agency started out on its 
venture. Tens of thousands of scientists, technicians 
and workers were reportedly engaged in 
the production of nuclear weapons and in the 
development and design of new nuclear weapons. 
Only recently there had been reports of one such 
new weapon of destruction which was said to have 
the curious merit of destroying people while 
leaving buildings intact; anything further removed 
from the high principles which had given birth to 
the Agency was hard to imagine. 
23. There had been other developments which 
had cast a cloud on international efforts to achieve 
the Agency's objective of non-proliferation and its 
objective of accelerating and enlarging the contribution 
of atomic energy to the advantage of mankind. 
24. At the recent international conference in 
Iran on the transfer of nuclear technology, a 
number of countries, among them parties to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT)[1], had expressed their disillusionment 
and frustration at the limitations and 
restrictions being imposed on their peaceful 
development of nuclear energy. Many of them 
considered that those measures, instead of contributing 
towards the control of nuclear weapons 
proliferation as intended, would have the exact 
opposite effect. The South African Government 
too thought that a genuine commitment to nonproliferation 
was least served by actions which 
cast doubt on the reliability of a supplier of 
material essential to demonstrably peaceful 
nuclear programmes. It must surely be obvious 
that the failure of a supplier to live up to solemn 
[1] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
3 


GC(XXI)/OR. 198 


treaty commitments in that field was one of the 
root causes for the decision by countries to have 
their own facilities so as to be self-reliant. Unilateral 
action of that kind by certain supplier 
nations would not only harm the credibility of 
NPT but would also undermine the Agency's 
safeguards system. 

25. Another development with deeply disturbing 
implications flowed from the recent 
failure by the Board of Governors to implement 
the explicit requirements of Article VI. A, 1 of 
the Statute. In rejecting the designation of South 
Africa as the Member in the African area "most 
advanced in the technology of atomic energy 
including the production of source materials", the 
Board had acted illegally and in violation of the 
Agency's Statute. No suggestion had been advanced 
that South Africa did not qualify in terms of the 
requirements of Article VI. A, 1. Indeed, no such 
suggestion could possibly be made in the face of 
the overwhelming evidence that South Africa had, 
since the founding of the Agency, been, and continued 
to be, the African country most advanced in 
the technology of atomic energy, including the production 
of source materials. Reliance had thus 
been placed on arguments of a purely political 
nature which were wholly irrelevant. 
26. In failing to designate South Africa, the 
Board had, however, done more than violate the 
provisions of the Statute; the Agency itself had 
been done an irreparable injury, for its integrity 
and its credibility had now been placed in doubt. 
That was a tragic development for the Agency, 
which had been assigned, amongst other tasks, an 
important role in the fields of safeguards and nonproliferation. 
Its ability to discharge those important 
tasks under the Statute, as well as under 
NPT, would inevitably be impaired. 
27. Countries which had a sincere commitment 
to the objectives of the Agency could not be 
sanguine about that development and were bound to 
take it into account in the determination of their 
policies in the atomic energy field. Those disquieting 
and disturbing developments would have 
to be faced soberly by the international community 
if it was to rescue the highly promising venture on 
which it had embarked twenty years before. 
28. Mr. VALDES-MARTINEZ (Chile), after 
congratulating the President on his election, said 
that he wished succinctly to describe the work the 
Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission had accomplished 
during the year past. The project for 
the construction of Chile's first nuclear power 
station was continuing to make progress, particularly 
in respect of training of staff for the 
various phases of the work, and Agency fellowships 
had helped a great deal in that connection. 
The research reactor of the Lo Aguirre Nuclear 
Centre had, he was pleased to announce, gone 
critical on 4 February; ancillary construction was 
now going forward with a view to bringing the 
installation up to full power (20 MW). Spain had 
provided valuable technical assistance in connection 
with that project, for which he wished to 
express sincere thanks. 
29. In December Chile expected to put a multipurpose 
pilot irradiation plant into operation, 
also at the Lo Aguirre Nuclear Centre. 
30. The reactor of the La Reina Centre had 
continued operating normally at full power, 20 to 
30 hours a week for the production of radioisotopes, 
special research and training. At 
present the isotopes produced by that reactor 
were able to cover virtually all the country's 
increasing demand, and some radioisotopes had 
been exported to Bolivia and Argentina. 
31. The projects already in hand in connection 
with the nuclear raw materials programme had 
been completed to the extent of about 50%; in particular, 
24 000 km of Chile's territory had been 
explored. In December 1976 international tenders 
had been invited in connection with the raw 
materials programme, and the offers received 
were at present being evaluated. The United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) was 
making an important contribution, through the 
Agency, in the form of experts, equipment and 
fellowships. 
32. As far as the applications of nuclear 
science to public health were concerned, two 
pilot centres for radiotherapy and nuclear 
medicine had been set up by the Commission 
under the agreement in force with the National 
Health Service, and those had brought about a 
significant improvement in the quality of the 
services offered to Chileans in that special 
medical field. 
33. Through its "training and advanced 
instruction" programme the Commission had, 
between September 1976 and August 1977, offered 
various courses for the benefit of its staff, some 
of which had been attended by scientists from 
other institutions as well. 
34. In an effort to secure even closer collaboration 
with other countries, Chile had concluded 
certain additional agreements with Argentina, 
viz. a project for co-operation in the use of 
isotopes in hydrology, a project for co-operation 
in the applications of atomic energy in industry, 
and a co-operative radioisotope project. 
35. The Third Chilean Seminar on Biology and 
Nuclear Medicine had been organized and conducted 
with notable success, both as regards the 
number of participants and the excellent results 
obtained. 
36. Chile's new legal norms to govern radiation 
safety were at the stage of codification and final 
editing, within the context of a Nuclear Law soon 
to be submitted for governmental approval and 
subsequent promulgation. 
37. A subject that deserved special mention, in 
the annual report submitted by the Board 
(GC(XXI)/580), was the success of the Conference 
on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle (the Salzburg 
-4 



GC(XXI)/OR. 198 


Conference)[2], which had enabled participants to 
become familiar with the latest developments in 
the nuclear power field - developments of vast 
importance for the present and the future. 

38. Chile was very grateful for the assistance it 
had received, and had tried hard to make the most 
effective use of that assistance. The country 
would continue trying to improve its technological 
capacities and its ability to turn the Agency's help 
to good account. 
39. Turning to safeguards, he said that the most 
effective way of helping to prevent the spread of 
nuclear weapons was simply to adopt a firm 
resolve not to participate in the process of proliferation 
- a process that had certainly not been 
unleashed by the countries least developed in the 
nuclear field. Proliferation was a special concern 
of those who possessed nuclear weapons and 
were continually perfecting them and creating new 
ones. His country, like some others, had had 
recourse to a type of moral safeguard which 
offered more effective guarantees than signed 
documents. 
40. Chile nevertheless believed in safeguards, 
but it felt that the real problem at present lay in 
the relationship between safeguards and technical 
assistance. Both were fundamental, concerns of 
the Agency, but the attainment of a harmonious 
balance between them was obviously difficult. It 
would be wrong to put a damper on the opportunities 
of developing countries in the course of 
confronting the proliferation danger. Chile had 
accordingly come to the conclusion that technical 
assistance should not be subjected to safeguards, 
as that would be in contradiction with the letter 
and spirit of the Statute. Moreover, it was wrong 
to divide countries into two categories - those 
which had signed the main non-proliferation 
treaties such as NPT and the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
(the Tlatelolco Treaty)! 3], and those which had not. 
There could be good reasons - other than an 
intention of contributing to proliferation - for a 
country's failure to sign. 
41. Chile would be happy to place its own nuclear 
infrastructure at the disposal of other developing 
countries, preferably from the region of Latin 
America, for purposes of training. 
42. Before concluding, he wished to convey the 
gratitude of his Government to all friendly 
countries which had lent loyal support and cooperation 
to Chile in furtherance of its nuclear 
programme. In particular he wished to thank the 
Director General for the Agency's invaluable 
assistance. 
43. Mr. ALLOTEY (Ghana) said that the present 
session of the General Conference was significant, 
[2] Held in Salzburg in May 1977. 
[3] United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 634, 
No. 9068. 
first, because it marked the twentieth anniversary 
of the Agency's existence, and second, because it 
marked the twenty-first meeting in an unbroken 
chain of sessions of the General Conference 
initiated in September 1957. The Agency could 
therefore be considered, in human terms, to have 
reached maturity. 

44. It was gratifying to note the expansion that 
had taken place in the Agency's main activities 
since the first session of the General Conference. 
The application of safeguards, the encouragement 
of nuclear power development, the promotion of 
nuclear safety and environmental protection, and 
the establishment of the International Nuclear 
Information System (INIS), were all pointers to 
the Agency's efforts to gear its activities to the 
development trends in the peaceful application of 
nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind. 
45. That those activities had been so successful 
was indicated by the results described by the 
Director General in such areas as the use of 
radioisotope techniques and radiation in agriculture, 
industry and water resources development, 
and the economic viability of electricity 
produced by nuclear energy. 
46. In all those areas the Agency deserved the 
commendation of all Member States for the calm 
and unruffled approach it had adopted in fulfilling 
its functions. At the same time, it was essential 
for the Agency to carry out periodic stock-taking 
to ensure continued and efficient service to the 
cause to which it was dedicated. It was therefore 
desirable to take a fresh look at its Statute and to 
see whether some modification might not be 
necessary to enable it to attune itself more finely 
to the realities of the current world situation. 
That referred in particular to the matter of 
Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute. The proposed 
amendment to that Article, of which Ghana was one 
of the many co-authors, should be considered in 
that light so as to elicit a positive response from 
the entire Agency membership during the current 
session. 
47. With regard to the Agency's budget for 
1978[4], his delegation shared the concern 
expressed by many others at the inordinate rate 
of increase in budgetary appropriations from year 
to year. It was to be hoped that the Agency would 
look into ways and means of making such increases 
commensurate with actual needs. 
48. Another matter of concern was the obvious 
imbalance between budgetary allocations for the 
regulatory functions of the Agency and its promotional 
activities. It was desirable that steps 
be taken by the Agency to remove that disparity 
and match the increases for safeguards with a 
corresponding increase in the funds allotted for 
technical assistance. That recommendation did 
not in any way detract from his country's support 
for the Agency's activities in the field of safe[
4] GC(XXI)/582. 
-5 



GC(XXI)/OR. 198 


guards. Indeed, as a party to NPT, Ghana supported 
the measures taken to promote that 
essential aspect of the Agency's functions. The 
problem of safeguards, however, was basically a 
political one, and should not be given undue 
budgetary emphasis to the detriment of technical 
assistance activities. 

49. Another aspect of the matter calling for 
urgent review was the undesirable situation by 
which safeguards activities were funded from the 
Regular Budget, while technical assistance, of 
greatest concern to developing countries, was 
financed from voluntary contributions which, by 
their very nature, were uncertain and on that 
account limited the scope of the programmes that 
the Agency was able to support. 
50. With regard to Ghana's own nuclear 
programme, the main thrust of the current 
research programme was still directed towards 
the reactivation of the nuclear research reactor 
project, the primary objective of which was to 
lay a firm basis for the introduction of nuclear 
science and technology in a way that would make 
the most impact on the life of the people, 
51. Pending completion of the research reactor 
facility, Ghana's research programme in radioisotope 
applications in medicine, hydrology, food 
and agriculture, pest control and uranium 
prospecting had continued and even been intensified. 
52. Emphasis was being placed on research 
likely to contribute significantly to the practical 
solution of the country's problems, especially in 
the sphere of agriculture. In that connection he 
wished to refer to some of the major research 
projects for which plans had already been finalized 
with a view to their implementation between 1978 
and 1980, and for some of which the Agency would, 
it was hoped, provide funds under its regular 
technical assistance programme. 
53. One such was the Radiation Technology 
Project, which envisaged the use of radiation 
technology in the sterilization of medical equipment 
and materials as well as pharmaceutical 
products. Agency-assisted feasibility studies 
completed in June 1977 indicated that there was a 
large potential in the country for the sterilization 
of intravenous infusion products, medical and 
sanitary dressings, and certain drugs, including 
antibiotics now manufactured in Ghana. The 
project was considered to be viable and the Ghana 
Atomic Energy Commission planned to implement 
it by 1980. 
54. The Commission also planned to collaborate 
with the Ministry of Health and the Environmental 
Protection Council of Ghana in establishing a 
Secondary Standards Dosimetry Laboratory as 
part of the Commission's health physics and radiation 
protection programme. The Laboratory, 
when established, would form part of the network 
of similar laboratories serving not only Ghana, 
but other countries in West Africa, with an up-todate 
dosimetry service. 
55. Also planned was the establishment by the 
end of 1978 of an Institute of Nuclear Science and 
Technology at the Ghana Nuclear Research Centre. 
It would provide training in nuclear science and 
technology, including radioisotope applications, 
for newly recruited staff of the Commission. 
Scientists graduating from the universities in 
Ghana would be able to take post-graduate degrees 
at the projected institute and it would also accept 
graduates from other developing countries. 
56. In the field of staff training and development, 
Ghana was continuing to receive support from the 
Agency through its fellowship programme, and 
also from bilateral sources, for which it wished 
to record its appreciation. 
57. In conclusion, Ghana had faith in the future 
of the Agency as an organization capable of 
bringing the full benefits of nuclear technology to 
all mankind. His country would continue to cooperate 
actively with the Agency in that noble task. 
58. Mr. SODNOM (Mongolia) congratulated the 
President and the Director General on their 
elections, and the Agency as a whole on its 
twentieth anniversary. 
59. Strengthening of the regime of non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons was an important aspect 
of the general striving towards international 
detente. However, there remained two nuclear 
Powers and several nuclear threshold States that 
had not signed NPT. The situation had been 
exacerbated by the acquisition of nuclear weapons 
by the racist regime of South Africa with the help 
of several Western States; as a result the stability 
and safety of Southern Africa, and of all mankind, 
were in danger. The utmost efforts should be 
made by the international community to prevent 
South Africa from building nuclear weapons. The 
regime of non-proliferation could be strengthened 
by attracting new signatories of NPT, by the conclusion 
of safeguards agreements with the IAEA, 
by improved effectiveness of Agency safeguards, 
and by stricter supervision of exports of nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology. 
60. Mongolia had been among the first to 
support the Soviet Union's proposal of an international 
agreement prohibiting the development 
and production of new types and systems of 
nuclear weapons for mass destruction. Recent 
developments proved that such an agreement was 
needed to put a stop to the arms race. 
61. The Agency's safeguards activities were 
certain to expand, and the Agency must therefore 
develop effective methods of controlling movements 
of nuclear materials. The Mongolian delegation 
welcomed the Agency's progress during the 
past years, and supported its technical assistance 
activities, which were very valuable to developing 
countries. An X-ray fluorescence analysis 
project was being conducted in Mongolia, the first 
results of which had been described at international 
conferences, and there was also a radiation 
biology project concerned with the use of 
radiation in agriculture. 
6 



GC(XXI)/OR. 198 


62. The Mongolian delegation supported the 
Agency's activities in connection with regional 
nuclear fuel cycle centres and with the physical 
protection of nuclear material. Mongolia 
welcomed the raising of the target for voluntary 
contributions to US $ 7 million, and would make 
its own modest contributions to the General Fund. 
63. Mr. MANZ (Austria) said that the Agency 
had been created as an international authority to 
control and develop the peaceful use of atomic 
energy. During the twenty years of its activity 
it had been guided by Article II of its Statute under 
which it was enjoined to accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world, while 
ensuring that assistance provided by it or through 
it was not used to further any military purpose. 
When those objectives had been drafted the commercial 
use of nuclear power had just appeared 
on the horizon. With nuclear power becoming a 
technical and commercial reality, the situation 
had changed and so had the responsibilities of the 
Agency. 
64. Although the Agency was concerned primarily 
with the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
Austria could not but express its dismay at the 
current arms race - it not only constituted the 
most serious threat to peace and order in the 
world but also entailed a tremendous drain on 
resources required urgently for other purposes. 
It was indeed outrageous that the world afforded 
itself the luxury of spending approximately 
20 times more on armaments than on combating 
poverty. 

65. His country considered that NPT, which it 
had strongly supported from the very outset, and 
the Agency's safeguards system could provide the 
framework for disarmament and arms control 
measures which were politically necessary in 
order to diminish the motivation for developing 
independent nuclear weapon potentials. 
66. In that connection, it was encouraging to 
note that two more States had acceded to NPT and 
that the number of safeguards agreements concluded 
with the Agency had risen since the preceding 
General Conference, 
67. Austria supported the Agency's continued 
efforts to develop and expand the safeguards 
system, and commended its activities during the 
preceding year in providing assistance to Member 
States in establishing and strengthening their 
national safeguards through training seminars and 
direct consultations. 
68. As for Austria, the safeguards procedures 
to be applied to the first nuclear power plant under 
construction had been improved, and the subsidiary 
arrangements for the material balance 
area were being negotiated with the Agency's 
Secretariat so that the Austrian national system 
for nuclear material accounting and control would 
be completed in the near future. 
69. The Safeguards Analytical Laboratory (SAL) 
which Austria had built for the Agency had been 
commissioned in 1976, and the negotiations for 
licensing its operation at full capacity were proceeding 
satisfactorily. 

70. The construction of the first Austrian 
nuclear power station had nearly been completed. 
However, public acceptance of nuclear power had 
become an important political issue in Austria as 
in many other countries. 
71. Continued resistance to the construction of 
nuclear power plants had resulted in a decrease 
in the orders for nuclear power stations in the 
world. Realizing that such resistance derived 
mainly from lack of objective information on the 
dangers and usefulness of nuclear energy, the 
Austrian Government had started a comprehensive 
campaign to provide the public with as much 
detailed information as possible on the advantages 
and disadvantages of nuclear energy. Well-known 
critics of nuclear energy had been invited to draw 
up a questionnaire, which had then been discussed 
in public forums where the supporters and the 
opponents were equally represented. On the basis 
of the results of those discussions, the Government 
had prepared a report to be submitted to 
Parliament. A decision on starting operation of 
the first Austrian nuclear power plant would be 
taken only after those extensive and thorough 
deliberations had been concluded. 
72. The opponents of nuclear energy had been 
concentrating increasingly on the final storage of 
radioactive waste, which had become a key 
problem also for the authorities. A solution to 
that problem could be facilitated by international 
co-operation. 
73. Austria appreciated the Agency's comprehensive 
study on regional nuclear fuel cycle 
centres, which had been presented at the Salzburg 
Conference in May, and was especially interested 
in the aspects dealing with long-term storage of 
spent fuel. His country supported all activities 
in that field for they could strengthen the Agency's 
role under its Statute, 
74. The Agency had rendered a valuable service 
to Member States by formulating a set of criteria 
for the physical protection of nuclear materials 
and facilities. Austria would welcome and assist 
in further development of the recommendations on 
the subject contained in document 
INPCIRC/225/Rev. 1 and hoped that the efforts to 
draft an international convention on the physical 
protection of nuclear material would be successful. 
75. Austria was gratified that the Agency had 
held an important gathering like the Conference 
on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle at Salzburg 
and hoped that it had made a positive contribution 
to the Conference. 
76. As in the previous years, the Austrian 
Government wished to reiterate its full support 
for and interest in the Agency's activities; it had 
pledged, subject to parliamentary approval, a 
voluntary contribution of $47 600 to the General 
-7 



GC (XXI)/OR. 198 


Fund for 1978 and would make available funds for 

Type II fellowships, amounting to 170 000 Austrian 
schillings. 

77. In conclusion, he wished to assure the 
General Conference that all the buildings of the 
Agency's Permanent Headquarters would be 
completed and ready for occupation in the summer 
of 1979, Although the office buildings were 
expected to be available at an earlier date, the 
organizations concernedhad expressed a preference 
for moving to the new premises only after the 
completion of the whole complex. His Government 
was confident that the Agency's activities in the 
future would be favourably influenced by the new 
environment, which should provide the most 
suitable working conditions for the staff of the 
organization. 
78. Mr. KOLICHAN (Byelorussian Soviet 
Socialist Republic) said that the Agency's twentieth 
anniversary was being celebrated at a time of considerable 
success in the struggle for peace and 
international security. Thanks to the unwavering 
policy of the socialist countries and of all peaceloving 
forces it had been possible to reduce the 
threat of war and intensify the peaceful coexistence 
of States with different social systems, 
7 9. In July, the Secretary General of the Central 
Committee of the Soviet Communist Party and 
Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet 
of the USSR, Mr. Brezhnev, had said that it would 
be possible for mankind entering the twenty-first 
century to enjoy conditions of peace more stable 
than ever in the past. In his message to the 
General Conference, however, he had stated the 
following: 
"We must not be blind to the fact that 
the forces in the world which would like to 
possess nuclear weapons as a means of 
threatening the people have not yet been 
eliminated. For this reason the problem of 
placing a reliable barrier in the way of 
nuclear weapons proliferation and of 
preventing the danger of nuclear war is now 
acute as never before. 

"The International Atomic Energy 
Agency has a major part to play in the 
solution of this extremely important 
problem and we express the hope that it 
will make every effort to ensure that the 
atom serves only the interests of peace. " 

80. During the twenty years of its existence, 
the Agency had worked to "accelerate and enlarge 
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world", and his 
delegation was particularly satisfied with the 
results achieved in safeguards, nuclear power 
generation, nuclear safety and nuclear information 
handling. 
81. The number of countries proficient in 
nuclear technology and in possession of significant 
amounts of nuclear material, including 
plutonium, was growing - and with it the risk of 
nuclear weapons proliferation. The importance 
of NPT and of the Agency's safeguards was 
therefore obvious, and his delegation was in 
favour of an intensification of the Agency's 
activities in the safeguards field. The scope of 
the Agency's safeguards would have to be considerably 
broadened in order to include all 
facilities involved in the fuel cycle and hence 
guarantee the possibility of effective controls on 
all nuclear activities in all non-nuclear-weapon 
States regardless of whether those States had 
acceded to NPT. Accordingly, his delegation 
supported the proposal to increase the staff and 
the budget of the Department of Safeguards. 

82. The Byelorussian SSR considered that all 
countries exporting nuclear materials, equipment 
and technology should, in their export policies, 
apply standards which would render nuclear 
weapons proliferation completely impossible. 
Strict standards would also have to be applied in 
accounting for and controlling nuclear materials 
used in programmes for nuclear explosions for 
peaceful purposes (PNE). 
83. His delegation was concerned about reports 
that South Africa was developing nuclear weapons 
and preparing to test them. The South African 
racists, who had not signed NPT, were feverishly 
trying to increase their nuclear potential. The 
making of nuclear weapons by South Africa would 
have very serious and far-reaching consequences 
for international peace and security, and the 
dangerous intentions of the Pretoria regime should 
therefore be condemned in the strongest terms. 
In that connection, he noted that the campaign 
being conducted by certain western circles in 
favour of the neutron bomb was giving rise to 
legitimate concern and condemnation. 
84. His delegation commended the Agency's 
work relating to the creation of multinational 
nuclear fuel cycle centres and to physical protection. 
The international meetings organized by 
the Agency, like the Salzburg Conference, were 
also important, for they provided opportunities 
for valuable exchanges of information. 
85. As regards the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy in his country, significant progress had 
been made, especially in nuclear physics and 
related areas; research was being conducted in a 
variety of fields, including nuclear structure, 
nuclear spectroscopy, the structure of radiation 
defects and the kinetics of their accumulation, 
magnetic neutron radiography and neutron activation 
analysis and its practical applications. In 
addition, work was being done on nuclear data 
evaluation and in the field of radiation chemistry. 
Radioisotopes were being used widely and for a 
great variety of purposes in science, technology, 
medicine and agriculture. A reactor of the IRT 
type and a number of accelerators and gamma 
installations were being used in research work, 
the results of which might well be of use to the 
Agency, with which his country was prepared to 
consider possibilities for co-operation. 
-8 



GC(XXI)/OR. 198 


86. In the Byelorussian SSR, intensive research 
and design work was continuing on a nuclear 
power station with a reactor using dissociating 
nitrogen tetroxide as coolant and heat-transfer 
fluid. Experiments and theoretical studies had 
yielded positive results and a 300-MW demonstration 
plant had been designed. A substantial 
expansion of nuclear power generation during the 
next few decades would probably be possible only 
with the participation of fast reactors. Hence, 
the nuclear power station being developed would 
have a gas-cooled fast reactor with a high heatdensity 
core in no way inferior to the core of 
reactors with a liquid-metal coolant. The 
Republics of the Soviet Union and also Poland, 
Hungary, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia - as 
Members of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA) - were playing a direct part 
in the project. 
87. The natural energy resources of the 
Byelorussian SSR were insufficient to meet - in 
the long run - the growing demand for thermal 
energy for industrial and communal purposes, 
and the possibility was therefore being considered 
of building a nuclear plant to provide heat for the 
town of Minsk. In that connection, his delegation 
considered the question of multipurpose reactors 
to be a fairly important one which should find an 
appropriate place among the Agency's activities. 
88. His country appreciated the work being done 
by the Agency in the field of technical assistance 
and had great understanding for the desire of 
developing countries to use the energy of the atom 
in accelerating their economic development. 
89. Announcing that the Byelorussian SSR 
proposed to contribute 20 000 roubles in national 
currency in 1978, he said that the equipment, 
instruments and materials purchased with the 
money should be given primarily to those 
developing countries which had acceded to NPT. 
90. In conclusion, he expressed confidence that 
the Agency would continue to help in solving the 
major problems of the peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy for the good of the world and the 
welfare of all peoples. 
91. Mr. SACADURA CABRAL (Portugal) 
congratulated the President and the Director 
General on their election, 
92. The consumption of electricity in Portugal 
was still far below that of other European 
countries, and it could thus be expected to 
increase in the future. However Portugal was 
not rich in natural energy resources, and the 
Government envisaged installing nuclear reactors 
to produce the electricity needed to promote the 
economic development of the country. Since the 
technology and the know-how for building such 
power plants would have to be provided from 
abroad, his Government welcomed the Director 
General's report on some of the most urgent 
problems connected with the introduction of 
nuclear power in less developed nations 
(GC(XXI)/INF/169, paras 8-32). 
93. In Portugal, the reorganization of nuclear 
activities had been studied carefully, and a white 
paper was being prepared for submission to the 
Legislative Assembly together with the Government's 
proposals regarding the introduction of 
nuclear power. The Administration was currently 
reorganizing its structure so that it could better 
deal with the needs of the years to come. If those 
proposals became law, the identity and functions 
of the Portuguese Nuclear Energy Board would be 
transferred to the Department of Energy, to be 
created in the Ministry of Industry and Technology. 
That Department would also be concerned with 
fossil fuels, electricity production and alternative 
energy sources. The Nuclear Research Centre 
at Sacavem, near Lisbon, would be integrated in 
a National Laboratory, under the same Ministry, 
and would concentrate on research and development 
in industry and energy. Furthermore, a 
public enterprise, ENU, had been established to 
exploit uranium resources; it would take over the 
production of uranium concentrates from the 
Mining Department of the Nuclear Energy Board. 
Finally, measures had been taken to establish an 
adequate regulatory organization in Portugal. 
94. Portugal was in favour of the strengthening 
of peace and co-operation, and consequently fully 
endorsed the objectives set forth in Article II of 
the Agency's Statute. Agency safeguards were 
already applied to the research reactor at 
Sacavem, and would be applied to the Portuguese 
nuclear power programme. However, the 
mechanisms associated with the proper application 
of safeguards should never stand in the way 
of legitimate wishes for continued economic 
development. 
95. Since the last General Conference Portugal's 
ties with the Agency had been strengthened. Much 
technical assistance had begun to arrive in 1977, 
and the Agency's assistance in tackling problems 
connected with the introduction of nuclear power, 
by providing advisory services and special 
missions, was taking good shape. 
96. The twentieth anniversary of the IAEA was 
a very important occasion; the role which the 
Agency would be called upon to play in the years 
until the end of the century would be even more 
important to the countries of the world. Questions 
such as the application of safeguards and the 
physical protection of the environment, as well as 
the increased provision of technical assistance to 
less developed countries, were vital to the 
establishment of a mutually beneficial system of 
international relations. 
97. However, the Agency would not be able to 
fulfil its tasks without carefully reviewing its 
funding mechanisms, and the system of financing 
and implementing the technical assistance 
programme. The introduction of a long-term 
planning basis for that programme would attenuate 
the problems encountered in its implementation. 
In that connection the Portuguese authorities 
approved of the report and accounts of the Agency 
for 1976 and of the budget for 1978. 

GC(XXI)/OR. 198 

98. Mr. MEYER (Uruguay) said that in the 
course of the Agency's first 20 years Uruguay 
had been engaged in almost all the main fields of 
activity which the Agency was promoting and that 
period also marked the beginning of a new era for 
his country. 
99. The Uruguayan National Atomic Energy 
Commission had recently been reorganized and a 
new Nuclear Medicine Centre had been set up, the 
scientific level of which was such that the World 
Health Organization had nominated it as a 
Reference Centre. He was honoured to offer the 
facilities of that Centre to the Agency and its 
Member States for scientific meetings and the 
training of specialists. 
100. The application of nuclear techniques in 
agriculture in Uruguay was particularly important, 
as Uruguay could become an important exporter of 
foodstuffs. It had all the basic conditions for that 
but, as competition between countries in the world 
was becoming ever more intense, Uruguay would 
have to endeavour to increase, improve and reduce 
the price of its production; the scientific control of 
the soil, water, fertilizers, crops, cattle etc. 
would considerably increase the yield of those 
resources. 
101. For that reason Uruguay had elaborated and 
was implementing an ambitious programme for 
the application of radioisotopes in agriculture, in 
which it placed great hopes. The present year 
would also see the establishment of a health 
physics service, the function of which would be to 
monitor personnel exposed to radiation. The 
services of the Nuclear Research Centre had been 
re-evaluated in the light of current requirements 
and now comprised the following: (1) a Central 
Radioisotope Service, (2) a Radiopharmaceutical 
Production Unit, (3) an Industrial Applications 
Laboratory, (4) an Activation Analysis Laboratory, 
(5) support for the programme on radioactive 
mineral resources, and (6) support for the food 
irradiation programmes. Without prejudice to 
the above, the principal task of the Centre in the 
future would be to train specialists in the different 
fields required for the implementation of 
Uruguay's nuclear power programme. 

102. Uruguay did not at the present time possess 
any non-renewable energy resources and oil 
imports now absorbed approximately 30% of 
proceeds from the country's exports. To try and 
rectify that situation, his Government had adopted 
a policy aimed at fully exploiting the hydroelectric 
potential of the country. Work would start soon on 
the 300-MW Palmar Dam project and work would 
be completed shortly on the 1890-MW Salto Grande 
project being undertaken jointly with Argentina. 
Together those projects would provide Uruguay 
with an additional 1245 MW of capacity by 1982. 
At the same time, measures would be taken to 
rationalize the use of energy and make use of nonconventional 
sources, although it was realized 
that the latter could be no more than a palliative. 
103. The demand for electricity was increasing 
at a cumulative rate of more than 7. 5% a year in 
Uruguay which meant that the only option in the 
nineties would be nuclear power. In the light of 
that, plans had been made to accelerate work on 
the prospection of new uranium resources, to 
train specialist technical personnel and to 
construct a number of research reactors; indeed 
the first of those, with a capacity of 10 kW, was 
due to go critical by the end of the year. 

104. Being a Latin American country and, as 
such, one of the creators of the first denuclearized 
zone on the planet, Uruguay had always supported 
the Agency's safeguards system. However, it 
felt that the enormous effort being devoted to 
safeguards should be balanced by an increase in 
the programmes of technical assistance for the 
least developed countries. 
105. Likewise he urged that the amount of 
technical assistance granted to developing 
countries should be calculated taking into account 
the relation, favourable to the Agency, between 
the amount contributed under the heading of safeguards 
by such countries and the minimal outlay 
required to apply safeguards to the embryonic 
nuclear programmes in developing countries. 
106. More funds should be allocated to technical 
assistance, since that was the most important of 
the Agency's programmes for the developing 
countries. In view of its importance that 
programme should not be based essentially on 
voluntary contributions. He proposed that bi- or 
triennial programmes be introduced (at least on 
an experimental basis), as in some cases those 
would be more appropriate than the annual 
programmes. It was necessary for the Agency to 
maintain a proper balance between its technical 
assistance and safeguards activities. It was 
logical that the development of nuclear power 
should result in an expansion of safeguards but it 
was not right for one programme to be expanded 
at the expense of another. 
107. Uruguay also supported the proposal that a 
study be carried out on the question of the equitable 
geographical distribution of Member States 
in the Board of Governors. 
108. In conclusion Uruguay pledged its full 
assessed contribution to the General Fund for 
1978 by way of demonstrating its continued 
confidence in the work of the Agency. 
109. Mr. AROCHA CASTRESANA (Venezuela) 
said that the Venezuelan Government shared the 
views expressed by representatives of other 
countries concerning the important role of the 
Agency in the development of nuclear energy in 
both the industrialized countries and the 
developing countries. The activities of the Agency 
in connection with safeguards were evidence of the 
high trust placed in it by the international 
community. 
110. It appeared, however, that the provision of 
technical assistance, which was one of the main 
objectives of the Agency, was being subordinated 
to other activities. That matter should be given 
- 10 



GC(XXI)/OR. 198 


careful consideration and corrective action taken 
if necessary. 

111. Although Venezuela had been a Member of 
the Agency from the very start, it had, for 
reasons which he would explain, up to the present 
not demonstrated its interest in nuclear energy. 
Venezuela was an oil-producing country of the 
Third World which exported a raw material 
without major processing. That export was the 
mainspring for most of the country's economic 
activity and generated 90% of its income. That 
was why, in the international context, Venezuela's 
economic policy was co-ordinated with the efforts 
of the developing countries. Given its strategic 
importance, oil could be a factor in the promotion 
of a new economic order which would result in a 
fairer distribution of the world's wealth and 
prosperity. 
112. Venezuela's economic and energy policies 
were based on conservationist principles and 
were intended to prevent depletion of its oil 
resources by the end of the century. For that 
reason oil production had been reduced from over 
3 million bbl per day to 2 million bbl per day. In 
that way a satisfactory ratio of 20 to 1 between 
reserves and production could be maintained. 
The conservationist policy was favourable to the 
development of industrialization and of a 
diversified domestic economy. Efforts were also 
being made to find other fuels so that oil and gas 
could be used more for activities like petrochemistry 
or transport. 
113. All those considerations had led Venezuela 
to consider alternative sources of energy and to 
engage in integral planning of all the country's 
energy resources. Priority had been given in 
that connection to the use of water power for the 
generation of electricity. Venezuela had a 
potential electric power supply of 20 000 MW 
available to industry and the economy. Of that 
amount 12 000 MW would be in use in 1985. 
Steps were also being taken to promote coal-fired 
generation of electricity to supply a new regional 
programme of iron and steel production. 
114. However, even full utilization of coal and 
water resources would not suffice to meet the 
long-term electrification plans of the country and 
therefore it would become necessary around 1990 
to turn to hydrocarbons or other sources of 
energy. For those reasons it had been considered 
necessary for the National Council for the Development 
of the Nuclear Industry (CONAN) to make an 
evaluation of the country's nuclear capabilities. 
115. Obviously, the development of nuclear 
industry and technology for peaceful purposes, 
including the generation of electricity, would have 
to be undertaken gradually and without undue 
haste. First priority had been given to prospecting 
for uranium in order that the country's reserves 
could be estimated and in the realization that 
existing world reserves were insufficient to meet 
the requirements of additional installed capacity. 
In that way Venezuela was showing its determination 
not to have to become an energy importer. 
116. The exploration carried out thus far had 
revealed the presence of promising anomalies, 
which were now being studied more intensively. 
Venezuela was interested in international cooperation 
which would help provide better training 
for its young geologists, geophysicists and geochemists, 
but it was concerned that such cooperation 
should not in any way compromise its 
uranium reserves. 
117. In view of the great interdependence between 
technology and the development of the nuclear 
power industry, special attention was being paid 
to the training of professional personnel in 
matters of nuclear planning in order that decisions 
which had to be taken in nuclear matters should be 
made by qualified persons. The co-operation of 
the Agency was, of course, of fundamental 
Importance in that connection and Venezuela hoped 
that it would be able to count on Agency assistance 
as in the past. 
118. Venezuela attributed great importance to 
the task of ensuring that nuclear energy was used 
for peaceful purposes only. That position, which 
was the traditional Latin American one, had been 
reiterated by the President of the Republic in 
statements to the General Assembly of the United 
Nations and on the occasion of visits to various 
continents. Long before NPT, Venezuela and 
other Latin American countries had sponsored the 
Tlatelolco Treaty and it was an active supporter 
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL), the 
organization of that regional treaty. It was concerned 
that OPANAL should be concerned solely 
with problems of nuclear weapons prohibition and 
not have to deal with other nuclear matters. As 
far as peaceful uses were concerned, it had given 
maximum support to the Inter-American Nuclear 
Energy Commission, which was part of the 
Organization of American States. 
119. Although Venezuela, by reason of its own 
power resources, could afford to take a more 
conservative approach to reaching a decision on 
nuclear power, it realized that the situation was 
different in other countries where the nuclear 
alternative was an immediate necessity in order 
to fill the gap left by the depletion of fossil fuels. 
120. Mr. SUKIJBAMRUNG (Thailand) said that 
in the past twenty years the Agency had come a 
long way in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, as had been envisaged by President 
Eisenhower when he had declared his "Atoms for 
Peace" programme in 1953. Like other developing 
countries, Thailand appreciated the promotional 
role of the Agency, in particular the technical 
assistance it provided in the fields of medicine, 
agriculture and industry. That assistance should 
continue during the next decade as it still constituted 
the basic help that many developing countries 
urgently needed. 
121. The past few years had seen the Agency 
emphasizing the promotion of nuclear energy, in 
particular, in manpower planning. Training 
courses, jointly organized by the Agency and 
- 11 



GC(XXI)/OR. 198 

certain developed Western States, had taken 
place. In Thailand full advantage had been taken 
of that programme, since it was known that the 
technical ability of staff was crucial to the 
launching of a national nuclear power programme. 
However, a problem that occurred from time to 
time in both developing and developed countries 
was the unfavourable opinion of the public with 
regard to the building of nuclear power plants. 
Since the Agency was both a promotional and 
regulatory organization, it should and could do 
much to alleviate fears and misconceptions about 
nuclear energy. His delegation wished to see a 
more active role played by the relevant department 
of the Agency in that field. Books or 
pamphlets written in plain language refuting the 
more common criticisms of nuclear energy could 
be published in various languages. Other publications 
or other action aimed at preventing misunderstandings 
on the part of the public could also 

be planned as required. 

122. With the expansion of nuclear energy the 
role of safeguards increased in importance and 
involved the Agency in considerable expenditure, 
obliging all Agency Members to take political 
considerations into account. That expansion gave 
rise to the most important issue of the time, that 
of how to develop nuclear power programmes 
without being excessively burdened by questions 
of proliferation. As a party to NPT, Thailand 
believed in nuclear non-proliferation, and still 
felt that non-proliferation could go hand in hand 
with the receipt of urgently needed nuclear technology. 
A regional fuel cycle centre, once free 
of technical and political difficulties, was perhaps 
the answer to that question which had not yet found 
a solution. He agreed with the Director General's 
comment in his opening statement to the 
Conference that a policy of denying the existence 
of nuclear technology could only be self-defeating 
in the end. That issue would remain for the next 
few years or perhaps the next decade unless those 
transferring and receiving nuclear technology 
could achieve mutual trust and understanding. The 
nuclear-weapon States could also improve the 
political climate by moving nearer towards nuclear 
disarmament, as was required of them by NPT. 
123. As a member of the Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development, and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(the RCA Agreement)! 5], Thailand was 
naturally pleased to see that agreement extended 
for another five years. He hoped that there would 
be more financial and technical support for many 
worthwhile regional projects. He particularly 
welcomed Australia's membership in the agreement 
and hoped that Japan, which was another 
developed country in the Asian region, would also 
join. 
124. At the General Conference held in Rio de 
Janeiro in 1976 the head of his delegation had 
[5] The text of the agreement is reproduced in 
document INPCIRC/167. 
urged that, as the Agency entered its twentieth 
year, understanding and foresight should prevail 
in certain quarters and that mutual tolerance and 
accommodation should be permanent features of 
future sessions. In that spirit, his delegation 
hoped that serious consideration would be given 
to the proposal of the South Asian, Middle 
Eastern, and African regions to amend 
Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute. Thailand supported 
the proposal in principle, as it felt that it was 
only fair to correct the under-representation of 
those areas. 

125. In conclusion, he reiterated his Government's 
firm support for the work of the Agency, 
especially its technical assistance programme. 
To that end Thailand had already pledged its 
assessed share of the Regular Budget and the 
voluntary fund for 1978. He congratulated 
Dr. Sigvard Eklund for his unanimous re-election 
as Director General of the Agency for another 
term. With his leadership and long experience 
another successful four years were assured. 
126. Mr. KAPSAMBELIS (Greece) expressed his 
Government's appreciation to the Secretariat for 
the contribution it made to the activities of the 
Agency, especially in the fields of technical 
assistance, nuclear power, nuclear safety and 
safeguards. At the beginning of the third decade 
of the Agency's existence, it was most appropriate 
that the activities foreseen in the texts of 
Articles III, X and XI of the Statute should be 
further expanded and his Government noted with 
pleasure that the Agency had already begun to 
show interest in developing those activities, 
127. In his opening statement to the General 
Conference, the Director General had referred to 
the need for irrevocable access, at a reasonable 
price, to nuclear fuel and fuel cycle services for 
nuclear power plants and to the suggestion that an 
international pool of nuclear fuel be established. 
He had also referred to the Agency's interest in 
the international fuel cycle evaluation which, his 
delegation understood, was to be organized 
shortly at a meeting in which the Agency would 
participate. His delegation also understood that 
one of the important items to be discussed at that 
meeting would deal with assurances for long-term 
supply of nuclear fuel for nuclear power plants. 
128. His Government was pleased that the Agency 
would be participating in that meeting for the 
important reason that the Agency could convey the 
views and provide information about the interests 
of Member States not taking part in the studies 
that would be undertaken. In that connection, and 
following a proposal the Greek delegation made 
to the Director General at the twentieth session 
of the General Conference, his Government suggested 
that the Director General should urge the 
participants at that meeting to include the question 
of assurances for long-term supply of nuclear 
fuel for research reactors amongst the studies, 

129. A number of Member States, including 
Greece, had encountered delays and complications 
in the supply of fuel for their research reactors. 
- 12 

GC (XXI)/OR. 198 


Such delays and uncertainties jeopardized the 
continued operation of the reactors and experiments 
being carried out with them. His Government 
suggested that the Director General should 
present to the proposed meeting estimates of the 
future needs of Member States for fuel for their 
research reactors for the next 5 or 10 years. He 
might also request that arrangements be considered 
for the assured supply of such fuel through 
the Agency under reasonable terms and conditions 
consistent with non-proliferation objectives. Such 
arrangements should be studied separately from 

arrangements related to the assured supply of 
power reactor fuel. 

130, His Government believed that the establishment 
of assured supply of nuclear fuel through the 
Agency would further contribute to the development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
that the Agency would thus have more efficient 
control of nuclear material, which was of great 
importance to world peace. 

• The meeting rose at 5. 40 p. m. 
- 13 



GC(XXI)/OR. 199 

International Atomic Energy Agency June 1978* 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 

TWENTY-FIRST REGULAR SESSION: 26-3 0 SEPTEMBER 1977 

RECORD OF THE ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, on Friday, 30 September 1977, at 10. 15 a. m. 

President: Mr. ETEMAD (Iran) 

Item of the 
agenda** Subject Paragraphs 
12 Examination of delegates' credentials 1-2 
7 General debate and annual report for 1976 (continued) 3-2 5 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Switzerland 3-1 0 
Peru 11-17 
Zaire 18 - 25 
Statement by the President regarding the twenty- 26 - 33 
third regular session of the General Conference 
13 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 34 - 55 
The work of the Committee of the Whole 56 
The Agency's accounts for 1976 57 
16 The Agency's budget for 1977 58 
9 The Agency's budget for 1978 59 
10 Scale of assessment of Members' contributions for 1978 60 
11 Amendment of Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute 61 
17 Appointment of the External Auditor 62 - 63 
14 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 64 - 65 
15 Voluntary contributions to the GeneralFund for 1978 66 - 67 
Closing of the session 68 - 77 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 18 October 1977. 
** GC(XXI)/591. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXI)/INF/170/Rev. 2. 


GC(XXI)/OR. 199 

THE RECORD 

EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES1 CREDENTIALS 
(GC(XXI)/593) 

1. The PRESIDENT drew the General 
Conference's attention to document GC(XXI)/593, 
which contained the report of the General 
Committee on examination of delegates' credentials. 
It was stated in the first paragraph that, at its 
twenty-eighth meeting on 28 September the General 
Committee had examined the credentials of delegates 
to the session, as provided for in Rule 28 of 
the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference. 
In subsequent paragraphs it was noted that 
credentials satisfying the requirements of Rule 27 
of the Rules of Procedure had been submitted to 
the Director General for the delegates of 73 Members. 
The report likewise indicated the General 
Committee's approach to its task, as also opinions 
that had been expressed. The last paragraph 
contained a draft resolution recommended for 
adoption by the Conference. 
• 2. The draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXI)/593 was adopted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 
1976 (GC(XXI)/580) (continuedfl]) 

3. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) congratulated 
the President of the Conference on behalf of his 
Government and the Government of the Principality 
of Liechtenstein. He also extended congratulations 
to Mr. Sigvard Eklund on the renewal of the 
General Conference's trust in him and, lastly, 
thanked the Austrian authorities for the hospitality 
accorded to the Agency and its various bodies. 
4. In the field of nuclear energy research and 
development, his country had continued to give 
priority to high-temperature reactors. The joint 
study of that reactor type, carried out over some 
20 years in conjunction with the Federal Republic 
of Germany, had brought positive results in that 
recently the full competitiveness of the hightemperature 
reactor with high-power gas turbine 
operating in direct cycle had been established. 
For some ten years past his country had likewise 
interested itself in the development of gas-cooled 
fast-breeder reactors under a programme being 
implemented by General Atomic. It was therefore 
with interest that his Government had followed the 
course of negotiations between the Ministry of 
Research and Technology of the Federal Republic 
of Germany, the United States Energy Research 
and Development Administration, and the French 
Atomic Energy Commission, and had decided to 
participate in a co-operation agreement on hightemperature 
gas-cooled reactors, which was due 
to be signed that same day at Bonn. 
5. As for Switzerland1 s collaboration in the 
activities of the Agency, his Government was par[
1] GC(XXI)/OR. 198 
ticularly interested in studies on nuclear safety, 
nuclear information, and irradiation of foodstuffs. 
In the field of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons 
and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, it was to 
be noted that his country had ratified the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT)[2] on 9 March 1977, following lengthy discussion 
in Parliament. It was hoped that other 
States would do their share toward making NPT 
truly universal in character, thereby enabling an 
advance to be made toward uniform non-proliferation 
conditions for the world as a whole. 

6. Since it lacked substantial fossil fuel resources, 
Switzerland, although an exporter of 
nuclear equipment, was basically a fuel importer 
and a customer for fuel cycle services furnished 
abroad. Its contribution to combating proliferation 
stemmed from a principle which it regarded as 
fundamental, i. e. that no action undertaken to that 
end should violate a State's freedom to utilize 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes once it had 
agreed to furnish the basic guarantees as laid down 
in NPT. In his Government's view, no measures 
taken or to be taken should be aimed at restricting 
that freedom or even at introducing discriminatory 
rules; on the contrary, they should be directed 
toward the freer use of nuclear energy by all 
States without discrimination. 
7. That principle was likewise the basic idea 
underlying the work of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency. There was therefore a need to 
reinforce measures to combat proliferation on 
the following four fronts: (1) international safeguards, 
which should continue to be a pillar of the 
non-proliferation system; (2) control of exports 
of nuclear materials, equipment and know-how. 
In that regard it was to be noted that work was in 
progress on strengthening the regime governing 
the institution of safeguards; (3) physical protection 
of nuclear installations, materials and transport 
operations. Responsibility there lay with 
Governments, and provision should be made for 
the exchange of reciprocal guarantees under an 
international agreement; and (4) access to nuclear 
fuel cycle services, such services being provided 
through machinery designed to minimize the risk 
of proliferation. In order to achieve that objective, 
there might be need to regroup various sensitive 
operations of the cycle in a single centre, and also 
to concentrate those operations in a very small 
number of multinational centres. 
8. By that dual technological and geo-political 
regroupment, the aims of non-proliferation, 
environmental protection, economies of scale, and 
safe access to fuel cycle services would be promoted, 
and the system of political security given 
greater strength through increased interdependence 
among States. It was for that reason that his 
country intended to participate in the nuclear fuel 
cycle evaluation proposed by the Government of 
the United States of America. It hoped that 
through that evaluation it would be possible to make 
[2] Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 
-2 



GC(XXI)/OR. 199 


a systematic study of ways and means of combating 
proliferation; and, further, that the exercise would 
provide answers to the questions posed and lead to 
a consensus on an international civil nuclear energy 
policy. 

9. To be sure, any coherent system for combating 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons had to 
embrace technical objectives (safeguards, 
physical protection, organization of the fuel cycle), 
but it should also encompass a political objective 
(renouncement of nuclear weapons). The international 
system of technical and legal safeguards 
could ensure a very high degree of confidence in 
non-proliferation. It should, however, be recognized 
that non-proliferation could never be 
absolutely guaranteed for obvious reasons associated 
with matters of technology and cost. The gap 
would therefore have to be filled by the political 
will to renounce nuclear weapons. That responsibility 
in the first instance was the concern of the 
nuclear-weapon States; they should reduce the 
temptations in the way of other States by exhibiting 
a real desire for nuclear disarmament. 
10. In conclusion, he extended warm wishes on 
behalf of his country's authorities and of the 
Principality of Liechtenstein to the Agency on the 
occasion of its twentieth anniversary and expressed 
the hope that the spirit of co-operation hitherto 
reigning within the Agency would continue to 
prevail in the future. 
11. Mr. BARREDA DELGADO (Peru), on behalf 
of his delegation, congratulated the President on 
his election, which was due both to his personal 
ability and to his Government1 s efforts to use 
atomic energy for peaceful development purposes. 
He also congratulated the Director General on his 
reappointment to a post in which he had already 
shown far from ordinary capabilities. The 
astonishingly rapid expansion of the Agency's 
activities could not be measured better than by the 
universality of the participation, during the twentyfirst 
session of the General Conference, in the consideration 
of questions which just a short time 
previously had been on the secret list. 
12. Peru, like other Member States, had 
received valuable assistance from the Agency 
thanks to which it had been able to embark upon the 
implementation of a plan aimed at creating the 
conditions for an effective use of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes at the cost of a reasonable 
national effort. Peru had to learn how to use 
nuclear techniques while establishing the infrastructure 
that would enable it to solve important 
socio-economic problems, such as increasing 
agricultural productivity, improving standards of 
public health, and so on. 
13. Peru intended also to investigate its uranium 
reserves, and for that purpose proposed to organize 
a team of qualified specialists. With the help 
of that team it would study the possibility of participating 
in the world uranium market. Moreover, 
a thorough study was being made of the utilization 
of nuclear energy for electricity generation, which 
would also make it possible to assess the country's 
nuclear fuel requirements. It was imperative for 
Peru to undertake such activities within its 
economic means, without neglecting more urgent 
needs, and taking care to apply all the safety 
measures that were required. 

14. Such a plan could not be implemented without 
outside help, which Peru hoped to obtain either 
from the Agency and the United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP) or under bilateral 
agreements. Negotiations were already being held 
with Argentina to that end. Peru fully agreed 
with the comments made by the Director General at 
the opening meeting regarding the necessity of 
only submitting requests for assistance in respect 
of specific well-planned programmes. It was 
currently witnessing an example of fruitful planned 
co-operation, the success of which was due mainly 
to exchanges of technology. 
15. He wished to stress that before even undertaking 
the least activity in the nuclear field Peru 
had signed all the international treaties and agreements 
on safeguards and non-proliferation. In 
that connection it appeared that certain countries 
wanted to apply sanctions as a preventive measure, 
and it was precisely those countries which had 
transgressed and continued to transgress. Would 
it not be simpler to preach by example? His 
delegation wondered if it would not be better to 
give NPT the title: "Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
and Reduction of Nuclear Weapons". 
16. The world was currently aiming at a levelling 
of standards of living. Energy could, without any 
doubt, contribute considerably to such an end, and 
the limitation of access to the relevant techniques 
could only lead to neo-colonialism. By exploring 
the microcosm, science and technology had put 
energy and the instruments needed to learn about 
the macrocosm at the disposal of mankind, but, 
in fact, little progress had been made on the path 
of direct communication between men, which was 
the best way of eliminating differences and of 
finding the road to truth, peace and the common 
good. The Conference could show the way, and 
that was why "the spirit of Vienna" had been 
spoken of. 

17. He hoped that that spirit would be preserved 
and would make it possible to find common solutions 
to common problems. 
18. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) congratulated 
the President on his election and Mr. Eklund 
on his reappointment as Director General. 
19. As he was participating for the fifteenth 
consecutive year in the discussions and debates of 
the General Conference, he thought he was in a 
position to identify the strengths and weaknesses 
of the Agency. In the first place, the nuclear 
experience, which had been lived through with 
much intensity, had nevertheless taken place too 
much in isolation, so that the year 1977 seemed 
to be the year of questioning everything at all 
levels. As Ralph Bunche had stressed, the 
Agency could not hope to live and grow in a political 
ivory tower. It had to take into account the 
-3 



GC(XXI)/OR. 199 

legitimate preoccupations: (a) of a world that 
saw its vital resources such as water and air 
dwindling; (b) of a Third World that felt itself 
crushed by an economic order that it considered 
to be increasingly unjust; and (c) of the countries 
"without nuclear rank" which felt themselves more 
and more forgotten in the face of the preoccupations 
of the Great Powers with regard to the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 

20. To take account of all those preoccupations, 
a sound policy should be developed without either 
haste or procrastination. Such a policy had already 
been embarked upon with NPT; it was continuing 
in the restrictions on international trade involving 
the nuclear "thing" - too late as far as South Africa 
was concerned - but was inadequately reflected in 
the rules and directives governing the Agency. 

21. On that point he was, he knew, in profound 
disagreement with many delegations which saw in 
political preoccupations a danger of rupturing the 
"delicate balance" that had been established in the 
Agency, particularly in the Board of Governors. 
However, the delicate balance of yesterday was no 
longer that of today. Yesterday the balance had 
had to be established between East and West; 
today it was between the advanced and the developing 
countries, namely between North and South. 
All that was necessary was to apply that golden 
rule of the United Nations under which all sovereign 
States were equal in law. 
22. Representation on the Board of Governors 
should therefore take into account, in an equitable 
manner, the numerical strength of the "Africa" 
and the "Middle East and South Asia" areas. It 
was for that reason that his delegation supported 
the draft resolution for amending Article VI. A. 2 
of the Statute and welcomed the replacement of 
South Africa by Egypt on the Board of Governors. 
23. Another delicate balance was implicitly provided 
for in Article II of the Statute, namely the 
balance to be maintained between the Agency's two 
main objectives: on the one hand to enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world, and on the other 
hand to ensure that the assistance provided was 
not used in such a way as to further military 
purposes. 
24. All the Members of the Agency had agreed 
to follow that noble objective, in particular by 
means of an adequate and equitable budgetary 
policy. However, for some years past the budgetary 
policy of the Agency appeared to show that 
the regulatory activities, or safeguards, were 
being favoured at the expense of promotion, or 
technical assistance. That belief was confirmed 
by the fact: (a) that the promotional activities were 
financed by voluntary contributions, while safeguards 
activities were totally financed from the 
Regular Budget; (b) that, because of monetary 
erosion and the multiplication of those requesting 
assistance, the technical assistance capacity of 
the Agency seemed to be stagnating or even 
diminishing; and (c) that the administration of 
technical assistance seemed to be relatively 
inefficient, as the report of the "Five Wise Men" 
had shown. With regard to the latter point it 
would be worth reviewing and supplementing that 
report; more emphasis should be put on the 
"equipment" and "fellowships" components than 
on the "experts" component. 

25. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the 
climate of confrontation that had sometimes 
characterized the Agency's work would give way to 
a new climate based on confidence. 
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT REGARDING 
THE TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION OF 
THE GENERAL CONFERENCE 

26. The PRESIDENT said that the Government 
of India intended to invite the General Conference 
of the International Atomic Energy Agency to hold 
its twenty-third regular session in India in 1979. 
The invitation would be officially extended at the 
twenty-second regular session of the Conference. 
27. He wished to thank the delegate of India for 
that information. 
28. Mr. KATORI (Japan) recalled that his 
country had had the honour of hosting the General 
Conference in Tokyo in 1965. During recent years 
his country had been steadfastly devoted to the 
cause of peaceful utilization of atomic energy. 
It warmly welcomed the invitation of the Indian 
Government to hold the twenty-third regular 
session of the General Conference in India in 1979, 
as that would further the progress of international 
collaboration. 

29. Mr. GARCIA-L6PEZ SANTAOLALLA 
(Mexico) also welcomed the offer of the Indian 
Government to hold the twenty-third regular 
session of the General Conference in India. He 
was certain that that country's achievements in 
regard to the standardization of improved nuclear 
techniques would guarantee the success of the 
Conference. 
30. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil) pointed out how 
important it was to hold sessions of the Agency's 
General Conference away from Vienna. The 
Agency's accomplishments were in fact not always 
well known in the outside world and it was necessary 
for other countries to gain a better understanding 
of the importance of those activities. 
That had been the case with Brazil, which .had been 
able to acquaint delegates with its aims in regard 
to nuclear technology. Holding sessions of the 
General Conference in countries other than Austria 
made it possible to establish durable relations, 
which was very important. It would also be very 
interesting for delegates to be able to form an idea 
of the problems with which India was confronted. 
31. He recalled that the spirit of Rio de Janeiro 
had been the spirit of understanding and reciprocity 
and he was sure that that could result only in the 
furtherance of peace and enhanced co-operation in 
all areas, including science and technology. 
-4 



GC(XXI)/OR. 199 

32. Finally, he quoted a passage from the Koran: • 42. The result of the election of two Members 
"One can perform a miracle on earth if the miracle from the area of Eastern Europe was as follows: 
exists in the heart of men. " 
Abstentions: 7 

33. Mr. CASTRO-MADERO (Argentina) said he 
wished to express his gratitude to the Government 
of India for inviting the Agency's General 
Conference to hold its twenty-third regular session 
in India. His delegation welcomed the invitation 
and was sure that it would enable all delegates to 
gain a better understanding of that country, to 
witness the progress made in the nuclear sector, 
and to promote a process of co-operation which 
would help in consolidating world peace. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF 
GOVERNORS (GC(XXI)/592) 

34. The PRESIDENT drew attention to his 
memorandum in document GC(XXI)/592 on the 
election of Members to the Board; in paragraph 2 
of that document he notified the Conference that 
12 Members had to be elected to the Board, 
specifying the geographical areas in respect of 
which elections were required and the number of 
Members to be elected from each area. 
• 35. At the invitation of the President, a 
member of the Egyptian delegation and a member 
of the Irish delegation acted as tellers. 
• 36. A vote was taken by secret ballot to 
elect 12 Members to the Board of Governors. 
37. The PRESIDENT informed the General 
Conference of the result of the voting. 
• 38. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Latin America was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 1 
Valid votes: 163 
Required majority: 41 

Votes obtained: 
Peru 82 
Ecuador 81 

• 39. Having obtained the required majority, 
Peru and Ecuador were elected to the Board. 
• 40. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Western Europe was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 2 
Abstentions: 1 
Valid votes: 163 
Required majority: 41 

Votes obtained: 
Norway 82 
Austria 81 

Valid votes: 159 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 

Romania 80 
Bulgaria 79 


• 43. Having obtained the required majority, 
Romania and Bulgaria were elected to the Board. 
• 44. The result of the election of two Members 
from the area of Africa was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 3 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 157 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 

Ghana 78 
Tunisia 78 


• 45. Having obtained the required majority, 
Ghana and Tunisia were elected to the Board. 
• 46. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia 
was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 1 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 79 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 

Kuwait 79 

• 47. Having obtained the required majority, 
Kuwait was elected to the Board. 
• 48. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of the Far East was as follows: 
Invalid votes: 6 
Abstentions: 16 
Valid votes: 61 
Required majority: 31 
Votes obtained: 

Republic of Korea 61 

• 49. Having obtained the required majority, 
the Republic of.Korea was elected to the Board. 
• 50. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia, 
or South East Asia and the Pacific, or the Far 
East was as follows: 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 81 
Required majority: 41 
Votes obtained: 

Iran 80 
Indonesia 1 


• 41. Having obtained the required majority, © 51. Having obtained the required majority, 
Norway and Austria were elected to the Board. Iran was elected to the Board. 
5 



GC(XXI)/OR. 199 

• 52. The result of the election of a Member 
from the area of Africa or the Middle East and 
South Asia, or South East Asia and the Pacific 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 7 
Valid votes: 76 
Required majority: 39 
Votes obtained: 
Senegal 75 
Sudan 1 

• 53. Having obtained the required majority, 
Senegal was elected to the Board. 
54. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 
12 Members so elected, recalled that under 
Article VI. D of the Statute they would hold office 
from the end of the current session until the end of 
the twenty-third regular session of the General 
Conference, in other words for a period of two 
years, except in the case of Senegal, which had 
been elected to the seat made vacant following 
Egypt's designation to serve on the Board. The 
representative of Senegal had authorized him to 
inform the General Conference, on behalf of his 
Government, that Senegal would serve on the 
Board for one year only. In that way, the General 
Conference could maintain the equitable and 
regular rotation on the Board of the Members in 
the various areas mentioned in Article VI of the 
Statute; on behalf of the General Conference, he 
thanked Senegal for its co-operation. 
55. He also thanked the delegations of Egypt and 
Ireland, which had provided tellers, the two 
tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 
THE WORK OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


56. Mr. ROHNSCH (German Democratic 
Republic), Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole, reported on his Committee's consideration 
of the agenda items that had been referred to it: 
item 8 - The Agency's accounts for 1976, 
item 16 - The Agency's budget for 19V7, item 9 -
The Agency's budget for 1978, item 10 - Scale of 
assessment of Members' contributions for 1978 
and item 11 - Amendment of Article VI. A. 2 of 
the Statute. 
THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1976 
(GC(XXI)/581) 

• 57. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XXI)/581 on the Agency's accounts for 1976 
was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1977 (GC(XXI)/588) 


• 58. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XXI)/588 on the Agency's budget for 1977 
was adopted. 
THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1978 (GC(XXI)/582, 
582/Mod. 1 and 590/Rev. 1) 

• 59. Draft resolution A (Regular Budget 
appropriations for 1978) set forth in document 
GC(XXI)/582/Mod. 1, Annex VI, draft resolution B 
(Operational Budget allocations for 1978) and draft 
resolution C (The Working Capital Fund in 1978) 
set forth in document GC(XXI)/582, Annex VI, 
and the draft resolution on the physical protection 
of nuclear facilities, materials and transports 
set forth in document GC(XXI)/590/Rev. 1, were 
adopted. 
SCALE OF ASSESSMENT OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS 
FOR 1978 (GC(XXI)/586, 583 and 
583/Mod. 1) 

• 60. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XXI)/586 on the revised guiding principles for 
the assessment of Members' contributions towards 
the Agency's Regular Budget and the draft resolution 
on the scale of assessment of Members' 
contributions for 1978 set forth in document 
GC(XXI)/583, the Annex thereto being set forth in 
document GC(XXI)/583/Mod. 1, were adopted. 
AMENDMENT OF ARTICLE VI. A. 2 OF THE 
STATUTE (GC(XXI)/594) 

• 61. The draft resolution in document 
GC(XXI)/594 on the amendment of Article VI. A. 2 
of the Statute was adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

62. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General 
Conference had appointed the Auditor General of 
the Netherlands to audit the Agency's accounts for 
1976 and 1977; it would therefore have to make an 
appointment for auditing the accounts for 1978 and 
1979. As the present External Auditor was prepared 
to accept a renewal of his term of office, he 
proposed that he be appointed to audit the Agency's 
accounts for 1978 and 1979. 
• 63. The President's proposal was adopted. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION 
COMMITTEE 

64. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Staff 
Pension Committee included two members and 
two alternates elected by the General Conference. 
The members were Mr. Modranszky (Hungary) 
and Mr. Jenkins (United Kingdom) and the 
alternates were Mr. Ad£n (Argentina) and 
Mr. O'Neill (Australia). The two last mentioned 
persons were no longer in a position to carry out 
their duties; the General Conference should 
therefore elect two new alternates. He proposed 
Mr. Sastradidjaja (Indonesia) and Mr. McCaskill 
(Canada). 
-6 



GC(XXI)/OR. 199 

• 65. Mr. Sastradidjaja (Indonesia) and 
Mr. McCaskill (Canada) were elected as alternate 
members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL 
FUND FOR 1978 (GC(XXI)/589/Rev. 3) 

66. The PRESIDENT referred the Conference to 
document GC(XXI)/589/Rev. 3 which showed that, 
at 6 p. m. on 29 September 1977, pledges of 
voluntary contributions to the General Fund for 
1978 had been made by 50 Members of the Agency 
in an amount equivalent to approximately $5. 8 million. 
In the meantime, pledges had been received 
from six more Member States: Belgium had undertaken 
to contribute $80 500, Portugal $15 000, 
Romania $21 000, Spain $30 000, Sudan $2500 
and the United Arab Emirates $6300. Fifty-six 
Member States of the Agency were therefore 
pledged to contribute a total amount of $ 5 997 471 
to the General Fund. 
67. That total was the highest ever pledged 
during a General Conference. However, the sum 
represented only 86% of the target of $7 million. 
He therefore urged the 54 Member States which 
had not already done so to make known the amount 
of their pledges of voluntary contributions. 
Furthermore, he asked all delegates to draw the 
attention of the competent authorities in their 
countries to the matter, urging them to make 
further contributions to the General Fund in accordance 
with their means, so that the Agency would 
have sufficient funds at its disposal to meet all the 
requests for technical assistance it received from 
its developing Member States. He reminded the 
Conference how often the importance of technical 
assistance had been stressed in the course of the 
present session. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

68. Mr. KAMIL (Indonesia), speaking on behalf 
of the Member States of the area of South East 
Asia and the Pacific, congratulated the President 
on the efficient way in which he had guided the work 
of the Conference. Thanks to his competence, the 
Conference had been able to complete its work 
early, while giving thorough consideration to the 
many items on its agenda. He also thanked the 
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole for the 
mastery he had demonstrated in his direction of 
the work of the Committee. Lastly he expressed 
his warm thanks to the Austrian Government for 
its generous hospitality. 
69. Mr. ERIKSEN (Norway), speaking on behalf 
of the countries of Western Europe, expressed his 
gratitude to the President for the way in which he 
had guided the work of the Conference. He wished 
also to thank the Director General and the Agency's 
Secretariat for the excellent way they had prepared 
the Conference and to thank the host country for its 
traditional hospitality. 

70. Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire), acting as 
spokesman for the countries of Africa, thanked 
the Austrian Government for the welcome it had 
extended to the Conference. He congratulated the 
President of the General Conference on the wisdom 
he had displayed in guiding the deliberations. He 
also thanked the Director General and the staff of 
the Agency who had contributed to the success of 
the session. 
71. Mr. SMITH (United States of America), 
speaking on behalf of the countries of North 
America, expressed his thanks and admiration to 
the President for the remarkable way in which he 
had conducted the work of a session which had had 
a particularly heavy agenda. 
72. Mr. KABBANI (Saudi Arabia), speaking on 
behalf of the countries of the area of the Middle 
East and South Asia congratulated the President 
on having made it possible, thanks to his particular 
competence, for the General Conference to consider 
rapidly and in a harmonious atmosphere the particularly 
heavy agenda that had been before it. 
Moreover, he wished the Director General great 
success in his new term of office. 
73. Mr. BARABAS (Czechoslovakia), speaking 
on behalf of the Eastern European countries, paid 
tribute to the President for the remarkable way in 
which he had conducted the proceedings; the 
confidence expressed in the President at the time 
of his election had indeed been justified. He 
thanked the Director General who had contributed 
to the success of the session and the Austrian 
Government which had provided exceptionally good 
facilities. 
74. The PRESIDENT, thanking the delegates for 
their kind words, said he considered it a great 
honour to have presided over the twenty-first 
regular session of the General Conference, which 
marked the twentieth anniversary of the Agency. 
He expressed the thanks of the General Conference 
to the host country and to the City of Vienna. He 
thanked the delegates for their spirit of understanding, 
which had enabled agreement to be 
reached on many important questions. 
75. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of 
Procedure he invited delegates to observe one 
minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
• 76. All present rose and stood in silence for 
one minute. 
77. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-first 
regular session of the General Conference closed. 
• The meeting rose at 1. 25 p. m. 
-7 



