GC(XXII)/OR.200 
February 1979* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE ENGLISH 

TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER 1978 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDREDTH PLENARY MEETING 
onHeld at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
Monday, 18 September 1978, at 10.50 a.m. 
Temporary President:
President: 
Mr. 
Mr. 
NABAVI NOURI (Iran) 
MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 
Opening of the session 
Election of the President 
1 4 
3 
16 
Opening statements 1759 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 20 September 1978. 
**/ GC(XXII)/595. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXII)/INF/l79/Rev.2. 

78-12086 


GC(XXTl)/OR.200 

page 2 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-second regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the 
delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT extended a welcome to all the participants, 
including in particular the representatives of the Austrian Government, the 
delegations of Member States, the representatives of the United Nations and 
its specialized agencies and the observers for inter-governmental and 
non-governmental organizations. As the delegate of Iran, he again expressed 
appreciation on his own and his country's behalf of the honour that had been 
done to Iran the previous year. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
5. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) nominated the delegate of Zaire, Mr. Malu wa 
Kalenga. .Among other qualifications, Mr. Malu held the degrees of Master of 
Science from the University of California at Berkeley, in the United States, 
and Doctor in Applied Sciences from Louvain University, Belgium, as also 
qualifications in civil, electrical and electronic engineering from his home 
country. 
6. In addition, he was Chairman of the Zaire Atomic Energy Commission, 
Director of the Kinshasa Regional Nuclear Studies Centre, member of the 
Scientific Council of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and of the 
Scientific Council of the Trieste International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics, and adviser to the Director General of the United nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Furthermore, his lengthy 
association with the work of the Agency and its Board of Governors gave 
assurance of his capacity to conduct the proceedings with competence and wisdom. 
7. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) and Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil), the latter speaking 
also on behalf of the Latin American region, supported the nomination. 
GC(XXII)/OR.200 
page 3 

8. Mr. Malu wa galenga (Zaire) was elected President of the General Conference 
for its twenty-second regular session by acclamation. 
Mr. Malu wa Kalenga (Zaire) took the Chair. 

9. The PRESIDENT wished first to express the Conference's thanks to 
Mr, Nabavi Nouri of Iran for having undertaken the duties of Temporary President. 
He had just learned that an earthquake had taken place in Iran with victims 
in the thousands. He conveyed to the delegation of Iran the deep sympathy of 
all present on account of the disaster and assured him of the full moral support 
of all delegations. 
10. On behalf of his country and its President, General Mobutu, he wholeheartedly 
thanked the delegates for the trust placed in him by his election to 
office. He was sure that he could count upon their help towards making the 
twenty—second session a most successful one. 
11. The session was a special one for several reasons, one of them being the 
fact that ten years earlier the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT)i/ had been opened for signature, an event constituting a decisive 
stage in the life of the Agency and, above all, in the development of peaceful 
nuclear activities throughout the world. For the first time in the history 
of mankind, 104 States, including three nuclear-*eapon States, had reached 
agreement on participating in a widespread system of international inspection. 
12. Despite the massive adherence to HPT, together with its practical expression 
in the negotiating of safeguards agreements with the Agency by practically all 
countries having a significant nuclear programme, it nevertheless had to be 
recognized that for some time past relations between States in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy had been affected by a growing unease. Many States, 
in particular those belonging to the Third World, had the feeling that the 
three basic objectives of the Treaty, as set out in articles III, IV and VI, 
were not being pursued with the same vigour as before. Because of certain 
difficulties recently noted in regard to free access to modern techniques for 
the building of power reactors and to enriched fuel supplies, rightly or 
wrongly, doubts had arisen concerning the way in which certain Member States 
party to NPT were implementing articles IV and VI. Unless all the goodwill 
generated by HPT was to be lost, it was essential that a judicious balance 
should be preserved between the exigencies of control and of promotional 
l/ Reproduced in document INFCIRC/14O. 


GC(XXH)/OR.200 
page 4 

activities, specified in articles III and IV. In direct implementation of 
those articles, a 'balance should he sought hetween the safeguards and technical 
assistance programmes of the Agency; the Director General was to be commended 
for the efforts he had made in that direction. 

13» Furthermore, the Powers concerned should pursue negotiations with all 
necessary diligence in order to bring about weapons control and nuclear 
disarmament in compliance with the heart-felt wishes of the world community. 
The renunciation and discrimination inherent in NPT would continue to be 
accepted only if that condition was fulfilled. 

14. At the present time nuclear activity affecting all stages of the fuel 
cycle was again being put in question. In particular, doubts were being 
expressed as to the political and economic wisdom of reprocessing and breeder 
operations. But despite all doubts, delays and questioning, it was by no 
means out of place to expect intensive recourse to nuclear power in the 
future. The problems linked with fuel reprocessing and plutonium recycling 
would of course have to be resolved satisfactorily. In that regard, his 
country subscribed to the idea of regional reprocessing and plutonium management 
centres, a scheme at present under study by the Agency. It was desirable that 
a general consensus in favour of that solution should emerge fairly soon, 
in order to remove present uncertainties and their possibly disturbing ;Sfv 
effects on the nuclear power market. Nuclear power might perhaps, through a 
form of internationalization, thus open the way to new co-operation between 
the North and the South by ensuring the stability in the energy market which a large 
majority in the world wanted. 
15. Again, with regard to the fuel cycle, there remained the ever more 
pressing problem of handling and storing radioactive wastes. A complex series 
of inter-related questions concerning technologies, industrial development, 
and legal, administrative and financial matters needed to be resolved in order 
that the safety level required for the protection of mankind and of the 
environment might be assured. The fears engendered among the peoples of the 
world by the waste management problem constituted one of the major obstacles 
to further development of nuclear energy. All the reports and studies on that 
subject called unanimously for an international pilot demonstration project, and 
there the Agency could play the part of catalyst. 
GC(XXII)/OR»200 
page 5 

16. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the proceedings at the session 
would take place in the full spirit of frank collaboration which had always 
marked discussions in the Agency. 
OPENING STATEMENTS 

17. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said he was pleased to selcome Member States' 
delegations attending the session and also the dignitaries representing the 
host country and the representatives of the United Nations. He wished to 
take the opportunity to thank the Austrian Government for its unfailing 
assistance to the Agency. 
18. The comments he was about to make departed from the traditional type of 
balance sheet concerning the past year's work and prospects for the future. 
It was essential at the present juncture to comment upon the status of nuclear 
energy in the world and to share with delegations some of his concerns about 
certain trends. He would, however, first refer to two important questions 
relating to the internal working of the Agency, namely the budget and the 
composition of the staff. 
19- All were certainly aware of the very thorough debate which had taken 
place in the Administrative and Budgetary Committee and in the Board of Governors 

on the"budget for 1979. After a series of reductions, the budget before the 
Conference still represented an increase of 27$ over the 1978 budget. The 
three major reasons for that increase were: the move to the new headquarters now 
scheduled to begin on 2 July 1979 - and the still largely unknown factor 

of operating costs for the last six months of 1979; the increase in the Agency's 
safeguards responsibilities, especially in consequence of the implementation of 
EURATOM safeguards; and, thirdly, inflation and the decline in the value of the 

dollar vis-a—vis the Austrian schilling. Regrettably, the portion of the 
budgetary increase devoted to technical programmes other than safeguards was 
minimal, representing only 2$ over the 1978 budget. 

20. The move to the Donaupark should lead to increased efficiency in the 
Agency's work, in that staff would no longer be located in five different 
premises throughout the city. It would constitute the ideal occasion for 
introducing organizational changes permitting better utilization of staff, and 
also for installing more modem office equipment. A study commissioned from 
a consultant firm on a number of those questions had brought useful suggestions 

0C(XXII)/OR.200 

page 6 

which should lead to increased efficiency. The move should also reduce the 
manning table for Maintenance and Operatives Service staff; redundant staff 
might he taken over either by the United Nations or by outside contractors. 
Those factors would help, over the next few years, to compensate for the 
heavy expenditures in 1979 and the as yet unknown operating costs for the 

Donaupark complex. 

21. The staff increase suggested for 1979 was almost exclusively the consequence 
of increased responsibilities associated with HPT. For instance, the Safeguards 
Evaluation Section in the Department of Safeguards was having to be extended 
and strengthened in the face of those growing responsibilities. He was hopeful 
that increases in the staff of the Department of Safeguards would level off 
in the future partly as a result of the important role which national safeguards 
organizations would play in assisting the Agency's work in that field. 
22. As for the dollar/Austrian shilling ratio, it had to be borne in mind that 
76$ of the Agency's expenditure was in Austrian schillings. As fluctuations 
in the currency market were completely beyond its control, the Agency could 
only react to the drop in spending power by effecting savings where possible, 
and by making provision for reserve funds in the budget and for supplementary budget 
requests. Clearly, that was unsatisfactory over the long term. As nearly all 
the organizations of the United Nations system shared the problem, the matter 
had been the subject of detailed study at an inter-agency level. One of the 
solutions suggested was that Member States might pay part of their contributions 
in the currency of the host country. He would recommend that suggestion for 
the Conference's consideration and would be interested to hear the views of 
Member States on the idea. Adoption of such a system would also result in a 
larger degree of parity among Member States in sharing the burden of the Agency's 
Regular Budget. 
23.' The Agency's Professional staff strength now stood at 508 persons, 
recruited from 65 countries. It included 26 regular posts at the Director 
or Deputy Director General level, recruited from 17 countries. A certain 
satisfaction regarding what had been achieved in that respect would not be 
out of place. At times, some criticism had been voiced regarding the 
composition and perhaps even the competence of the staff in the Safeguards 
Department, where at present 42 countries were represented. At times, the 
Secretariat was asked to consider factors which were not covered by the Agency's 

GC(XXII)/OR.20O 
page 7 ; 

Statute - for instance balance in numbers of staff as between developed and 

developing countries, or between geographical regions; language competence; 

and so on. For obvious reasons, it was not possible to fulfill all those 

requirements. The Secretariat was, however, doing its best to comply with 

what was stipulated in Article VII.D of the Statute, namely that it should 

"secure employees of the highest standard? of efficiency, technical competence 

and integrity", and that "Subject to this consideration, due regard shall be 

paid to the contributions of members to the Agency and to the importance of 

recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible". Member 

States could assist by ensuring that vacancies were widely advertised in their 

countries and by recommending suitably qualified and experienced candidates, 

not restricted to Government organizations. 

24. Coming to the main part of his statement^ to the status of nuclear energy, 
he directed attention to a slide showing the estimated production of electricity 
from nuclear power stations during the period 1 July 1977 to 30 June I978 in 
the countries with free market economies. All would agree, he was sure, that 
the figures represented a noteworthy outcome of twenty years of technological 
achievement. 
25. The reactors in question had to be provided with fuel. In some cases the 
operating utilities wanted to reprocess the fuel for recycling of plutonium, and 
all that gave rise to a series of questions, many of which involved the Agency. 
During the 20-year period, no fatal accident involving radiation had occurred 
in the civilian power reactors. The load and operating factors had been 
satisfactory, especially in view of the tremendous technical development they 
represented, with single units now surpassing the 1000 MW level. Whereas in 
1955 aggregate installed nuclear capacity in the world had been only 5 MW, and 
in 1967 10 000 MW, it was today 100 000 MW, with some 200 000 MW under construction 
or in the advanced stage of planning. 
26. That extremely positive picture had to be balanced against the levelling 
off in orders for nuclear power plants in the past two years. So far in 1978 
some 17 nuclear power plants were reported to be in various stages of negotiation 
in the free market economies, but very few firm orders had been placed. 
Admittedly, the recession which affected the economies of many major industrialized 
countries and the energy conservation measures required by higher fuel 
prices had led to a somewhat lower rate of increase in energy consumption. 
That trend in turn was also reflected in the decline of orders for conventional 

GC(XXII)/OR.200 
page 8 


power plants. Still, it had to be recognized that the use of nuclear energy for 
power production in many countries no longer represented as attractive a solution 
to their power problems as it had appeared to offer a few years ago. The uneasiness 
and uncertainty of governmental authorities was exemplified "by the 
following statement, made by the Swedish Under-Secretary of State, at the 
opening of an IAEA meeting held in Stockholm two weeks previously: 


"I believe, and millions of others believe, that there are still 
important problems associated with nuclear power which remain unsolved and 
that the worries consequently are well-founded and legitimate. For instance, 
I don't think there is anyone today who is not prepared to admit that the 
problems of the back-end of the fuel cycle have been neglected over the 
years and that satisfactory solutions still remain to be worked out. The 
link between peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the risk for proliferation 
of nuclear weapons has emerged as a major issue. Many questions are asked 
about the true costs of nuclear power. And an issue which is increasingly 
discussed relates to the social impact of nuclear power". 


27. The misguided hesitation expressed in that statement was striking against 
a background of heavy investment by industrialized countries in power reactors, 
enrichment facilities, reprocessing plants and fast breeder prototypes, allied 
with projections of electricity production indicating a growing need for nuclear 
power. At the Bonn summit held in July 1978, leaders of the Western world had 
declared that "the further development of nuclear energy is indispensable and 
the slippage in the execution of nuclear programmes must be reversed". He would 
endeavour to make a brief analysis of the main factors which had led to that 
situation. 
28. The century preceding the Second World War had been called the golden age 
of engineering. During that period the Suez Canal had been, inaugurated, the 
three-phase alternating current generator and the internal combustion engine had been 
invented, the first trans-Atlantic cables had been laid, and wireless communications 
had been started. During that period achievements in engineering 
had been based on progress in the pure and applied sciences. Both theoretical 
and experimental research on the propagation of electromagnetic waves had led 
to the development of telecommunications, the discovery of radioactivity had 
thrown new light on the structure of matter, and the invention of ammonia 
synthesis had played a decisive role in the development of the chemical industry 
in general and of fertilizers in particular. There had been a general 
belief that scientists and engineers had a great mission to perform; to make 
life more comfortable, with fewer anxieties and more possibilities for everyone. 
Scientists and engineers had worked with the feeling that they were 
contributing to the social and economic advancement of human society. 
GC(XXII)/OR.200 
page 9 


29. The spirit of that period had been characterized by the saying: "The 
difficult we do immediately, the impossible takes a little longer". During the 
past twenty-five years that confidence had waned and the belief in the benefits 
of technical development had changed in some quarters to a mistrust and a 
questioning of the necessity and usefulness of further applications of science 
and technology. Technology in itself was now regarded by large circles as a 
malevolent force. 
30. In some countries, Governments, although elected in democratic ways, were 
being prevented by pressure groups from introducing major technological innovations. 
Just how widely the ideas of those groups were shared was unknown, 
but those who espoused them were adamant and vociferous; they had access to news 
media and they exercised considerable political influence, although referenda 
had shown consistently that those in favour of nuclear energy outnumbered those 
against by two to one. 
31. The phenomenon was particularly evident in the highly industrialized 
affluent countries with market economies. The developing countries, with more 
than two thirds of the world's population, were still primarily concerned with 
how to gain access to modern technologies on the best terms and how to use 
technology to further their economic development and self-reliance. The 
countries with centrally planned economies also continued to regard science 
and technology as benevolent forces. In that context tenin's remarks about 
the urgent need for electricity production and its importance for the advancement 
of society seemed apposite. Positive opinions of science and technology 
would no doubt also be put forward at the United Nations Conference on Science 
and Technology for Development, to be held in Vienna in August 1979. 
32. The present opposition of some sectors of the public in affluent societies 
to nuclear power was only one aspect of the changed attitude towards science 
and technology in general. Although everybody wished to benefit from all the 
conveniences which electric energy made available, further development was 
considered unnecessary by certain groups. Very little thought was given to the 
means required to maintain the standard of living in the developed countries, 
not to mention what was needed to raise the standard of living in the developing 
countries. Very little thought was given, either, to the question of how to 
secure food and water for a population that would probably reach the 6000 million 
level by the end of the century. Using terms like "appropriate", "soft" or 
"intermediate" technology, to conceal the inadequacy of their proposals, those 

GC (XXII)/OR. 200 
page 10 


wishful thinkers apparently wanted a world where the developing countries could 
make do with windmills while the developed would content themselves with zero 
growth, although continuing to enjoy the benefits of past industrial development. 
Small non-conventional energy sources might be the best solution to the problem 
of energy supply in small rural communities, but they could not turn the wheels 
of industrialization of a country. 


33« In such a turmoil of unclear thinking, nuclear energy had become the symbol 
of the "hard" technology which those who did not believe in technical development 
were now so vigorously criticizing. There might be two explanations for that. One 
was that the consequences of a slow-down or halt in the planning and construction 
of nuclear power stations were not immediately felt. The difficulties would only 
appear six to ten years later in the form of a lack of electrical energy, for 
which the utilities and electricity boards would then be held responsible. Part 
of the difficulty lay in the different time-frames in which scientists or engineers, 
as opposed to politicians, operated. Surely, for instance, advocates of a decision 
to stop using artificial fertilizers, the greatest polluting agent of our surroundings, 
would never get much support because the consequences would be felt 
within a year's time and their responsibility for such a decision would still be 
fresh in the public mind. 


34. Another reason why nuclear energy had become a scapegoat lay in the conscious 
or unconscious association in most people's minds between the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and nuclear weapons. However, the first of the two 
arguments, the changed attitude towards science and technology, and the underestimation 
of the importance of an assured energy supply for the whole economy, 
was surely the more important. 
35. The lesson of the oil crisis in 1973 seemed to have been forgotten already. 
People must be brought to understand that without abundant cheap energy they 
would not be able to continue to enjoy their present privileges in the developed 
world; nor would they be able to assist in raising to a decent level the standard 
of living in the developing countries. During the preparation of the United 
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972, the attitude of developing 
countries had been that they could accept the environmental consequences of 
industrialization, because poverty was the worst pollution. 
36. He was an advocate of nuclear energy, but at the same time he was in favour 
of making efforts to use and develop other promising sources of energy. An 
objective comparison must be made between energy options for the guidance of 
GC(XXII)/OR.200 
page 11 


decision-makers. Nothing had so far led him to change his conviction that 


nuclear energy would show up very well in such a comparison. 


37. Regarding the second argument, the association between peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and nuclear weapons, there had so far been no case where a 
country had gone about developing nuclear explosives by constructing a nuclear 
power plant. In the ten-year period from 1945 to 1954» three countries had 
developed nuclear explosives. Between 1955 and 1964» two other countries had 
done so, and between 1965 an<^ 1974 only one country had. During that time 
the nuclear capacity in the world had grown from 5 MW in 1955 to 54 000 MW in 
1974» in 19 countries. That alone indicated that there was no relationship 
between the expansion of nuclear power and the development of nuclear 
explosives. 
38. More should be done, by the Agency as well, to face up to the critics of 
nuclear power and discover their reasons for opposing it. It was not a 
question of convincing anyone, but of helping them to see the problems of 
nuclear energy in the right perspective in relation to the problems inherent 
in alternative sources of energy. 
39» In addition, there were other problems which an operator of a nuclear 


power station had to deal with. He was supposed to be able to satisfy the 


electricity needs of his customers. To do that he required fuel for his 


plant, and, in order to obtain fuel, he had to be able to give a credible 


assurance that his nuclear power plant was serving peaceful purposes only. 


Most producers of nuclear fuel now required that a customer must have acceded 
to NPT or otherwise have accepted full-scope Agency safeguards. 


40. NPT had so far been ratified or acceded to by 104 countries. Non-nuclearweapon 
States party to NPT promised not to acquire or develop nuclear weapons 
and to accept Agency safeguards as a means of verifying their adherence to that 
commitment. 
41. The Treaty represented the fundamental basis for all the deliberations 
connected with the proliferation problem. It was a solemn undertaking which, 
together with safeguards provisions, was the best achievable guarantee that 
peaceful nuclear development would not lead to the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
42. A country which had signed NPT and with which the Agency had concluded an 
agreement on the implementation of safeguards might nevertheless be subject to 
a number of other restrictions imposed by the supplying country as a condition 

GC(XXII)/OR.20O 
page 12 

for delivery of nuclear fuel. Such conditions had been introduced by the 
United States of America through a non-proliferation act adopted in March 1978, 
the purpose of which was further to reduce the risk of proliferation. Although 
that was national legislation, it had wide-ranging implications and involved a 
new export control system. It also provided for a number of restrictive measures 
regarding reprocessing and re-transfer out of the receiving State which many 
States might find it difficult to accept. The practical consequences of such 
legislation would, of course, depend upon the way in which it was implemented. 
An important feature of the new legislation was the requirement that a country 
receiving nuclear material or equipment from the United States must be a party 
to NPT or must accept full-scope safeguards. If all supplier States were to 
adopt that policy, the non-proliferation regime would become universal and many 
problems would be eliminated. 

43. Most of the enriched material used in some eighty light-water reactors 
outside the United States of America was imported from that country and, 
therefore, the new conditions whichi might be attached to deliveries of fuel and 
equipment would be the subject of careful study by the importing countries. As 
was always the case when access to a process or'material was made difficult or 
denied, the imposition of restrictions initiated activities to circumvent them. 
In the nuclear field, where enrichment technology remained classified, that had 
resulted in the development of a number of new processes of uranium enrichment 
and even in the establishment of multinational undertakings. Serious problems 
might arise if the restrictions were felt to be too severe by the recipients. 
44« Anxiety^ about the risk of nuclear proliferation had led to the raising of 
technical questions about the purpose of the Agency's safeguards system and to 
a number of new projects and studies. 

45. The objective of safeguards as defined by the Board of Governors was- "the 
timely detection of diversion of significant quantities of nuclear material 
from peaceful nuclear activities to the manufacture of nuclear weapons or of 
other nuclear explosive devices or for purposes unknown, and deterrence of such 
diversion by the risk of early detection". The question now under discussion 
was how soon a diversion would have to be detected in order to keep the risk of 
manufacture of a nuclear explosive to a minimum and what detection times were 
needed for different types and forms of nuclear material. 
46. The purpose of the debate was certainly to strengthen the safeguards system. 
It had, however, serious implications for certain technical activities, e.g. 
reprocessing, bulk handling facilities for fuel element production, and breeder 
GC(XXII)/OR.20O 
page 13 

reactors, which would not make it easier for utilities to choose nuclear power 
as an attractive alternative to conventional power. 

47. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INPOK), which had been 
launched on the initiative of the United States of America in October 1977 and 
in which 53 countries and four international organizations were participating, had 
as its chief aim to minimize the danger of proliferation without jeopardizing the 
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in recognition of the need to 
make nuclear energy widely available. That work was financed from a special fund 
to which 29 countries had voluntarily contributed. The amount of material already 
assembled was impressive; some 400 reports and papers totalling 8000 pages had 
been produced. 
48. Interest in and support for INFCE were encouraging. Nuclear power was entering 
a new phase where more countries were planning to construct fuel cycle facilities 
in addition to power stations. That development would affect safeguards and 
international supply agreements and would have environmental and economic implications; 
review and planning would be necessary so that the basis for a stable 
international regime for nuclear energy might be established. An international 
consensus should be achieved on the basis of non-discriminatory access and selfrestraint 
by all concerned. Only such an international consensus could eventually 
lead to more harmonious relations between suppliers and recipients of nuclear 
materials, equipment and technology. 
49. The results of INFCE should provide a timely input to the Second Review 
Conference of the Parties to HPT, to be held in I98O. While an international 
consensus on some aspects of the control articles would be crucial to the future 
successful implementation of the Treaty, it must be remembered that for the majority 
of countries attending the Conference the implementation of Article IV, concerned 
with international co-operation, and of Article VI, on disarmament, was the most 
important question. 
50. Non-nuclear-weapon States understandably desired a clear-cut commitment on 
the supply of nuclear materials. While they had accepted Agency safeguards, in the 
elaboration of which they had been able to participate and the implementation of 
which they controlled through the Board of Governors, they were very much concerned 
about unilateral restrictions and uncertainties in international supply 
contracts. The case-by-case approach should be replaced by internationally 
accepted principles. 
51. Proliferation was a political problem to be dealt with by political, not 
technical means. Rather than denying sensitive technologies on a selective basis, 
a serious effort should be made to set up joint regional or international ventures 

GC(XXII)/OR.200 
page 14 


• Reunde 
r Agency safeguards, in which any interested country could participate.
gional fuel cycle centres and international plutonium storage sites should he given 
priority consideration. Countries should be encouraged to accept full fuel cycle 
safeguards and then given full access to peaceful nuclear technology. The Agency 
should continue to improve its safeguards system and benefit from the experience 
gained. 

52. After the INPCB Pinal Conference and the Second HPT Review Conference, both 
to be held in I98O, the Agency planned to organize a second major conference on 
nuclear energy and its fuel cycle in 1981 or 1982. An international conference 
had also been suggested by the General Assembly of the United Nations. 
53« Another question to which considerable attention had been given during the 
past few years was the physical protection of nuclear materials against misuse 
by sub-national groups. Progress had been made on a draft International Convention 
on Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials and Facilities. Plutonium storage was 
another matter which was being studied both by Member States and by the Secretariat. 

54. It was most unfortunate that all the measures taken to control the peaceful 
fuel cycle tended to distract attention from the re'al threat to peace represented 
by the existing nuclear weapons arsenals that continued to grow steadily. 
55. The situation of the nuclear power industry was a paradoxical one. On the 
one hand, the rising price of oil and other fuels had made nuclear plants even more 
economical; the operating reactors, currently representing some 1600 reactor years, 
had an unparalleled safety record and had shown good reliability; the environmental 
impact was much smaller than that of conventional power stations. On the other hand, 
the electric power utilities had to be able to plan ahead. It was an industry subject 
to a great deal of governmental regulation and, in most countries, dependent on 
supplies from abroad. The industry needed what it had had in the 1960s - confidence 
in clear governmental policies and in the availability of fuel and services 
from other countries where necessary; confidence that sites could be found and 
plants built without interminable and expensive legal complications. 
56. Many of those problems were national, and each State had to cope with its 
particular difficulties. Other problems were international, and there the Agency 
should assume a more active role. 
57. It was his firm opinion that the Agency's technical assistance programme 
formed a cornerstone of the Agency's work. From everything he had said it would 

be clear how much importance he attached to NPT, especially to its universal 

acceptance. But what was said in Article IV of the Treaty about mutual assistance 

required not only goodwill from the affluent countries, but also financial support. 

GC(XXII)/OR.200 
page 15 

58. As chief administrative officer of the Agency he had no right formally to 
propose a target for voluntary contributions to the technical assistance programme. 
However, considering that the average cost of a single nuclear power 
plant was of the order of S1000 million and the suggested target for technical 
assistance was S8.5 million, the least he could do was to make an appeal to 
all Member States to be generous in supporting the technical assistance programme. 
59= Mr. HYVAKfflEN (Special Representative of the Secretary-General for 
Disarmament) read a message from Mr. Kurt Waldheim, Secretary-General of the 

United Nations. In his message, Mr. Waldheim sent his best wishes for a 

successful session of the General Conference and stated that, in an era of 
technological progress, the importance of nuclear energy as a vehicle of 
economic and social development was evident. Nuclear energy could be of the 
greatest benefit to mankind, but it could also be destructive. The International 
Atomic Energy Agency had a most important role to play, both in 
making nuclear energy accessible to nations for their development and in 
applying safeguards against it s misuse. 


GC(XXII)/OR.201 
March 1979* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER 1978 
RECORD OF TEE TWO HUNDRED AND FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Monday, 18 September 1978, at 3.5 P.m. 
President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 
General debate and annual report for 1977 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 
France 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Argentina 

Paragraphs 


1 6 


7 76 


7 19 
20 41 
42 62 
63 76 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 26 September 1978. 
**/ GC(XXII)/595. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXII)/INF/l79/Rev.2. 


78-12090 


GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 2 

ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

1. The PRESIDENT said that the consultations which, had been held regarding 
the composition of the General Committee had led to agreement that the General 
Committee should be composed of 16 members: the President of the General Conference 
the eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, and six 
additional members. To that end, the General Conference would have to suspend 
Rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, as it had done in 
the previous two years, and decide to elect six additional members to the General 
Committee instead of five. 
2. He took it that the General Conference was willing to agree to the suspension 
of Rule 40 and to elect six additional members to the General Committee. He 
wanted to stress that that decision would in no way constitute a precedent in 
regard to the appointment of the General Committee at later sessions of the 
General Conference, especially as the informal consultations between the 
representatives of the eight geographical areas had shown a common desire to 
reach a permanent solution in regard to the composition of the General Committee. 
3. In accordance with Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, the General Conference 
now had to elect eight Vice-Presidents and the Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole. It also had to elect the six additional members of the General Committee. 
4. He proposed that the delegates of the following States be elected as the 
Vice-Presidents of the General Conferences Algeria, Australia, Canada, 
Colombia, Iraq, Japan, Poland, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland. 
5. He proposed Mr. Gillon, alternate to the delegate of Belgium, as Chairman 
of the Committee of the Whole, and the delegates of the following States as 
members of the General Committee: Federal Republic of Germany, German Democratic 
Republic, India, Jamaica, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and United States 
of America. 
6. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. The General 
Committee was thus duly appointed. 
GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1977 (GC(XXII)/597) 

7. Mr. MYERS (United States of America) said that in the third decade of 
co-operation nuclear power continued to have considerable advantages, but at the 

same time it entailed ever more awesome responsibilities. In spite of progress 

in the field of safety, nuclear power continued to be a source of dangers which 

the Agency should combat while taking into account the needs and wishes of all 

its Member States. He then read out a message from the President of the United 

States of America. 

8. MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
"On behalf of all my fellow Americans, I send warm greetings to the 
distinguished delegates of the twenty-second. General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency. 

"In these years of global uncertainty about future energy supplies, 
our resourcefulness in finding internationally—acceptable methods to 
expand the safe and peaceful uses of atomic energy will be crucial in 
improving world-wide living standards. 

"Nuclear energy retains an important place in the United States 
planning for both domestic and world prosperity. Our experience since 
last year's 20th anniversary conference and our exchanges of views in 
the formative stages of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation 
bode well for a future in which many nations can benefit from nuclear 
power. 

"We must continue to seek a proper balance between central and 
dispersed systems, between energy abundance and environmental impacts, 
between programmes appropriate to developed nations and developing 
countries, so that all Members of the IAEA can continue to benefit, 
not only in augmented energy supplies, but also in agriculture, health 
and a variety of other peaceful applications of the atom. 

"The United States looks forward to sustained close co-operation 
with the Members of the IAEA in this vitally important field." 

9. Since the last presidential elections, the United States has set about 
better defining its energy policies, especially in the nuclear field. The 

Agency has also made great progress. Some remarks concerning prospects for 

the peaceful uses of nuclear energy throughout the world seemed called for. 

10. Everyone knew of the difficulties the United States had encountered in 
trying to reach agreement in Congress on a national energy policy; important 

results had nevertheless been obtained and deserved to be mentioned. First, 

the energy-saving measures proposed by President Carter had had some effect. 


GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 4 

Oil imports had been reduced by 1% in -the first half of 1978, and in recent 
years energy consumption had ceased growing at the same rate as the gross 
national product. The slowing-down was in fact greater than that recommended 
at the summit meeting in Bonn in July 1978. Secondly, the United States had 
decided to develop the mining of its abundant coal resources, and the 
Government was encouraging industrialists to use that fuel rather than 
imported oil and gas. It also sought to stimulate the synthetic fuel manu


facturing industries and wished to co-operate with other countries in that 

endeavour. Thirdly, measures had been taken to increase national oil and 

gas production. Fourthly, technologies based on solar energy and fusion 

energy were being studied. Solar energy was beginning to be used for 
heating and cooling purposes, but much research would still be needed on 
other solar techniques and on fusion. The work of the Agency might be very 
useful in that field. Fifthly, the United States had taken further steps 
to increase the safety of nuclear power. The capacity to enrich uranium was 
being expanded so that it could be used as fuel in light-water reactors. 
Finally, Congress had passed a new law on nuclear non-proliferation which 
would make the United States a reliable supplier. The United States had 
liberalized the conditions imposed by its contracts so as to respond better 
to consumer needs, with respect to the techniques offered as well as to 
prices. Other countries were now competing as suppliers, which was healthy 

for the world market. So long as contracts entailed non-proliferation 
measures, customer countries should be able to turn to the supplier who 
suited them best. 

11, With regard to the safety of nuclear energy, his country was taking steps 
towards effective and safe radioactive waste management, without which nuclear 
power could not be utilized effectively. Since reprocessing technology had 
not yet been perfected, the Government had offered to take charge of the storage 
of spent fuel. As a result, it was now identifying storage sites, ensuring 
their safety, making the necessary ecological studies and seeking to obtain 
legislative approvals. The United States was not only willing to help its 
own utilities but was prepared to take back certain amounts of spent fuel 
from countries to which the fuel had been supplied, if there were no other 
storage possibilities and if the operation was in the interest of nonproliferation. 
However, all countries would have to try to find a solution 
to their own storage problems. 

GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 5 

12. In connection with the disposal of radioactive waste, the United States was 
making a massive effort better to demonstrate to the public that all kinds of 
radioactive waste could be safely disposed of. As long as the effectiveness of 
Agency safeguards could be ensured in step with the development of the nuclear 
industry, nuclear power would continue to grow in importance in the United States 
and in other countries. The United States already had an installed nuclear 
capacity of 5° °°0 MW» and double that capacity was expected for 1985. The 
light-water reactor had proved reliable and would certainly be very valuable in 
the future. Better fuel utilization and the use of advanced isotopic techniques 
should increase the energy yield of uranium resources. 
13. By revising its export principles and carefully examining the problems of 
proliferation and safety connected with the nuclear fuel cycle, the United States 
hoped to contribute to the economic development of all countries. Although the 
United States had passed through a difficult period of doubt concerning nuclear 
policy, the problems had been faced and the public had been shown that the risk 
of proliferation was not taken lightly. Other countries had gone through a 
similar phase, and the present situation was much clearer and safer than before. 
It would certainly be easier to find international solutions, in spite of the 
seriousness of the problems. Thus, the Bonn economic summit had concluded with 
a declaration in favour of nuclear power. The United States refused to believe 
that only a few privileged States had a monopoly on morality or responsibility. 
However, although countries were entitled to different points of view, the 
principal nuclear suppliers must respect non-proliferation standards irrespective 
of commercial pressures. Moreover, the nuclear industry and trade could develop 
only if the spread of sensitive facilities and materials was limited and if all 
countries co-operated to solve the problems of the fuel cycle. 
14. In that connection, the United States thought it encouraging that over 
50 countries and several international organizations were participating in the 
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE). It was to be hoped that 
INFCE would produce a comprehensive analysis of the situation which would guide 
decision-makers and make new institutional arrangements possible. The countries 
that were taking part in the evaluation had often expressed different views, but 
the dialogue that had been started should lead to common principles. Countries 
seemed ever more concerned to avoid premature plutoniua production and widespread 
national control of separated plutonium, and were realizing that there 
was no economic urgency for recycling plutonium in thermal reactors. The 

GC(mi)/OR.201 
page 6 

United States and other countries were perfecting techniques by which the highlyenriched 
fuel of many research reactors might soon he replaced by low-enrichment 
uranium. 

15. The Agency's safeguards programme was of increasing importance in view of 
the growing number of facilities subject to safeguards, and it remained the 
centrepiece of the world's efforts toward non-proliferation. That was why the 
United States had voluntarily offered to accept safeguards on a number of 
facilities, which would be opened to Agency inspectors as soon as the offer 
was approved by the Senate. Moreover, since 1976 the United States had been 
giving special support to the Agency's safeguards system, in addition to its 
regular contributions and its voluntary contributions for the technical assistance 
programme. 
16. However, that support would be wasted without that of other countries. 
He therefore called upon other Member States to increase their safeguards contributions 
as far as possible, to maintain their national systems of accountancy 
and control and to co-operate with the Agency in the application of 
safeguards. It was true that the safeguards system had recently been criticized, 
but that only emphasized its importance. The Secretariat was doing 
its best to improve it and to provide the Board of Governors with more exact 
information that was easier to evaluate. Besides safeguards, physical 
protection also deserved mention; its importance was growing as ever greater 
quantities of nuclear materials were stored, used and transported. The 
draft convention on physical protection contained provisions for preventing 
the diversion or theft of nuclear materials by international terrorists or 
sub-national groups which might jeopardize peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
17. A further international event of the highest importance had been the 
United Nations Special Session on Disarmament in the summer of 1978. On 
that occasion the United States Government had proposed expanding its contributions 
to the peaceful nuclear programmes of developing countries parties to 
the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)i/. That assistance 
would be provided through the Agency, which showed the importance that 
the United States had continued to attach to the Agency's technical assistance 
l/ Reproduced in document INPCIRC/14O. 

GC(XXII)/OR.2Ol 
page 7 

programme for the last twenty years. If Congress approved, the United States 
would establish a trust fund of J5 million which would be administered by the 
Agency from I98O and would provide funds for experts' services, equipment, 
research materials and fellowships in the areas of health, safety and environmental 
protection related to nuclear power plants. In addition, the United 
States would, each year for five years, supply the Agency with uranium enriched 
to less than 20$ and worth $1 million. The Agency could distribute it to 
countries for research purposes, giving preference to developing countries 
parties to NPT, which would receive it free, or selling it at reduced price 
to other States parties to NPT or to developing countries not parties to NPT. 
In the latter case, the research should be directed more towards the applications 
of lower—enrichment, rather than higher-enrichment, uranium. Finally, 
the United States intended to furnish fuel cycle services with an annual value 
of $1 million and to provide financing for nuclear power projects undertaken 
by countries parties to NPT. The United States hoped that that assistance 
would strengthen NPT and add to the Agency's importance in the field of technical 
assistance. 

18. The United States recognized that the Agency could fulfil its mission 
only if it kept a fair balance between its safeguards activities and its 
efforts to let the developing countries benefit fully from the peaceful applications 
of atoms in agriculture, medicine and power production. Recently, the 
Agency had issued a large number of guidelines in connection with safety and 
environmental protection. Those on the underground disposal of radioactive 
waste deserved special mention. In that context the United States would 
inform the Agency's Member States of the results of studies on the management 
of radioactive waste. A further major task was the development of standards 
and codes of practice for the safe operation of nuclear power plants. Many 
experts from the United States had participated in the drafting of those documents, 
which would soon be published and would be extremely useful to all 
Member States. As Member States expanded their nuclear activities the Agency 
would have to provide more and more assistance in the form of advice, fellowships, 
equipment and experts' services. The United States had therefore 
increased its contribution in kind to $2 650 000 in 1978. Fellowships had 
been provided and five courses organized, four of which had taken place at 
Argonne National Laboratory. Such fellowships and courses were particularly 
useful to developing countries and the United States called on other Member 
States to increase their aid. The Agency's technical assistance was also 

GC(XXH)/OR.201 
page 8 

very important in other areas, such as life sciences. The United States had 
for two years been providing special assistance to the Agency in extending 
medical applications in developing countries, and it supported the applications 
in ecology, agriculture, stock—breeding and disease control, 

19, After having thus expounded the main interests and activities of the 
United States in the nuclear field, he pointed out that the Agency's Member 
States must above all else agree on international measures for non-proliferation 
and the application of safeguards. In spite of the difficulties, Member 
States should be confident of finding a solution. Other endeavours had been 
declared impossible, e.g. establishment of an international atomic energy 
agency, agreement on a safeguards programme, conclusion of a non-proliferation 
treaty and achievement of a dialogue between supplier countries and recipients 
of nuclear materials and equipment. All those endeavours had succeeded. 
Any defeatism should be resolutely rejected and a spirit of conciliation and 
optimism mustered to expand the peaceful uses of atomic energy throughout the 
world. 

20. Mr. PECQUEUR (Prance) said that his country felt obliged to voice its 
opposition to the trend towards excessive increases in the Agency's budget. 
That attitude should not be interpreted as expressing any lack of confidence in 
the Agency, whose role in the development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
was well appreciated by the French Government; on the contrary, it was determined 
wholly by considerations of healthy financial administration. In the existing 
economic circumstances there seemed to be little reason why international organizations 
should increase their budgets at such a fast rate while Member States 
were subjecting themselves to severe restrictions. The efforts to economize 
which the Director General had made after the Board's proceedings in June were 
therefore gratifying. However, he was empowered to announce that his 
Government had included in its budget for 1979 a sum of $300 000, representing 
Prance's voluntary contribution to the Agency. That contribution marked a 
substantial increase; but official confirmation could only be given, of course, 
on completion of the customary budgetary procedures. In addition, the French 
Government was willing to sponsor a number of technical assistance projects 
which the Agency had been unable to include in its budget for 1978, and 
negotiations were under way between the technical departments of the 
Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique and the requesting countries concerned. 
During 1978 Prance had hosted, for the third time, a course on "The role of 
GC (XXII )/0E. 201 
page 9 

nuclear energy in a national power plan", at the Institut national des sciences 

et techniques nucleaires, and also an international symposium on "Nuclear power 

station control and instrumentation", which had been held in April at Cannes. 
At the present moment a group of some twenty specialists in nuclear safety and 

environmental protection were undertaking a study tour in France. Finally, 
France had signed a verification agreement with the European Atomic Energy 

Community (EURAT0M) and the Agency under the terms of which the Agency would be 
able to apply safeguards to certain materials designated by France on its territory. 
That agreement illustrated the importance which France attached to the 
Agency's safeguards activities. 

21. Since the previous session of the Agency's General Conference, in September 
1977, France had continued with the implementation of its nuclear programme, 
which by 1985 would provide more than half the country's electrical power 
generating capacity. In addition to the two reactors put into operation in 
1977, France had built two new units during the current year, and at the 
present rate of construction one could anticipate the annual introduction of 
5000 Mtf(e) in the years to come. 
22. He wanted to make special reference to various stages in the parallel and 
simultaneous development of the fuel cycle industry. Trials with the first 
diffuser group that been started in the EUR0DIF enrichment plant at Tricastin 
in February last, and commercial production would begin early in 1979. The 
construction of that industrial plant was a typical example of the efficiency 
of the nuclear industry, but in addition it constituted a model of international 
co-operation in regard to one of the key factors of the fuel cycle. At the 
other end of the chain, the La Hague installation had made a satisfactory start 
with the second reprocessing campaign for irradiated fuels from water reactors; 
it was about to make a start on the third campaign, and Cogema was undertaking 
extension work so that it would be able to honour the reprocessing contracts 
signed with various foreign electricity companies, involving more than 
6000 tonnes of fuel. Mention had also to be made of the first campaign at 
the fission-product vitrification plant at Marcoule. 

23. The reprocessing of irradiated fuels and the vitrification of high-level 
wastes were the two options selected by France to "close" the nuclear fuel 
cycle. Those options seemed to offer the best guarantee of environmental 
safety and to permit the best possible utilization of the earth's uranium 
resources, thanks to the possibility of plutonium recycling in fast-breeder 
reactors. 

GC(XXII)/OR.201 

page 10 

24. In that area, Prance's choices were clear and the year's results were 
positive; after two years of very regular operation, it had been necessary to 
shut down the Phenix demonstration reactor so that various structural items in 
the heat exchangers of the intermediate circuit could be modified. After the 
modifications, Phenix had been put into operation again at full power and had 
performed excellently, a fact which largely confirmed the advantages of that 
type of reactor. Work at the Creys-Malville prototype large-capacity power 
station was also being continued, and the entry into service of that plant, 
the first fast breeder reactor plant, was planned for 1983. It was important 
to note that the first core of the Phenix reactor had been completely reprocessed 
at the Marcoule pilot plant, which showed that, in that respect too, 
fuel-cycle technology and reactor technology were being developed simultaneously. 
However, whatever the extent of the world's exploitable uranium resources, they 
were of limited accessibility and were also unequally distributed between the 
various countries in the world. It was indeed possible to improve the utilization 
of uranium by thermal reactors, but such improvements could hardly change 
the order of magnitude of the problem; with fast breeders, a country could have 
access to an energy potential which was independent of natural geographical 
differences and several factors of ten greater than the world's prospective 
oil resources; so the use of fast—breeders seemed essential. 

25. For any given country, the urgency of such a step was, of course, a 
function of the relative scope of its nuclear programme and its own uranium 
resources, and opinions regarding that urgency differed from one country to 
another. Bearing in mind the lead time for the development of any sophisticated 
technology, however, a start should already be made to gain appropriate 
experience of fast breeders in countries where their introduction was justified 
in the short or medium term. The condemnation of fast breeders on the grounds 
of proliferation risks due to the use of fuel rich in plutonium was without 
foundation. The true problem resided mainly in the surveillance of the 
plutonium stock between its extraction from the irradiated fuels and reutilization 
in a fast or thermal reactor* To oppose the development of fast 
breeders and the extraction of plutonium from irradiated fuels would be a 
serious act through which the entire international community could suffer. 
Steps should therefore be taken to reduce the proliferation hazards of the 
plutonium cycle to a level comparable with that of the uranium-235 cycle, and 
that aim was quite feasible. 
GC(XJCtI)/oE.201 
page 11 

26. Once the technical and technological problems of nuclear energy had been 
solved and its economic competitiveness compared with fossil-fuel sources proven, 
it would be necessary to turn to the problem of public acceptance. One could not 
but be struck by the passionate nature of the reactions observed in that connection. 
It was clear, however, that the state of the world energy balance necessitated 
a substantial contribution from nuclear power in the 80s and 90s. 
27. In addition, the latest reports from unbiased and competent authorities 
showed that, to produce the same quantity of energy, the risks involved in 
nuclear power were very much less, both for persons occupationally concerned 
and the population at large, than those involved in the use of other energy 
sources. 
28. Finally, those who had sincere misgivings regarding the type of society 
which the development of nuclear energy might call into being should learn 
from history that the respect for individual and collective freedoms was hardly 
compatible with the need to operate under conditions of shortage. 
29. He felt sure that the arguments he had advanced would in the end prevail 
and that the public would finally adopt a realistic attitude in its choice of 
energy supplies. It was in that spirit that the French Government had signified 
the importance it attached to public information in the nuclear field by 
creating, under the Prime Minister, a Council for Information on Nuclear 
Power. 
30. In that connection it was comforting to note that, when the public had had 
the opportunity to take up a definite position, it had in general responded 
more favourably to nuclear energy than had been anticipated, even in certain 
areas reputed to be imbued with anti—nuclear sentiment. Public acceptance was 
achieved through the "de-dramatization" of problems with a psychological 
approach, through better knowledge of the overall energy context, and through 
a better appreciation of the relative risks of different energy sources. That 
was a long—term task in which sociologists and psychologists were required as 
much as engineers. 
31. There was one area, however, where it was not enough to rely on time, but 
where it seemed a matter of urgency to determine and apply appropriate measures, 
namely the area of non-proliferation. It was necessary to get out of that 
tragic dilemma where the choice was only between a world in which any conflict 
could degenerate into a world catastrophe, since every nation had nuclear 
weapons, or a world in which energy shortages might destroy international 
equilibrium and in which all hope of development would be barred to the poor. 

GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 12 

32. The duality of good and evil was not specific to nuclear energy but was 
in fact an inherent characteristic of technical progress, and in the case in 
point it had to he realized that the potential benefits and the risk were both 
very great. 
33. It had to be stressed first of all that even total renunciation of the 
potential benefits would not eliminate the risk, because other methods of 
producing nuclear arms existed which were faster and less costly than the 
building of electric power stations with their associated fuel cycle. One 
therefore had to face up to the prospect of developments in the nuclear 
sector throughout the world, while at the same time endeavouring to minimize 
the risk of a conflagration. In addition, any policy of non-proliferation 
should avoid creating a condition of segregation by reserving the benefits 
of nuclear energy to a few developed countries. If the size of the equipment 
could be appropriately adapted and the financial problems solved, nuclear 
energy constituted for developing countries a great hope in the medium term 
and a vital hope in the long run. One had to find a middle way whose objectives 
would be as follows: to promote the development of nuclear energy, 
allowing all to benefit therefrom in a manner and according to a time schedule 
which suited their economic development; and to limit the risks of proliferation 
by applying a flexible policy, based on certain restrictions but also on 
certain safeguards, while respecting the legitimate opinions of the countries 
concerned but forbidding the diversion of materials, facilities or techniques. 
34. Parallel with the comprehensive studies in the context of the International 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), to which French technicians 
were making an active contribution, the French Government was pursuing its 
own lines of research on that subject within the framework of the Interministerial 
Council on External Nuclear Policy, established in September 1976 
by the President of the Republic. The Government desired to refine its 
nuclear policy, the main lines of which as laid down in October 1976 were not 
in any doubt. 
35. France realized the essential, if not irreplaceable, contribution that 
nuclear energy could make to the development of various countries and wished 
to confirm its intention of promoting peaceful nuclear applications in fulfilment 
of its international engagements. On the other hand, in keeping with 
its specific and humanitarian traditions, France did not want to intensify the 
threat represented by the proliferation of atomic weapons. 
GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 13 

36. Far from being purely interdictory, however, French policy was resolutely 
constructive and was aiming at an international organization for the marketing 
of materials and services which would guarantee and control their peaceful 
utilization but which would also give consumers the certainty of being able to 
obtain them when required, without excessive restrictions, which would likewise 
guarantee that international techniques were developed satisfactorily from the 
point of view of proliferation risks, and which would finally ensure due respect 
for national options, in so far as the latter conformed to clear economic 
objectives and were not systematically directed towards techniques of doubtful 
utilization. France believed that it was possible to reconcile all those 
objectives and was willing to collaborate with everyone in order to establish 
a system of technical procedures corresponding to those criteria. 

37. It was clear that an international consensus was a condition for progress, 
since only the agreement of the various partners would make possible the 
equitable application of rules inevitably not flexible enough to cover all 
cases and all interpretations, 
38. The technical reports prepared on an international basis by the different 
INFCE working groups should, by their evaluation of the more or less proliferative 
nature of the technologies envisaged, provide a common technical basis 
which would facilitate the indispensable consensus on the political measures 
which would have to be derived therefrom. 
39. In regard to non-proliferation, French efforts had not been restricted to 
mere elucubration, and in two areas it had been possible to give concrete form 
to France's philosophical approach thanks to the development of technologies 
equivalent in terms of efficiency to those at present in use or under development, 
but much more satisfactory from the point of view of non-proliferation. 
For example, the process of uranium enrichment by chemical treatment reported 
at the International Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle (the 
Salzburg Conference), held in May 1977, a process which virtually excluded 
the attainment of high isotope concentrations, embodied intrinsic nonproliferation 
safeguards which were unique in that particularly sensitive 
area; and the development of "caramel" fuels combining the conventional 
plate structure with the use of uranium oxide instead of mechanical alloying 
meant that only slightly enriched uranium could be utilized without adversely 
affecting reactor performance. 

GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 14 

40. It was still necessary to determine a suitable policy for the management 
of plutonium, which constituted no special risk except when it was separated 
and free from fission products, which was not the case with reactors, even 
fast breeders. The crux of the plutonium cycle problem was therefore the 
management of stocks between output from the reprocessing plant and return to 
the reactors. That problem was by no means insoluble but constituted an 
essential component in the making of a satisfactory non-proliferation policy, 
41. He hoped that international collaboration would make it possible to reduce 
the risks of proliferation associated with plutonium to the same acceptable 
level as would be reached in the case of risks relating to the enriched uranium 
cycle. It was his earnest wish that, in spite of the continuing difficulties, 
nuclear energy would before the end of the present millenium start to fulfil 
the hopes that humanity had placed in it for a third of a century past, and 
would thus make the important contribution that was needed for the progress 
of man in the realms of energy, economics and peace. 
42. Mr. HA.UNSCHII1J (Federal Republic of Germany) said that in the year 
that had just passed the public had taken considerable interest in the nuclear 
power debate and the two main problems associated with it: the contribution 
nuclear energy should make to the overall energy supply and ways of ensuring 
its peaceful application. 
43. Such interest was fully justified since, just as much today as in former 
times, the adoption of any new technology capable of changing man's living 
conditions involved political decisions for which a consensus had to be sought. 
It was therefore vital that the public should maintain or regain its faith in 
governments, science and industry, and regard them as capable of controlling 
the use of nuclear energy and restricting it to peaceful purposes. The discussions 
on that subject, moreover, had lately taken a more objective turn. 
44. Following lengthy and sometimes controversial debates, his country had 
decided, at the beginning of the previous year, to revise its energy programme. 
All parties had agreed that there was need to diversify the sources, reduce the 
proportion of oil and make use of all possibilities for conservation, and also 
that the predominant part would be played by coal, which was the Federal 
Republic's main source of energy on its own territory. It had been decided, 
nevertheless, that nuclear energy was still indispensable in order to cover 
the considerable remaining need. He recalled that in 1977 nuclear power plants 
had accounted for approximately 13$ of the overall electricity output in the 
Federal Republic of Germany. 
Gc(xxii)/oR.aoi 
Page 15 

45« The worldwide discussion on energy and non-proliferation had enhanced the 
importance of the Agency which, over the past year, had intensified its efforts 
to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technical co-operation with 
the Member States of the Third World. The volume of nuclear materials and the 
number of facilities, both old and new, under Agency safeguards had increased 
sharply, and the Agency's role as a worldwide co-ordinator was emphasized by 
INFCE, which had been started in October 1977. 

46. In all countries, economic development required a safe and sufficient 
energy supply at acceptable cost, and it was for that reason that energy now 
ranked among the major issues in international politics, at a time when it 
was important to narrow the existing North-South gap and relax the tensions 
resulting from it. 
47. The first essential was that each country should use its own resources, 
which in the case of the Federal Republic was coal, and elsewhere could be 
hydroelectric power, while in a large number of countries in the Third World 
there could be solar energy. But the techniques required for improving the 
exploitation of those resources were still lacking. His Government was aware of 
that problem and was willing, in conjunction with others, to assist in solving 
it. The plan was not only to use solar energy in the Federal Republic, where 
it would in any case be limited by the climate, but also to develop methods 
suited especially to lieveloping countries. 
48. Nuclear power would still be necessary, however, above all for supplying 
the major consumers such as big cities, large factories and extensive grids. 
In that area, too, the Federal Republic had entered into partnership with 
various countries in order to assist them in energy planning and in setting up 
the scientific and technical infrastructure required, as well as to transfer 
know-how and help them to develop in terms of their own specific interests and 
potential. 
49. The advice, mediation and direct contributions of the Agency had been of 
the greatest value in that respect. Its training programmes and its recommendations 
on the construction and operation of nuclear power stations were 
examples of successful work, as were its studies on the feasibility of 
introducing nuclear energy in various regions. Other important tasks were 
waiting to be tackled by the Agency in that field. 

GC (XXII)/OR. 201 
page 16 

50. However, its budget could not meet all requirements. During the present 
year some $20 million were "being allocated totally or primarily for the benefit 
of the developing countries. That was the largest item in the budget, followed 
by $12 million devoted to safeguards, a figure which would incidentally have to 
be increased owing to the very fact that, thanks to the Agency, nuclear activities 
were expanding in many places. 
51. The importance which the Federal Republic continued to attach to the Agency's 
technical assistance was attested by what had become the traditional announcement 
of his Government's voluntary contribution to the following year's budget, 
namely about $700 000 to the General Fund and $1.5 million as an additional voluntary 
contribution to pay for fellowships, training courses, scientific conferences 
and experts' services. 
52. The second important area of the Agency's work was that of safeguards against 
proliferation. All of the Agency's Member States were united in their desire to 
prevent proliferation, as was shown by the Treaty which had been concluded ten 
years previously and which, in spite of its imperfections, had none the less 
contained proliferation among its signatories. 
53. The second NPT Review Conference, to be held in I98O, would make it possible 
to examine the questions which had arisen in the meantime, including that of 
universality. The multinational control system whose advantages had been 
demonstrated by NPT was still not universally applied, thus leaving the risk of 
bilateral arrangements being made between suppliers and recipients. Efforts 
must therefore be pursued to secure worldwide application of NPT. 
54» Connected with safeguards was likewise the question of differentiation 
between nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States. The inequality 
inherent in NPT for political reasons must not be allowed to invade the 
scientific, technical and economic fields. That was why the Government of the 
Federal Republic of Germany welcomed the offer by three nuclear-weapon States -
France, the United Kingdom and the United States - to open non-military nuclear 
activities to Agency inspection. The Government of the Federal Republic had 
been stressing the importance of that point for several years past, and expected 
speedy implementation of the offer. It noted with satisfaction the progress 
achieved during the previous year and thought that the Soviet Union should join 
the movement. Nuclear-weapon States should not enjoy any privilege regarding 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy; it was therefore necessary that they should 

GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 17 

submit their peaceful nuclear installations to all the inspections required, 
something which would give them practical experience in the application of 
safeguards and save them from giving the impression that, in the sphere of 
peaceful uses, they enjoyed privileges in no way implied by the principle of 
non-proli feration. 

55. There remained one great unsolved problem, that of the balance between 
implementation of NPT and the promotion of peaceful uses. Symmetrical 
application was essential if the Treaty was to be effective. Approximately 
100 States had acceded to the Treaty, and a wide measure of control was 
being exercised over them. But they had also acquired the right to the 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy, which could not be questioned. The 
intentions expressed in NPT could not, under the pretext of non-proliferation 
or safeguards, be interpreted as permitting the imposition of restrictions 
which would virtually amount to preventing the peaceful utilization of 
atomic energy under economically viable conditions. 
56. A non-proliferation system based on discrimination would run counter to 
the aims of NPT. Discrimination would initially delay the dissemination of 
various techniques, but in the long run those techniques would be developed 
and disseminated in an uncontrolled manner. Everyone knew that a civilian 
nuclear power programme was the most expensive and the most easily detectable 
way of obtaining nuclear weapons. It was also a fact that the decision of 
a particular country to acquire nuclear weapons was not merely a function of 
technical considerations. It was above all a political question, which had 
to be handled with not only technical but also political methods, including 
international co-operation on the basis of partnership within the framework 
and in the express spirit of NPT. 
57. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (iNFCE) now being undertaken 
would make it possible to study all the aspects of the wide agreement 
which would be necessary on the future use of nuclear energy in the context of 
NPT. INFCE represented the greatest effort that had ever been made to clarify 
the relationships between the economic use of nuclear energy and the principle 
of non-proliferation, with great political and economic values at stake. 
58. It was satisfactory that all interested countries could take part in 
INFCE, and that the discussions were thus open to groups of different 
interests and of different status. He was also glad that the Agency, in 

GC(XXU)/OR.201 
page 18 

accordance with -the Federal Republic's request, was serving as a forum for INFCE, 
which would ensure that all those taking an interest, whether active or not, in 
nuclear energy would be informed of the results of the project, 

59, After a year devoted to the collection of data, the actual evaluation could 
now begin. It was gratifying that within INFCE a pragmatic and realistic 
approach was becoming predominant, and that there was a growing understanding 
that it would be preferable - among other reasons, in order to save time - to 
perfect existing techniques capable of immediate industrial application 
rather than to contemplate entirely new systems, 

60, There was likewise a realization that specific technical changes and 
isolated institutional arrangements would not solve anything. It was preferable, 
and possible, to identify a spectrum of co-ordinated measures which could 
be submitted, with a high degree of agreement, for the approval of Governments, 
Without wishing to prejudge the future, he thought that some of the following 
items could be found among those measures: 

— 
Further technical development of safeguards; 
— 
Increasing reliability of nuclear power station fuel supplies; 
— Criteria for the use of highly-enriched uranium in research 
reactors and new reactor types; 
— Closer investigation of possible modificationstechniques in the back end of the fuel cycle; 
to certain current 

— 
Establishment of a regime for the deposit of excess plutonium as 
provided in the Agency's Statute (in which connection he wished 
to praise the Agency's initiative, which his country would 
actively support); 
— 
Various mechanisms for international or regional co-operation, 
61, 
Those were the topics on which the Federal Republic of Germany had con


centrated its MFCE-related efforts. He wished to point out in that connection 
that his Government and the Agency had just agreed on a joint programme 
for the further technical improvement of safeguards. That very comprehensive 
programme would start with 30 projects to be executed by research centres and 
industrial undertakings in the Federal Republic, and should assist the Agency 
to develop effective and at the same time practicable safeguards. 

GC(XXH)/0R,201 
page 19 

62, New tasks would emerge for the Agency, which was well qualified to accept 
additional responsibilities thanks to the efforts of the Director General and 
his staff. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany wished the Agency 
well in its work, which was essential for prosperity and security in the world, 

63, Mr, CASTRO MADBRO (Argentina) recalled Argentina's main achievements 
in the nuclear field during the past year. The Atucha I plant had continued to 
operate extremely well, producing 1759 GWh in the course of the year and 
attaining a load factor of 95$, Construction of the Embalse station, the 
country's second nuclear power plant, was proceeding normally, with active participation 
by Argentine engineering enterprises, A final decision regarding 
the third nuclear power station project, Atucha II, also based on natural 
uranium, was to be taken at the beginning of the coming year. Thus, by 1986 
Argentina would have an installed nuclear capacity of 1500 Mtf, Argentina 
would assume full responsibility for the construction of the third station; 
hence that project would mark an important step towards self-sufficiency in 

the nuclear field, 

64, 
Like 1968, the year in which the decision to built the country's first 

nuclear power plant had been taken, 1979 would be a milestone in Argentina's 

nuclear development: the departure from turnkey purchases of nuclear power 

plants, 

65, 
With regard to the fuel cycle, the country's activities were aimed at 

securing the greatest possible degree of national autonomy. To that end, 

uranium ore prospection was continuing, and reasonably assured reserves of 

25 400 tonnes had been established and additional resources of 4000 tonnes 

estimated. Knowledge of total nuclear ore reserves constituted one of 
Argentina's basic objectives, which was being pursued with the collaboration 
of the private sector, both domestic and foreign, 

66, The production of concentrates had by now risen to 150 tonnes and thus 
was quite adequate to meet the demand; nevertheless, to cover future requirements 
Argentina was considering exploitation of the Sierra Pintada deposit, 
which should allow production of 600 tonnes per year. Domestic private 
industry would participate in the realization of that project, the start of 
which was foreseen for 1982, 

67, The pilot plant for fuel element fabrication was continuing production 
while awaiting the completion, at the end of I98O, of an industrial-scale 


GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 20 

installation that would produce 450 fuel elements a year. Parallel to that, 

a Zircaloy tube factory was under construction and was scheduled to go into 

service in 1983. 

6S. Argentina had developed the 'basic engineering techniques for constructing 
an experimental heavy water production plant and had invited domestic industry 
to take over the detailed engineering and the construction with a view to 
starting production in 1981. The technology mastered in that project would 
serve as the basis for the construction of an industrial installation to meet 
future needs. That path constituted, in Argentina's opinion, the only possible 
solution in view of the policies of the "Club of London", which tended to increase 
the dependence of recipient countries on their suppliers. 

69. The production and use of radioisotopes and of high-intensity radiation 
sources had continued to grow. In particular, the National Atomic Energy 
Commission was producing sealed sources of cobalt-60 and building cells for 
the production of radionuclides of very high specific activity. The Commission 
was, moreover, studying the possibility of transferring irradiation plant 
technology to private undertakings so that they could gradually take over the 
provision of the sterilization services required in the country. 
70. Research and development activities were being concentrated more and more 
on the fuel cycle, in view of the country's policy of national autonomy, and 
on new sources of energy. In addition to studies devoted to solar and wind 
energy, a modest nuclear fusion programme had been put in hand. Work was also 
going ahead on the installation of the 20-MV heavy ion accelerator purchased 
by Argentina, which was to go into service in 1982 and would make a valuable 
contribution to progress in nuclear physics in Argentina and indeed throughout 
Latin America. 
71. In its capacity as a nuclear energy authority, the National Atomic Energy 
Commission had continued to perform its functions connected with the licensing 
of nuclear installations and with the consequent regulatory activities. In 
that connection, its activities had developed particularly in the areas of 
radiation protection and nuclear safety. 
72. Argentina had strengthened its collaboration with the competent international 
organizations in the nuclear field, including in particular the United Nations 
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, the International Commission 
on Radiological Protection, the United Nations Environment Programme, 
the World Health Organization, the International Labour Organisation and, of 
course, the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
OC (XXII) /OR. 201 
page 21 

73. The brief review he had given of the activities of the National Atomic Energy 
Commission made it quite clear that Argentina was irrevocably resolved to pursue 

a national nuclear policy which would assure the country independence in that 

domain; that objective in fact assumed increasing importance as restrictions 

imposed at the international level on the transfer of technology and on the supply 

of nuclear materials became more stringent, 

*/ 

74. He continued with the following statement-' : 
"The essential characteristics of this nuclear policy, established by 
Decreee No. 3138 of October 1977» are a belief in the cause of peace, a 
decision to increase the national scientific, technical and industrial 
effort and a wide and generous spirit of co-operation in the international 
field, particularly in Latin America. 

"Our peaceful outlook, nourished by a long history of respect for law 
and justice, has been expressed many times at international conferences and 
has been fully reflected in our actions. 

"The accession of the Argentine Republic to the Antarctic Treaty and 
the Outer Space Treaty, which contain specific reference to weapons of 
mass destruction, is a clear demonstration of this policy. 

"Recently the Minister of External Relations of my country announced 
before the United Nations General Assembly that steps were being taken to 
ratify the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, 
in the negotiation of which we played a major role. 

"The denuclearization of a geographical region as important as ours 
can be achieved only in conditions of equality and mutual respect, a 
principle not acknowledged in the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons, which is the reason why the people of Argentina have 
rejected it totally and spontaneously. 

"Furthermore, as our Minister of External Relations has stated, this 
Treaty has failed in its application, since not only has it not stopped 
vertical proliferation but it has not even slowed down the rate thereof, 
as demonstrated by the fact that whereas in 1968, the year the Treaty was 
opened for signature, the superpowers possessed 5300 strategio nuclear 
missiles, this number had risen to 12 500 in 1977, 

"The promises of technical assistance for the development of the use 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes have likewise 'failed to give the 
results that might have been expected, as evidenced by the proceedings 
of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons held in 1975, 

"Our programme of co-operation in the international field is pursued 
through bilateral agreements, principally with our fellow Latin American 
countries, and includes specific plans of action in all fields of application 
of nuclear energy. 

2/ Reproduced verbatim at the request of the speaker, in accordance with 
Rule 89(b) of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, 


GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 22 

"It has been very successful, as amply demonstrated by the commissioning 
of the training reactor in Lima, in the construction of which 
the staff of the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute actively participated. 
This is the first stage of a more ambitious co-operation project involving 
the construction of a centre for nuclear research and radioisotope production. 


"This policy of regional co-operation is aimed in particular at the 
training of human resources by means of fellowships, the provision of 
expert services and the holding of courses, and the approach is such as 
to enable the Latin American personnel involved to participate extensively 
in the carrying-out of studies and the execution of projects. 

"The courses being organized include one on uranium prospecting and 
an introductory course on nuclear power, which are to be held this year at 
the National Atomic Energy Commission under the auspices of the Inter-
American Nuclear Energy Commission. Such international co-operation is 
likely to increase as a result of the policies approved at the last 
meeting of the Ministers of External Relations of the non-aligned 
countries, at which Argentina had the honour to be included in the group 
of nations appointed to co-ordinate action in this field. 

"The results of the United Nations conference on co-operation between 
developing countries, which ended recently in Buenos Aires, open up new 
possibilities for such horizontal co-operation. 

"In contradistinction to the obscurantist and restrictive policies 
followed by some industrialized countries under the pretext of serving 
the cause of non-proliferation, we believe that international co-operation 
is the most effective means of ensuring the utilization of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. In this connection we agree entirely with what 
the Director General said in his statement at the special session of the 
United Nations General Assembly on disarmament - namely: 

• in the long term, policies restraining and denying 
... . aimed at

the transfer of nuclear or any other technology cannot be succesful 

and could in the end prove counter-productive'. (A/S-10/PV 13) 

"The size of the network of safeguards agreements associated with cooperation 
agreements (listed in the annual report) is the best possible 
evidence of the truth of this statement. 

"The objectives of our nuclear policy are the same as those pursued 
by the International Atomic Energy Agency and we therefore feel fully 
competent to point out, when appropriate, any changes in direction which 
may be necessary to ensure the Agency's success. 

"We all know that technical assistance and the safeguards system are 
the pillars on which the International Atomic Energy Agency is founded. 

"My Government seeks through its participation in the various organs 
of the IAEA to promote the harmonious strengthening of both these activites 

GC(XXII)/OR.201 
page 23 

"What has occurred in the past few years obliges us, however, to issue 
warnings which are intended to be of a constructive nature. 


"I shall not dwell on restrictive aims based on discriminatory criteria, 
such as the proposal to limit provision of technical assistance to States 
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NTT), which 
has often been put forward in the Board of Governors, since these aims are 
totally illegal owing to their incompatibility with the Statute. 

"I shall, however, mention the limitations on the provision of technical 
assistance by the IAEA which stem from the fact that countries which supply 
technology, i.e. countries which have the infrastructure necessary for 
enabling the IAEA to furnish assistance, are imposing significant limits on 
its provision where the development of nuclear industry is concerned. 

"We believe that technical assistance in the initial stages of nuclear 
development - for example, in the construction of irradiation reactors, the 
production of radioisotopes and the development of their applications - is 
of real importance, and that it should be maintained and even increased as 
far as possible. This assistance should, however, be extended to the more 
advanced stages of nuclear development, not only as a natural continuation 
of what has already been done, but also as an essential factor in the 
achievement of the IAEA's objectives, which are, as we know, to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world. 

"By denying technical assistance or restricting it to intermediate 
levels of development, obstacles are placed in the way of growth, and 
commercial suppliers of technology are the ones to benefit, or, which 
comes to the same thing, the prosperity of a limited part of the world 
is favoured, 

"Owing to this restriction, the IAE4 cannot supply Argentina with the 
technical assistance it needs at its level of nuclear development, and for 
this reason Argentina is seriously considering the possibility of ceasing 
to submit technical assistance requests. 

"In addition, the technical assistance programme is severely limited 
at present because of the scant financial resources allotted to it. If 
this situation continues, we shall inevitably arrive at a point where only 
lip-service is being paid to the idea of technical assistance, and one of 
the pillars on which the Agency is built will thus be destroyed, 

"The situation is further aggravated by the fact that some contributions 
are made in non-convertible currencies. This causes a lack of 
financial liquidity which places severe constraints on technical assistance. 
It is therefore essential that the rules relating to this matter 
contained in document INFCIRC/l3, which were approved by the General 
Conference in 1959» should be effectively applied. 

"My country, together with many developing countries, has suffered 
from the effects of these limitations, which could cast doubt on the 
entire present system and lead to a further reduction in the sphere of 
competence of the Agency, affected as it already is by the establishment 
of the 'Club of London* and the implementation of the International 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation. 


ac(xxn)/oR«aoi 
page 24 

"In the field of safeguards, adjustments mist also be made urgently in 
order to avoid a deadlock. The General Conference will have to consider, 
and will almost certainly approve, an exceptionally inflated 'budget. One 
of the main causes of the increase in our expenditure is the hypertrophy 
that has occurred in the safeguards system. The reason for this is that 
safeguards are being applied not only to nuclear materials, as was originally 
intended, but also to innumerable other items which could not possibly be 
converted into weapons. 

"We believe that safeguards policy should concentrate on essentials 
and should avoid the waste of effort on incidental and unimportant matters 
which, apart from being costly and inefficient, militates against the 
overall credibility of the system. 

"Another reason for the increase in the cost of safeguards is the 
decision to apply them in three nuclear-weapon States, which will certainly 
not contribute anything to efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation. It 
is difficult to determine the rationale of this decision unless it be to 
satisfy industrial interests which have nothing to do with the basic concern 
underlying the safeguards system. 

"I cannot help commenting that, besides the limitations which it 
imposes on the granting of technical assistance, the increase in safeguards 
activities seems to be directed towards consolidating the industrial predominance 
of the few, to the detriment of the majority of the members of 
the international community*'. 

75 • finally, he stressed the benefits of a certain number of other Agency 
activities! the programmes on nuclear power and reactors, nuclear safety and 
environmental protection, food and agriculture, and the life sciences and 
physios, Argentina particularly appreciated the preparation of safety codes 
and guides for nuclear power plant operation. It also attributed great importance 
to the work of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, 
which was stimulating progress in physics throughout the world. 

76. Argentina reiterated its undertaking to assist the Agency by providing 
experts and fellowships. It hoped to increase its participation, to the 
greatest possible extent, in all studies and writing groups which were of 
great value to the international community. 
The meeting rose at 5.5 p.m. 


GC(XXII)/OR.202 
February 1979* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER 1978 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUMORED AND SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 19 September 1978, at 10.50 a.m. 

President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda** 


Arrangements for the Conference 1 -2 


(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 1 -2 
General debate and annual report for 1977 
(continued) 3 - 123 


Statements by the delegates of: 


India 3 -12 
German Democratic Republic 13 -29 
United Kingdom 30 -51 
Bulgaria 52 -60 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 61 -94 
Belgium 95 -111 
Pakistan 12 -123 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 22 September 1978. 

«*/ GC(XXII)/595. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIIl)/INF/l79/Rev.2. 


78-12094 


GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 2 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL 
DISCUSSION (GC(XXII)/595) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed, the Conference that the General Committee, at 
its meeting the previous day, had authorized him to report on the result of its 
consideration of the above item. The General Committee recommended: (l) that 
the agenda should consist of the items contained in the provisional agenda, as 
set out in document GC(XXII)/595; and (2) that the items should he allocated 
for initial discussion as indicated in the same document. 
2. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1977 (GC(XXII)/597) (continued) 

3. Mr. SBTHNA (India) congratulated the President on his election, and 
expressed his delegation's appreciation of the manner in which the Director 
General had conducted the Agency's affairs during the year. 
4. The budget of the Agency for 1979 had shown an unprecedented increase of 
27$ over the budget for the preceding year. The Agency should exercise greater 
economy, especially in sectors not directly related to its actual operational 
needs. The Agency's budget continued to reflect an unfortunate imbalance 
between expenditure on safeguards activities and that on promotional activities. 
While budgetary provisions for safeguards activities increased substantially each 
year, those for promotional activities did not keep pace. Taking into consideration 
currency fluctuations and inflation, the technical assistance programme 
of the Agency had hardly grown at all in real terms. 
5. The voluntary offers of some nuclear weapon States to place a few of their 
facilities under Agency safeguards might result in a further increase of the safeguards 
component of the budget. It was difficult to say to what extent such 
limited non-proliferation measures should be financed by the Agency. His country 
had always believed in the concept of comprehensive non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and had consistently held that international safeguards, in order to be 
truly effective, must be applied uniformly and universally to all nuclear activities 
in all States. 
6. His delegation attached great importance to the technical assistance programme 
of the Agency, and was happy to be associated with the drafting of the revised 
Guiding Principles and General Operating Rules to Govern the Provision of Technical 
Assistance by the Agency. It was to be hoped that the revised Guiding Principles 
and General Operating Rules would be finalized soon and that individual Member States 
GC(XHl)/OR.202 
page 3 

would not insist on introducing principles contrary to the provisions of the 
Agency's Statute. His country was totally opposed to any form of discrimination 
in the provision of technical assistance by the Agency to its Member 
States, and urged the Agency not to accept the responsibility of administering 
voluntary technical assistance contributions if such offers were subject to 
restrictive and preferential conditions. 

7. For 1979» the Board of Governors had recommended a target of US $8.5 million 
for voluntary contributions to the General Fund. India would contribute the 
equivalent of US $63 000, which was more than the amount corresponding to its 
base rate of assessment, and would continue to provide fellowships, scientific 
visits and expert services to other developing countries under the Agency's 
technical assistance programme. 
8. The amendment of Article VI of the Statute had been under discussion for 
some time. His delegation supported the principle of more equitable geographical 
representation on the Board of Governors. 
9. The five Codes of Practice relating to the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants 
had now been completed. Those Codes would be useful to Member States embarking 
on nuclear power programmes. India would continue to provide expertise for the 
preparation of the Safety Guides. 
10. There had been three meetings of governmental representatives to consider 
the drafting of an international convention on the physical protection of nuclear 
material. His country attached great importance to the proposed convention, 
and hoped that a draft convention would emerge soon and find universal acceptance. 
11. Since the preceding session of the General Conference there had been some 
notable developments affecting international co-operation in the field of atomic 
energy. There appeared to be a growing obsession with hypothetical proliferation 
involving quantities of nuclear material that were being used peacefully and were 
tiny compared to the vast amounts of nuclear material deployed in continuing 
weapons programmes. He hoped that a more balanced view would prevail so that 
the development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes was not unduly hampered. 
12. His country was committed to the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes 
for improving the living standards of its people. Electric power was being 
provided at competitive rates and applications of nuclear techniques in agriculture, 
industry and medicine were being developed. The Agency had an important 
role to play in international development, and India had made its contribution 

GC(XXH)/OR.202 
page 4 


• In the spirit of promoting international 
toward s the achievement of -that goal.
co-operation and understanding and recognizing the vital role that the Agency 
could play, he was happy to announce that his Government had offered to host the 
twenty-third regular session of the General Conference in New Delhi. India 
would provide all the necessary facilities and would defray such additional 
expenditure as the Agency might incur as a result of holding the session away 
from its headquarters. 

13, Mr. SITZLAOK (German Democratic Republic) said he would first like to 
extend a. welcome to the delegation of the Republic of Viet Nam on the occasion 
of its first attendance at the General Conference. 

14» Almost ten years ago to the day, the General Assembly of the United Nations 
had passed a resolution recommending the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)-' and requesting the depository Governments to open it for 
signature. That event had marked the beginning of a phase of serious 
international endeavours designed to prevent an increased nuclear hazard to 
mankind. At the same time a start had been made towards a further shaping of the 
Agency's activities, which had led to continuous growth in its importance and 
responsibilities. But the Agency's endeavours would make sense only if the 
most urgent demand of the world today, namely the preservation of lasting peace, 
was met. In that connection, the real and urgent issue lay in successfully 
ending the nuclear arms race, stopping further production of nuclear weapons 
and reducing existing stockpiles. 

15» There was no reasonable alternative to the policy of peaceful co-existence 
and disarmament* At the United Nations special session on disarmament, the 
majority of the Member States had declared themselves for disarmament, as 
an absolute necessity and a pressing task, thus strengthening the hope that 
effective disarmament measures would at last be taken, particularly in the 
nuclear field. His Government strongly supported the proposals made to that 
effect by the Soviet Union, calling, inter alia, for cessation of the production 
of all types of nuclear weapons and hence, also, stopping development of new 
weapon systems. In the same connection, his delegation strongly supported the 
demand to proceed immediately to the implementation of the proposal made by 
the eight socialist countries in the Committee of the Conference on Disarmament 
relating to a complete and unconditional renunciation of the production and 
deployment of neutron weapons. 

l/ Reproduced in document MFCIRC/14O. 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 5 

16. It was essential in the interest of international security to prevent any 
further acquisition by racist regimes of arms, including nuclear weapons and 
related technology, since that was creating an increasingly dangerous situation 
for the world community. In that regard, all States should adhere strictly to 
the relevant decisions of the United Nations Security Council. 
17. NPT was of the greatest importance within the framework of the efforts to 
bring about disarmament. Since its coming into force, considerable progress had 
been made but, unfortunately, not yet enough. In his delegation's opinion, all 
States should accede to NPT for its universal acceptance was in the interest of 
the whole world. 
18. As a party to NPT, his country held that the Treaty in no way impeded the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. On the contrary, the conditions for international 
scientific and technical co-operation and for assistance to developing 
countries in the nuclear field would be much more favourable if misuse of 
nuclear energy could be excluded by further developing and strengthening the 
existing system of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Early in the year, in 
a note addressed to the Director General, his Government had clearly defined its 
policy concerning nuclear exports, relevant safeguards and other measures to 
strengthen that system, and his delegation would welcome similar policy statements 
on the part of other States. In the present situation, the Agency's 
responsibility for developing and consolidating the system in question was a 
growing one, as also its tasks in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
by all States. 
19. His Government was firmly convinced that the Agency constituted the one 
and only world organization for discussion and settlement of all political, 
scientific and technical issues involved in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
His country would support all efforts aimed at promoting the system of nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons and further increasing the effectiveness of 
the Agency. 
20. His delegation had scrutinized with great interest the annual report for 
1977; the Director General and the Secretariat were to be commended on all the 
documentation prepared for the session. The programme, as drafted for the years 
1979-84, took into account what was necessary and feasible in order for the Agency 
to carry out its tasks; and it appeared to be well-balanced. His delegation 

GC(XXH)/OR.202 

page 6 

accordingly endorsed it as it stoodt In particular, it agreed with the conclusions 
emanating from the International Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle 
(the Salzburg Conference), held in May 1977, and endorsed the idea of convening a 
similar world conference in 1981 or 1982 in recognition of the great importance 
of direct communication among all engaged in the development of nuclear energy 
applications in the world. His country's interest stemmed from its extensive 
nuclear energy programme, which already accounted for 8$ of its total 
electric power generation and was to he further extended as an integral component of 
the energy substructure. That work was being done in close co-operation with the 
USSR and the other member countries of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(CMEA) . 

21. In regard to the programme on nuclear safety and environmental protection, 
noteworthy progress had been made, particularly in the work on nuclear safety 
standards. The importance of that work lay in the fact that the standards would 
form the basis for national regulations, thus facilitating international cooperation. 
His delegation had repeatedly stressed that safety and protection 
constituted fundamental conditions for obtaining the benefits to be derived 
from nuclear energy. In his country's own programme, priority had thus always 
been given to the matter of protection against potential deleterious effects. 
Measures to that end were planned and executed on a long-term basis, as, for 
example, the highly automated depository for low- and intermediate-level radioactive 
wastes which had been constructed over the past ten years and which 
provided for the final storage of wastes over long periods. 
22. His country unreservedly supported the Agency's safeguards programme. 
Effective safeguards applied in non-nuclear-weapon States served international 
security and were an indispensable prerequisite for the responsible use of 
nuclear energy. It was therefore in favour of the application of effective, 
independent safeguards by the Agency, covering all nuclear activities and in 
accord with HPT principles. To date, however, the Agency had had virtually 
no opportunity to carry out the necessary independent controls in the nonnuclear-
weapon States Members of the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM). 
It was to be hoped that those States would do everything in their power to fulfil 
their commitments under NPT. The safeguards agreement concluded between his 
country and the Agency had always been conscientiously fulfilled on the basis of 
an effective national system, the core of which was the computer—aided recording 
of and reporting on the nuclear material held. 
23. 
His delegation had noted with interest the Director General's report to the 
2/ 
Board of Governors on the implementation of safeguards in 1977-' and welcomed 

2/ GOV/19II. 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 7 

in particular the Agency's conclusion that no safeguarded nuclear material had 
been diverted from the declared peaceful activities. It should be the general aim 
to ensure that such a conclusion could be drawn with ever-increasing reliability, 
and the Agency's endeavours clearly to define the objectives and procedures of the 
safeguards system, as also its efforts towards, inter alia, the rational use of 
resources and improvement of the quality of inspections and the qualifications 
of inspectors, should be further pursued. Clearly, the means to achieve those 
ends would have to be provided. His country would continue to give maximum 
support to all those efforts. 

24. The physical protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities constituted 
one of the measures aimed at consolidating the system of non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, since unsecured nuclear material could precipitate 
a threat far beyond national boundaries, and that international aspect had to 
be taken into account in national planning. The Agency's work on internationally 
agreed guidelines therefore enjoyed his country's full support, and it was 
looking forward to the early conclusion of the proposed convention on the 
physical protection of nuclear material. 
25. Particular credit was due to the Agency for its work in disseminating 
scientific information on the uses of nuclear energy through well prepared 
scientific conferences and meetings and the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS). The fact that the number of countries participating in INIS 
had recently considerably increased indicated that the service was finding 
growing appreciation. With the planned expansion of its scope in 1979, the 
system as a whole would become still more effective. 
26. The trend discernible in the Agency's programme toward the provision of 
technical assistance in a broader perspective and on a longer-term basis was 
in full accord with his delegation's views. His country continued to attach 
great importance to the technical assistance programme and had the potential 
to give it effective support in many areas, in the interest of developing 
countries. It was ready to expand its assistance and to share its experience. 
In that connection, he was authorized to state that his Government would increase 
its contribution to the 1979 programme to the amount of 250 000 marks. 
27. As for budget issues, his Government regarded the scheduled raising of'the 
assessment on Member States for 1979 hy about one-third as considerable, the more 
so as only half of the increase was accounted for by programme expansion. While 
fully appreciating the efforts already made to reduce expenditure, it hoped that 
everything possible would be done to keep administrative expenses as low as 

0C(XXII)/OR.202 
page 8 

possible in the future. Despite its concern, however, his delegation was prepared 
to endorse the draft 'budget as presented, in token of the great importance 
it attached to the Agency's activities. 

28. The results presented in the annual report showed that the Agency had done 
excellent work over the past year, for which gratitude and appreciation were 
due to the Director General and the Secretariat. 
29. Apart from its scientific, technological and economic importance, the 
Agency's programme was unique in serving the welfare of mankind, through 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy aimed at resolving the greatest 
problems afflicting the world. As noted in the Pinal Document of the tenth special 
session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament, however, 
it had also to be recognized that mankind was today confronted with the unprecedented 
threat of self-destruction, a threat due in part to the existence 
of nuclear energy. There could be no discussion on the Agency's programme, 
therefore, without laving emphasis on the need for securing peace. Highly 
sophisticated and costly technical measures alone would not suffice; the 
essential condition lay in the political will of all States to end the arms 
race and to achieve real disarmament. Misuse of nuclear energy had to be 
prevented. The importance of the Agency resided in its contribution to that 
endeavour and its activities for the benefit of mankind. 
30. Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) said that he had listened with particular 
interest to the Director General's wide-ranging and thoughtful survey. For reasons 
which he would explain later in his remarks, he would single out for special 
mention what the Director General had said about the great need for a sustained 
programme of information and education regarding the impact of nuclear power on 
society. 
31. During the past year a number of important decisions on the development of 
nuclear power in the United Kingdom had been taken, including the ordering of 
another four gas-cooled reactors and the expansion of the Windscale reprocessing 
plant. 
32. Although the United Kingdom was relatively well endowed with fossil fuels, 
Government papers on energy policy had emphasized the importance of nuclear power. 
In January 1978 the Secretary of State for Energy had announced Government approval 
of the proposals by the Electricity Boards to order four further gas-cooled 
reactors and to envisage the subsequent ordering of a pressurized-water reactor. 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 9 

33. Those decisions had been taken against a background of growing public 
awareness of their importance, and it was his Government's policy to encourage 
full public debate on all major projects, particularly in the nuclear field. 
The proposal by British Nuclear Fuels Limited to construct at Windscale a plant 
for reprocessing irradiated oxide fuel had been examined by public enquiry. The 
issues investigated had covered a wide range of questions. One of those was the 
role of nuclear power as contrasted with alternative sources of energy; another 
was the advantage of reprocessing as compared to long-term storage; a third 
was the question of the ultimate disposal of waste. There was no doubt that, as 
a result of the enquiry, criticisms of alleged secrecy over nuclear decisions 
could no longer be sustained, and it was abundantly clear that the safety and 
engineering record of the nuclear industry was outstandingly good. Also, the 
open discussions that had been held showed that many misconceptions and fears 
of the general public were without foundation. Finally, it had become more 
generally accepted that the contribution which the renewable and alternative 
forms of energy might be able to make was a long way off, and that meanwhile 
there was a demand for energy which only nuclear power could meet in the short 
term. 
34. After thorough debate, the recommendation contained in the report of the 
enquiry that the project should proceed without delay had been approved by a 
large majority in Parliament. That outcome had demonstrated that, if all the 
facts were presented and analysed in a clear and rational manner, the public 
was unlikely to reject the benefits nuclear power could offer. Accordingly, 
he wished to urge that vigorous information programmes aimed at all levels of 
public opinion should be implemented with a view not only to defending the 
nuclear industry from its critics but also to bringing to public attention 
its positive achievements and its future potential. 
35. The second example of the United Kingdom Government's positive approach 
to the need for public acceptability was its undertaking that a proposal to 
proceed with a commercial demonstration fast reactor would be the subject of 
a similar wide-ranging public enquiry, though the timing and form of such an 
enquiry had not yet been settled. 
36. Modifications to the Dounreay reprocessing plant to permit the reprocessing 
of the plutonium oxide from prototype fast reactor (PFR) fuel were approaching 
completion, and commissioning of some sections had started. Commissioning of 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 

page 10 

the solvent extraction plant was expected to be completed in early 1979. Work on 
the pilot plant at Windsoale for the manufacture of mixed plutonium/uranium oxide 
fuel by the gel precipitation route was proceeding favourably and it was expected 
that that plant would also be in operation by early 1979. 

37. In any discussion of the environmental impact of nuclear energy, an important 
question was whether nuclear facilities could be safely and successfully 
decommissioned. The United Kingdom welcomed the Agency's continuing sponsorship 
of work in that field, including the exchange of information and the preparation 
of decommissioning codes. The United Kingdom was currently gaining first-hand 
experience in decommissioning following the closing down of the experimental 
Dounreay Past Reactor after 17 years of successful operation. Some of the 
internal components removed from the reactor had been subjected to the highest 
irradiation of any material in the world. 
38. The introduction to the Agency's annual report for 1977 referred to 
developments in the nuclear fuel cycle during that year. In that connection 
he wished to mention the progress made in Anglo-Dutch-German collaboration 
on the centrifuge project (URENCO). The first cascade halls of the plants 
at Capenhurst and Almelo had been formally opened in 1977, and when fully 
operational in 1979 those facilities would be the world's first major commercial 
plants to use the centrifuge process. UREHCO would increase its capacity to 
meet developing market requirements. 
39. The United Kingdom greatly welcomed the decision of the European Council 
of Ministers to site the large fusion experiment, the Joint European Torus 
(JEI), at Culham. With its European partners the United Kingdom had taken 
a full part in the discussions leading to the establishment of the JET Joint 
Undertaking in June and would, of course, continue to work for the success of 
the project. 
40. The risks associated with the proliferation of nuclear weapons were a 
matter of concern to all nations. It was therefore worth recording that 1978 
had seen important international discussions on the problems of disarmament. 
There had for example "been progress in the United Kingdom's tripartite 
negotiations with the United States and the Soviet Union on a Comprehensive 
Test Ban Treaty, and in his speech at another significant international meeting 
devoted to the question of disarmament - the United Nations special session on 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 11 

disarmament which had recently been held in Hew York - the Prime Minister, 
Mr. Callaghan, had reaffirmed the willingness of the United Kingdom to play a 
central role in moves towards disarmament. 

41. The second Review Conference of the Parties to NPT was due to be held in 
1980. On that occasion the United Kingdom Government would continue its efforts 
towards the attainment of the vital objective of non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. However, recognizing that some countries had reservations about 
acceding to NPT, his Government recommended as an alternative for those countries 
the text of the Agency's Pull Puel Cycle Safeguards Model Agreement, itself based 
on the Agency's safeguards system. 
42. The further development of nuclear energy was indispensable. But in 
order to promote its peaceful use and to avoid proliferation of nuclear 
weapons it was also essential to strengthen the existing non-proliferation 
regime. That should be done in a way which recognized that all countries 
had a legitimate claim to a guarantee that their energy needs would be met. 
The United Kingdom Government therefore welcomed INPCE, which had attracted 
broad support and participation and had already yielded worthwhile technical 
and scientific progress. 
43. The United Kingdom was of course playing an active part in INPCE, and 
was contributing technical papers based on its experience of commercial 
reprocessing. 
44. Another important development during the past year had been the 
circulation to Member States of the Agency's study on the international 
management and storage of plutonium and spent fuel. The United Kingdom 
Government warmly welcomed the opportunity provided by the study for discussing 
various schemes aimed at increasing the proliferation resistance of the nuclear 
fuel cycle. 
45. If any scheme for international plutonium storage was to achieve general 
acceptability, it would have to be non-discriminatory and the need of States 
to have properly safeguarded access to plutonium supplies would have to be 
recognized. The establishment of such a scheme would make a significant 
contribution to reducing proliferation risks. It was accordingly something 
to which his Government attached high priority. 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 12 

46. If NPT could be described as the cornerstone of non-proliferation, safeguards 
themselves and the operation of the Agency's safeguards inspectorate were the 
bricks and mortar. He was very pleased indeed that in the Safeguards Implementation 
Report for 1977 the Agency had again been able to confirm that there was 
no evidence of any diversion of a significant quantity of nuclear material. 
47. The United Kingdom was always considering the best ways and means of 
giving practical support to the Agency's safeguards activities, which it 
regarded as being of fundamental importance. A two-week training course for 
Agency safeguards inspectors was to be held in the United Kingdom at Springfields 
and Windscale in October 1978. The question of future courses would be reviewed 
with the Agency in the light of the experience gained. 
48. Ever since the conclusion of NPT in 1968, the United Kingdom had publicly 
undertaken, in spite of its exemption as a nuclear-weapon State, to open all 
peaceful nuclear activities in the United Kingdom to Agency safeguards. He 
was pleased to be able to confirm that, after long negotiations, an agreement 
on that subject between the United Kingdom, EURATOM and the Agency had entered 
into force on 14 August 1978. His Government felt that implementation of the 
agreement would afford the Agency valuable technical experience, since the 
Agency inspections would cover plants of advanced design incorporating the newest 
technology, 
49. The United Kingdom was convinced that NFT was the single most important 
international instrument for containing the dangers of nuclear proliferation. 
As the Prime Minister had said with reference to NPT at the United Nations tenth 
special session on disarmament: "We need to make acceptable agreements that 
will strengthen the technical barriers to the spread of nuclear arms, while 
making it possible for all countries who so desire to have access to nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes." To achieve that end,there had to be secure 
access to supplies of nuclear fuel. The United Kingdom therefore attached 
particular importance to the statement made at the conclusion of the 1978 
economic summit meeting held in Bonn, when the United States and Canada had 
expressed their intention to continue as reliable suppliers of nuclear fuel 
within the framework of effective safeguards. 
50. The United Kingdom firmly believed that the link between assured fuel 
supplies and safeguards was vital to universal participation in the peaceful 
benefits of nuclear technology. The Guidelines for nuclear suppliers, to 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 13 

which the United Kingdom was a party and which had been published by the 
Agency as document INFCIRC/254, should assist in making clear to customer 
countries the conditions which nuclear suppliers considered it necessary to 

impose. 

51. The United Kingdom recognized the importance of furthering the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. His 
Government had, therefore, as in previous years, pledged its full 
contribution to the Agency's General Fund. In addition, the United Kingdom 
would be increasing the sums which it had been making available to the Agency 
for the provision of fellowships in the United Kingdom for training scientists. 
He was pleased to say that the funds available for that purpose would in 1979 
be more than double those allocated in 1978, and it was hoped that they could 
be further increased in the future. 
52. Mr. KOSTADINOV (Bulgaria) said that the twenty-second regular session 
of the Agency's General Conference was being held in an atmosphere marked by 
worldwide efforts to strengthen the process of detente, supplemented by specific 
action in the field of disarmament, and that an important contribution in that 
respect bad been the tenth special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations 
on disarmament, the results of which were of great significance for the Agency. 
The session had stressed the responsible part to be played by the Agency in 
ensuring peaceful co-operation in the utilization of nuclear energy. The Director 
General's contribution to the work of the special session on disarmament, which 
had been constructive and encouraging, had been to put forward positive proposals 
for making the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons more universal and for 
further strengthening the application of safeguards. 
53» The Bulgarian Government welcomed the initiative shown at the special 
session on disarmament, which had been aimed at creating the conditions essential 
for genuine disarmament. An important part in that respect was played by the 
proposals put forward by the Soviet Union on practical ways of ending the arms 
race, together with the statement that the Soviet Union would never use nuclear 
weapons against States which undertook not to produce or acquire such weapons, 
or to have them on their territory. The Soviet Union had recently submitted for 
consideration by the General Assembly of the United Nations a draft international 

convention on strengthening the security of non-nuclear-weapon States. The 
Bulgarian Government welcomed that step, considering that the immediate conclusion 


GC(XXII)/OR.202 

page 14 

of the convention, together with the accession to it of troth nuclear-weapon and 

non-nuclear-weapon States, was an important way of strengthening international 

peace and would have a beneficial effect on the .Agency's work of promoting non


proliferation. Progress along those lines would also be of great importance for 

the success of the Second HPT Review Conference to be held in 1980. 

54. 
His delegation supported the appeal made to all Governments during the 
special session on disarmament for the further strengthening of current international 
treaties aimed at limiting the arms race, A particular case was the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Huclear Weapons, which more than ever before 
needed to be applied more universally. The time had come for all non-nuclearweapon 
States with a high nuclear potential to consider acceding to NPT or 
accepting effective Agency safeguards with respect to all their peaceful nuclear 
activities. That applied particularly to countries located in regions fraught 
with conflict and tension. A nuclear conflict breaking out in any of those 
regions could trigger a worldwide nuclear clash. If the Governments of such 
countries, including South Africa and Israel, really wanted to show the world 
that they were anxious to prevent an escalation of the instability and tension 
in their respective areas, they should accede to KPT. 
55. A matter of concern in the overall non-proliferation effort was the continued 
delay in the practical implementation of Agency safeguards in the nonnuclear—
weapon States Members of EURATOM. His delegation considered it impermissible 
to postpone any longer the full application of the Agency's standard 
safeguards procedures to non-nuclear-weapon countries with considerable nuclear 
activities, including the non-nuclear-weapon States Members of EURATOM. 
56. In a world in which nuclear power was being developed at an ever faster 
pace and the international exchange of nuclear materials and equipment was 
expanding, further improvement of the Agency's safeguards activities was a 
priority consideration in strengthening the regime of nuclear non-proliferation. 
Effective and independent control by the Agency was one of the basic premises 
for broad international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
It was heartening to see, along those lines, that the Agency had begun, both 
from the organizational and procedural standpoint, to improve the work of the 
Department of Safeguards and that the Safeguards Evaluation Section was operating 
successfully. The Secretariat was also working on a clearer-cut definition of 
the technical aims of safeguards. Bulgaria would welcome the continuation of 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 15 

the new trend on the basis of a thorough analysis of the work of the inspectorate 
and systematic introduction of all necessary improvements. 

57. The Agency's work in the field of technical assistance was especially commendable 
in view of the understandable efforts of Member States to use nuclear 
energy to speed up their economic development. Technical assistance should 
continue to be based on voluntary contributions in national currency, with 
priority being given to those countries developing their nuclear power capacities 
that had already acceded to NPT. That stipulation was a perfectly 
just one, for it was those States which had in practice made the most effective 
contribution to ensuring the peaceful nature of international nuclear co-operation. 
His country continued to oppose the provision of technical assistance by 
the Agency to the regimes of South Korea and Chile and to Israel. 
58. His Government wished to express its satisfaction with Bulgaria's own 
fruitful collaboration with the Agency, which was of great benefit to the country. 
Bulgaria regarded the utilization of nuclear energy as an important means of 
solving energy problems of decisive importance for its economic and social 
development. 
59. The Bulgarian Government was, for its own part, rendering assistance to 
the Agency, and in the current year had provided advisory services for a project 
relating to the introduction of numerical data identification techniques into 
IMS. His country was continuing to work on the development of methods and 
equipment that could be used in the Agency's safeguards work. A series of 
programmes for automated and absolute determination of plutonium isotope 
composition was also being prepared, and completion of that work would provide 
a solution to one of the most topically relevant problems in the Agency's 

inspection work. His country fully supported the Agency in its efforts to 
combine the function of technical assistance with the activities essential for 
safeguarding the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and in that connection 
he was authorized to announce that Bulgaria would increase its voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund in 1978 by 28% in national currency, in accordance 
with the figure recommended by the Board of Governors. 

60. In conclusion, the Bulgarian delegation welcomed the work done by the 
Secretariat in preparing the Annual Report for 1977. The Report gave evidence 
of the fact that the Agency was an important international organization that 
made a major contribution to the cause of peace and international co-operation, 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 16 page 17 

and described, clearly and concisely, the highlights of the .Agency's activities; 
the Bulgarian delegation therefore endorsed its adoption by the General 
Conference. 

61. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) noted that for the 
first time the Socialist Republic of Viet-Nam, which had now assumed the rights 
and duties of full memDership in ihe Agency, was talcing part in a session of the 
General Conference. His delegation welcomed the representatives of the heroic 
Vietnamese people, who had defended their freedom and the unity of their 
country in a struggle lasting many years and who were now stoutly defending the 
inviolability of their territory, their independence and their right to build 
socialism in their own country without interference, threats and pressure from 
outside. It believed that Viet Nam's participation in the work of the Agency 
would further enhance the latter*s role in the development of international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
62. The Conference's twenty—second regular session was taking place in a year 
marked by intense international activity aimed at solving one of the cardinal 
problems of modern times: that of diminishing the danger of war, limiting the 
growth of armaments and ultimately achieving disarmament. On the occasion of 
the sixtieth anniversary of the Great October Revolution, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, 
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the 
Soviet Union, had said "The most important, the most pressing problem now is 
to stop the arms race which is overwhelming the world." 
63. Holding unswervingly to its principles in the matter of disaimament, the 
Soviet Union was doing everything in its power to achieve progress in current 
negotiations on a limitation of the aims race and on disaimament; it was 
coming forward with specific proposals aimed at curbing the anas race, 
especially where nuclear weapons were concerned, as a transition to true disarmament 
measures. The proposals which his country had made at the recent 
special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament were 
designed to secure those goals. In particular, the Soviet Union had proposed 
that negotiations should be launched with a view to stopping the production of 
nuclear weapons in all fonns and bringing about a gradual reduction of stockpiles 
until all such weapons were eliminated. 
64. A particularly important matter, for all who wished to limit the arms race, 
was the prevention of any further proliferation of nuclear weapons. HPT had 
been opened for signature ten years before. One could confidently say that its 
conclusion had erected a barrier to the spread of nuclear weapons over the whole 
planet. But further efforts were needed, especially if one considered what 
fateful consequences might ensue for the world should States located in zones of 
tension and conflict obtain nuclear weapons. For that reason, plans to produce 
such weapons in South Africa and Israel could not but cause profound alarm. 
65. The task of giving a universal character to NPT remained vitally 
important.' The Soviet Union accordingly urged all who had not yet acceded to 
the Treaty to do so. That in itself would make a significant contribution 
towards strengthening the non-proliferation regime. 
66. Understanding as it did the desire of the non-nuclear-weapon States to 
obtain guarantees binding in international law from the nuclear-weapon States 
that nuclear weapons would not be used against them, the Soviet Union had 
declared at the special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations 
that it would never use such weapons against States which had themselves renounced 
the production and procurement of them and did not possess them on 
their territory. 
67. The Soviet Union had in fact just come forward with a new initiative in 
the interests of peace. It had proposed including in the agenda of the 
General Assembly for its 33rd session, as an important and urgent question, an 
item entitled "Conclusion of an international convention to strengthen 
guarantees for the safety of non-nuclear-weapon States", in the preparation of 
which would participate, on one hand, those nuclear-weapon States which were 
prepared to offer appropriate guarantees to the non-nuclear—weapon States and, 
on the other hand, interested non-nuclear-weapon States which were prepared to 
renounce the production and procurement of nuclear aims and which did not have 
such weapons on their territory. 
68. The creation of non-nuclear zones in various regions of the world would 
do much to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime. 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 

page 18 

69. Supporting as it did the efforts of all countries which did not want to 
allow nuclear weapons in their regions, the Soviet Union had signed Additional 
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
(the Tlatelolco Treaty)-'. In doing so, it had undertaken not to assist any 
Latin American country in obtaining nuclear weapons and also not to use nuclear 
weapons against States party to the Tlatelolco Treaty. It went without saying 
that the Soviet Union would scrupulously observe that obligation on the 
condition that other nuclear powers respected the status of the region and that 
States party to the Treaty ensured an authentic non-nuclear regime. 

70. An important role in matters of non-proliferation and in preventing the 
risk of nuclear war was played by the International Atomic Energy Agency - an 
international organization enjoying great authority and the support of all who 
were interested in ensuring that atomic energy was used exclusively for 
peaceful purposes. The Soviet Union for its part had always given the Agency 
every possible support in carrying out that important and noble task, so vital 
to the interests of all countries and peoples, and would continue to do so. 
71. Recently, in many countries and in various international forums, there 
had been a fresh upsurge of debate on the role and place of nuclear power in 
the world1 s fast-growing power economy. The"reassessment of values" that was 
being witnessed and the quest for alternative sources of energy were connected 
with a number of factors, and in the first place with the problem of nonproliferation. 
However, it was becoming increasingly obvious that for many 
countries with large power requirements nuclear power would, even in the next 
few decades, become the favoured source of energy and in some cases undoubtedly 
the main source of electric power. That being so, the task was to determine how 
nuclear power could be introduced in such a way as to protect the environment 
and prevent any danger of weapons proliferation. Those questions had in fact 
been given thorough treatment by the Agency's Director General in his address 
to the Conference. The Soviet Union shared Dr. Eklund*s concern and also his 
assessment of the present situation. National programmes for the development 
of nuclear power and international efforts to evaluate the nuclear fuel cycle 
had an important role to play in the solution of those problems, as did also 
meetings such as the Salzburg Conference, which the Agency had conducted so 
successfully in 1977« 

j / United Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 634, No. 9O68. 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 19 

72. There had been no basic changes in the Soviet Union's programme of nuclear 
power development or in its approach to the main problems thereof. The main 
features of the programme were familiar: a combination of power stations 
using thermal and fast reactors, and radiochemical reprocessing of the fuel 
with extraction of plutonium and unspent uranium for reuse. In the coming 10 to 
15 years the intention was to accelerate the growth of capacity based on thermal 
reactors (by enlarging existing power stations and building new ones), using 
proven designs which had demonstrated good technical, economic and operational 
characteristics. 
73. The accelerated development of nuclear power in the Soviet Union was not 
a consequence of any depletion of natural sources of energy but was governed, 
rather, by economic and ecological considerations. The Soviet Union was in 
fact among the more fortunate countries where fuel and energy were concerned. 
It was the only large, highly developed industrial State in the world which 
could base its economic development exclusively on domestic fuel and energy 
resources. 
74. However, those resources were not by any means evenly distributed over the 
territory of the Soviet Union. The European part of the country, where a large 
part of the population lived, was increasingly feeling an insufficiency of 
organic fuels. For that reason, the development of nuclear power was being 
given priority in the European part of the country, pursuant to decisions taken 
at the XXVth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. 
75. Those decisions were being successfully implemented. In the economic 
plan for I976-I98O the rate of introduction of nuclear power stations in fact 
outstripped the development of electrical energy as a whole in the country. 
By I98O nuclear capacity would be of the order of 21 million kW; by 1985 it 
would double, and thereafter the introduction of nuclear power stations would 
move even faster. Installed nuclear capacity was expected to reach 
90-100 million kW by 1990. 
76. A large industrial base was needed to construct the machinery needed for 
such a power programme. The "IzhorskLj Zavod" combine was being reconstructed 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 20 

for the purpose, and very soon the first unit of the giant "Atommash" nuclear 
machinery plant would go into operation. In countries belonging to CMEA., 

existing plant was being expanded and new large machine factories installed; 

also multilateral co-operation in the production of machinery, instruments and 

equipment for nuclear power stations was being put in hand. 

77. At the thirty-second session of CMEA, which had taken place in June, a 
specific long-term programme of co-operation among CMEA Member States had been 
adopted in the energy, fuel and raw materials spheres, to extend up to 1990. 
One of the most important aspects of that programme was the accelerated 
development of nuclear power in the organization's Member States. With the 
technical collaboration of the Soviet Union, nuclear power plants with an 
aggregate capacity of about 37 million kilowatts were to be built in the 
European Member States of CMEA and in the Republic of Cuba, and it was 
anticipated that two large power plants producing four million kilowatts each 
would be built on the territory of the USSR with the collaboration of interested 
CMEA Members to supply electrical energy for all participating in the project. 
78. The long-team programme also foresaw scientific and technological 
co-operation aimed at series production of the WEhR-1000 reactor and its 
introduction in CMEA Member States after 1980; also foreseen was the development 
of a large fast reactor and of reactor plants for the combined production 
of heat and electric power. 
79» Parallel with the expansion of the industrial base for machine construction, 
plants serving all other stages of the nuclear fuel cycle were being developed. 
An industry had been created for the extraction and processing of uranium ores, 
for uranium enrichment and for the production of fuel elements and special 
materials required for nuclear power plants. 

80. 
Serious attention was being given to the development of methods, equipment 
and technological processes for radiochemical reprocessing of irradiated fuel, 
and also to methods of managing large quantities of radioactive waste. To 
ensure careful and comprehensive checking and verification of technology and 
equipment for the radiochemical sector and a controlled introduction of 
reprocessing capacity, it had been decided that irradiated fuel should be 
stored for at least five years before reprocessing. The successful development 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 21 

of thermal reactor fuel reprocessing methods made it possible to extend the 
basic technology to processes and installations for the reprocessing of 
breeder reactor fuels, thereby allowing broad utilization of power plants with 
reactors of that kind in the overall energy scheme. 

81. A great deal of attention was being given in the Soviet Union to the 
development of new and more effective energy sources, above all fast reactors. 
The country's fast breeder programme was based on the construction of reactors 
with large conversion coefficients and short fuel doubling times - reactors 
which would make it possible to develop nuclear power at the required rate of 
growth without appreciable external inputs of uranium. By the beginning of 
the twenty-first century the Soviet Union expected to have established what 
it felt to be an optimum nuclear power structure, a combination of fast breeder 
reactors serving for base power production and thermal reactors used both to 
generate electric power and to supply process heat for industry as well as heat 
for homes. 
82. While working on the "contemporary problems" of power production, the 
Soviet Union was also continuing with its large programme in plasma physics 
and controlled nuclear fusion research, thus laying the scientific and 
technological foundations for power generation in the next century. 
83. The Soviet Union approved of the Agency's draft programme for the period 
1979-1984, which was adequately balanced and took account of the interests of 
both developing and developed Member States. It would continue to co-operate 
actively with the Agency for the solution of scientific and technological 
problems and would offer broad support for work connected with nuclear power 
and its fuel cycle, nuclear safety and environmental protection, plasma physics 
and controlled nuclear fusion research, INIS and so on. 
84. In view of the importance of nuclear fusion for all mankind, the Soviet Union 
had responded to the Director General's appeal for closer international cooperation 
in fusion research and had made a specific proposal, at a meeting of the 
International Fusion Research Council (IFRC) in 1978, for the development and 
construction of a demonstration fusion reactor by the combined efforts of Member 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 

page 22 

States. His delegation was convinced that work on such a vast project under 
the aegis of the Agency would he in the interests of all countries and would contribute 
enormously to the development of energy production technology for the 
future. 

85. It was a familiar fact that long-term programmes for the development of 
nuclear power were confronted in many countries Toy the problem of reliable 
fuel supply. The Soviet Union provided uranium enrichment services to a number 
of countries on mutually advantageous terms, on the understanding that the 
uranium would be used only for peaceful purposes. It was prepared to continue 
offering such services, to other countries as well, enriching their uranium up 
to 5$ in with appropriate international safeguards and in strict accordance 
with existing agreements on the control of nuclear exports, in the spirit of HPT. 

86. 
The provision of technical assistance to developing Member States occupied 
a special place in the Agency's programme. The Soviet Union attributed 
particular importance to that type of activity; it responded to requests 
received through the Agency's Secretariat by supplying equipment, instruments 
and materials to those countries, and assisted in the training of specialists by 
organizing training courses and study trips to the Soviet Union. Acting in the 
spirit of Article IV of NPT, the Soviet Union had increased its voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund from 100 000 roubles in 1968 to 650 000 roubles 
in 1978. 
87. The Soviet delegation was authorized to announce, on behalf of the Soviet 
Government, that its voluntary contribution in 1979 would be increased to 
750 OOOroubles (in national currency), for the provision of technical assistance 
primarily to developing countries party to MPT. 
88. In the opinion of his delegation, the Secretariat should, through technical 
assistance, more actively foster the development of the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in States party to MPT. That would be more fully in 
accordance with the provisions of the Statute, which required an equitable 
approach to the provision of technical assistance, and would accord also with 
a principle which had received broad support at the MPT Review Conference in 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 23 

1975, namely that non-nuclear-weapon States party to MPT should receive preferential 
treatment in the provision of technical assistance both on a bilateral 
basis and through the Agency. 

89. The Soviet delegation was also authorized to announce that the Soviet Union 
was prepared to contribute 50 kilograms of ^U free of charge to the 
Agency's fund for the five-year period ahead, as a contribution to the Agency's 
activities connected with the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. The material 
in question would be supplied in concentrations up to 20$ enriched in the isotope 
235J, 

for use as fuel in research reactors, critical and sub-critical assemblies 
and the like» to meet the needs of non-wiclear-weapon States party to MPT. 

90. The Soviet Union attributed great importance to the Agency's control functions 
arising out of the Statute and out of NPT. It took a positive view of the 
Director General's efforts to improve the structure of the Department of 
Safeguards and equip it to meet the requirements of current and future tasks. 
The steps that had been taken to secure a further improvement of verification 
procedures and methods also merited approval, as did the development of an 
automated safeguards data processing system and the preparation of recommendations 
concerning national systems of accounting and control of nuclear materials, 
which were such an important element in the efforts States were making to 
strengthen the non-proliferation regime. Another positive feature of the 
Secretariat's work was that it was concentrating its verification effort on 
those sensitive stages of the fuel cycle where nuclear materials that could 
be used in explosive devices might be obtained. 
91. At the same time, the Soviet delegation had to express understandable 
concern at the fact that many States party to MPT had not yet fulfilled the 
requirements of Article III.4, which established a time limit for the entry 
into force of the safeguards agreements concluded with the Agency. It would 
greatly serve the interests of the effectiveness of both MPT and the Agency's 
safeguards system if those States would, very soon, act to fulfil their 
obligations under Article III.4. 

GC(Xm)/OR.2O2 
page 24 


92. Another question which should not be deferred was the application of 
full-soope safeguards to the nuclear activities of the non-nuclear-weapon 
States Members of EURATOM in strict accordance with the Agency1s safeguards 
system. The Agency should make full use of its right of independent verification 
and not delegate that right simply because there existed a national 
system of accounting and control in particular States or groups of States. 
The Soviet Union called upon the non-nuclear-weapon States Members of EURATOM 
to act in a constructive spirit and display their goodwill by completing the 
process required for the practical application of Agency safeguards in the 
shortest possible time; that process had already been prolonged well beyond 
all deadlines laid down in MPT. 
93. The Soviet Union was actively co-operating with other countries in the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy and was prepared to develop that co-operation 
further, under the auspices of the Agency as elsewhere. Using the energy of the 
atom itself very extensively, the Soviet Union was ready to share its rich 
experience and technical abilities with others for the further progress of mankind. 
In pursuance of that principle the Soviet Union would continue to do everything 
in its power to strengthen the Agency and enhance the activities so important 
for peace which emerged from the Statute and from HPT. 
94. In closing, he wished to express confidence that the present session of the 
General Conference would make an important contribution to the further development 
of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and to the 
strengthening of international security and the non-proliferation regime. 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 25 

95. Mr. SMOLDEREN (Belgium) congratulated the President on his election, 
especially in view of his and his country's special links with Belgium. He 
also thanked the Director General for his work in a particularly difficult 
period for the Agency. 
96. Turning to the work of the Agency itself, he wished to emphasize, firstly, 
that one of its main statutory functions was to ensure that the applications 
of nuclear energy with which it was associated were exclusively for peaceful 
purposes. The Agency was therefore obliged to apply effective safeguards and 
it was normal that the Director General and the Department of Safeguards should 
make continuous efforts to ensure their quality and effectiveness. In that 
connection, however, certain fundamental principles had to be borne in mind. 
97. First, it was necessary to base the implementation of Agency safeguards 
mainly on provisions decided on by the Board. If technical committees were 
asked by the Secretariat to make suggestions, those suggestions could not be 
taken as equivalent to or replace decisions of the Board. If Agency officials 
believed that regulations laid down by the Board needed to be reviewed, it was 
for the Board to set up a committee to propose amendments; the committee must 
be open to all Member States wishing to participate. Moreover, Member States 
not represented on the Board would have to be able to make their views known 
about subjects of particular concern to them. 
98. Secondly, Agency safeguards objectives were inseparable from the objective 
of developing peaceful applications of nuclear energy throughout the world. 
Safeguards must not work against that objective nor cause technical or economic 
discrimination between nuclear^weapon States and those which had voluntarily 
renounced nuclear weapons. Although the effectiveness of Agency safeguards should 
not be impaired, it was unacceptable that they should put such a burden on 
industrial installations as to prevent them from being internationally competitive. 
In order to prevent economic discrimination, Belgium had frequently proposed 
that nuclear-*eapon States should accept identical safeguards in their nonmilitary 
nuclear installations. Such safeguards would not entail unnecessary 
expenditure and would be the best way of ensuring similar opportunities for 
competition between nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States. The principle 
that safeguards should not hamper development was in fact appropriately stated 
in paragraph 4 of document IKFCIHC/l53 (Corrected). 

GC(XXII)/OR.2D2 
page 26 


99. Thirdly, it was necessary to develop and to use equipment designed to 
simplify as far as possible the inspection effort required of the Agency and 
to ease the constraints imposed 'by safeguards on managers of nuclear installations. 
The present trend marked by considerable increases in the number of Agency staff 
for purposes of applying safeguards was out of all proportion to the effort it 
was making to develop equipment designed to reduce the number of inspectors. 
Appropriately installed equipment could operate round the clock, whereas human 
inspection effort always required the physical presence of inspectors. Modern 
data processing techniques were sufficiently workable and versatile to be able 
to provide solutions for safeguards problems. 
100. Fourthly, the Agency had a duty to take every precaution to protect 
commercial and industrial secrets or other confidential information coming from 
installations to which it applied safeguards. To that end, it should limit its 
inspection requirements to what was really necessary in order to implement safeguards. 
It should not request access to all parts of nuclear installations or permission 
to make tests which were not of direct relevance to safeguards. The problems 
in that connection were particularly difficult because the Agency recruited 
inspectors on fixed-term contracts. In many cases, those inspectors had worked 
for the nuclear industries of Member States and, after their contracts with the 
Agency expired, would go back to work for firms in their country of origin which 
were in competition with those which they had been sent to inspect. Inspectors 
should therefore not have the opportunity to acquire technical information that 
was in any respect confidential about fabrication techniques used in the factories 
they inspected. It might well be desirable for the Agency not to recruit 
inspectors on a fixed-term basis but rather on a career basis so that they would 
not put to commercial use information acquired while working for the Agency. 
101. Fifthly, the Agency should make full use of national and, even more so, 
of supranational systems of accounting and control of nuclear materials in 
order to avoid unnecessary duplication. Wherever possible, it should carry out 
its tasks by verifying results obtained by the national or supranational system. 
It was a fundamental principle laid down in paragraph 7 of document 
INFCIRC/153 (Corrected) that, when carrying out such verification, the Agency 
should take due account of the technical effectiveness of such systems. 
Gc(XXII)/OR.202 
page 27 

102. Sixthly, it was necessary to bear in mind the principle laid down in 
Article IV of HPT that nothing in that instrument should affect the inalienable 
right of all parties to the Treaty to develop research, production and use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination. That right 
could be impaired if controls were imposed which made peaceful nuclear installations 
unusable. It would also be against NPT to reserve certain spheres of 
non-military industry to nuclear-^weapon States. Belgium was supporting international 
efforts to reduce the dangers of proliferation of nuclear weapons by 
participating actively in INPCB and by adhering to the guidelines of countries 
exporting nuclear technology. However, the objective of non-proliferation 
should never result in limitations being imposed on Belgian technology designed 
to meet the country's economic, industrial and energy requirements. The 
sensitive technology needed for Belgium's development objectives could be used 
without serious risk of proliferation. 
103. It was in the light of the six principles mentioned above that Belgium 
would endeavour to ensure that the safeguards agreements concluded between 
seven EURATOM countries and the Agency would be put into effect as soon as 
possible. 
104. The need to achieve an effective safeguards system should not overshadow 
another important task of the Agency, that of assisting the developing 
countries with peaceful applications of nuclear energy. The needs of those 
countries were enormous and a selection had to be made among projects. That 
should be done after extensive exchanges of views had taken place between the 
requesting countries and the Agency, in some cases with the participation of 
experts from countries able to provide the assistance requested. His delegation 
welcomed the steps taken by the Director General to speed up the 
examination and the implementation of projects, 
105. He also noted with satisfaction that the total amount of unobligated 
balances had stopped increasing and that it might be reduced in the near 
future0 Efforts in that direction should be continued. 
106. Belgium proposed to continue making voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund and to offer six Type II fellowships. It would also continue 
with the special technical assistance agreements with Nigeria for the 
eradication of the tsetse fly, providing a contribution of B.Fr. 10 million 
over a period of five years (1977-1981), and with Zaire for the development 
of the Kinshasa nuclear centre. 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 28 


107. With regard to general problems of the administration of the Agency, the 
tendency for the lumber of staff members to increase and the permanent effect 
that trend was having on its budget were cause for great concern. 
108. The draft budget proposals for 1979 had been totally unacceptable and the 
Director General, to his credit, had tried to reduce them. However, the increase 
finally agreed on was still too large and it was most important to prevent such 
increases from becoming habitual. 
109. With the Agency's move to more functional buildings in the Donaupark, its 
staff should be able to work more efficiently and thus it might be possible to 
reduce its numbers. The fact that the Board had agreed that the Agency should 
occupy two office towers in the Donaupark complex did not mean that it could 
progressively take on another 500 staff members to fill the space available. 
It appeared, however, that there was a danger of that happening, judging by 
document GC(XXII)/600, which showed a proposed increase of 200 staff members 
in two years. His delegation reserved the right to speak further on that 
point in the Committee of the Whole. 
110. Although the move to the Donaupark would involve an increase in operating 
costs, they should be kept to a minimum and there should be no expenditure that 
was not fully justified. In view of current difficulties, furnishings and equipment 
should not be renewed unless renewal was really necessary. He was sure 
that the Director General would see that the move was carried out with the 
maximum efficiency and economy. 
111. In conclusion, he stressed the need for the Agency to preserve its character 
as a highly specialized technical institution. The responsibilities with 
which it was entrusted by the Member States and the United Rations were such 
that technical considerations should take priority over the political considerations 
with which certain Member States were becoming increasingly concerned. 
If the technical aspects of the utilization of nuclear energy were not given due 
attention, the Agency would not be able to safeguard the peaceful use of nuclear 
installations effectively nor make a wide distribution of worthwhile technical 
assistance. 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 29 

112. Mr. KHAK (Pakistan) said that on behalf of the Pakistan delegation he 
wished to join in offering congratulations to the President on his unanimous 
election. With his vast experience in the nuclear field and thorough understanding 
of the Agency, there was no doubt that he would guide the 
Conference successfully and enable the delegates to deal effectively and 
constructively with the delicate issues before them. His election symbolized 
the expanding role and importance of Africa in international affairs and the 
growing recognition that Africa had a key role to play in shaping the Agency's 
future policies. The Pakistan delegation also wished to congratulate the 
Director General on his thought-provoking remarks about the problems of nuclear 
energy and heartily endorsed many of the ideas he had presented. 
113. The activities of the Agency were expanding rapidly in both scope and depth. 
The programme and budget for 1978 had shown the largest increase in any single 
year. During the discussion in the Board, the Pakistan delegation had commented 
on the desirability of controlling the Agency's budget without seriously curtailing 
the effectiveness of its programme. There had been a disproportionately large 
increase in the safeguards budget at the expense of other important programmes, 
particularly technical assistance. The Agency could fulfil its statutory 
requirements and retain its effectiveness only if equal emphasis were placed on 
the promotional and regulatory activities. Disproportionate emphasis on 
safeguards would affect the Agency's credibility as the promotor of peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy and would seriously undermine its ability to 
play a constructive role in implementing safeguards. The major powers had to 
realize that they could not use the Agency as an effective instrument of nonproliferation 
without making it an equally effective vehicle for the promotion 
of nuclear energy. It was absolutely essential to maintain a proper balance 
between safeguards and technical assistance. It was regrettable that the net 
resources available for technical assistance were declining in purchasing 
power year after year and that the Agency was losing its influence over the 
nuclear energy programmes in a large number of developing countries whose 
requests for assistance had to be rejected for lack of funds. Such 
indifference towards the needs of the developing countries would breed apathy 
which would seriously undermine the universal acceptance of the Agency's safeguards 
system and the strengthening of non-proliferation. 

GC(XXn)/OR.3D2 
page 30 


114* Pakistan believed that nuclear power was more than ever needed to overcome 

the growing energy shortage which was heginning to undermine economic and 

political stability in various parts of the world. It was following with deep 

interest the outcome of research and development into solar and fusion energy. 

Even the most optimistic projections indicated that the full development and 

commercialization of those new technologies was still three decades away and 

that during that period world energy needs would more than double. There was 

therefore no other viable option but to put to use the available proved 

technology of nuclear fission reactors in order to conserve irreplaceable 

resources. 

115. The greatest threat to nuclear energy lay not so much in the opposition 
from environmentalists or in cost increases, but in the uncertainty and 
confusion created by the questionable and vacillating policies of the major 
suppliers. Pakistan shared-tear concern about the dangers of proliferation and 
the unregulated spread of nuclear technology, but those problems could not be 
overcome by deliberately destroying confidence in the continuity of supplies 
of materials, equipment and technology required for peaceful purposes. The 
world was anxiously awaiting early agreement among the super powers to reduce 
stocks of destructive weapons and to ban further nuclear weapons tests and the 
deployment of new weapon systems. 
116. 
There was a growing tendency among the supplier States to modify existing 
treaties, agreements and contracts unilaterally under the pretext of 
strengthening non-proliferation. That had created a sense of insecurity among 
the recipient States which subscribed wholeheartedly to the various safeguards 
treaties and agreements. The importance of international undertakings should 
not be underlined or destroyed on the pretext of controlling proliferation, and 
law-abiding countries should not be forced to renegotiate existing arrangements 
and contracts. Non-proliferation could only be built on the solid foundation 
of mutual trust and confidence. Each contract which was dishonoured added to 
the growing mistrust among nations. A partnership should be developed between 
the recipient and supplier States, between the rich and the poor -a partnership 
for progress and peace. There should be greater independence in the 
nuclear fuel cycle and a sharing of nuclear materials and technology. In the 
long run that would be a better guarantee of world peace than a policy of 
GC(XXII)/OR.202 
Page 31 

denial which left the recipient States with no alternative but to seek fuel 

cycle independence for their economic survival. 

117» Pakistan fully supported INPCE as a potentially valuable exercise to help 
establish technical options for facilitating peaceful applications of nuclear 
power. The communique issued at the start of the study stated that "The evaluation 
will be carried out in a spirit of objectivity, with mutual respect for 
each country's choices and decisions in this field, without jeopardizing their 
respective fuel cycle policies or international co-operation, agreements and 
contracts- for the peaceful use of nuclear energy, provided that agreed safeguards 
measures are applied". If those assurances were not respected, the usefulness 
and credibility of any conclusions and recommendations resulting from 
INFCE >rould be seriously impaired, 

118. Pakistan had complete faith and confidence in the adequacy of the Agency's 
safeguards system and in the Agency's ability to implement that system. There 
was a regrettable tendency to undenaine the Agency's role in safeguards through 
the setting up of parallel regimes and noims by different supplier States and 
the introduction of new concepts into Agency safeguards systems which were 
completely incompatible with the Statute, Pakistan could not accept a difference 
between NPT and non-SPT States as far as technical assistance was concerned. 
It appreciated the Agency's efforts to undertake research into improved safeguards 
techniques in order to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of its 

system and reduce the number of inspectors without sacrificing reliability. 
The Pakistan delegation urged the Director General to ensure an adequate geo


graphical distribution in the Agency's safeguards inspectorate. 

119, The developing countries of the world, representing two thirds of mankind, 
were facing a critical dilemma. There had been an inevitable increase in the 
price of oil and, as the available resources became exhausted and the cost of 
discovering and developing new resources climbed, a further escalation in prices 
was becoming unavoidable. The industrialized countries, instead of enforcing 

a fiBB policy of energy conservation, were increasing their consumption and 
pre-empting the available limited reserves. It was ironic that for domestic 
political considerations they were also slowing down their nuclear power 
programmes. Moreover, some were deliberately delaying or deferring the 
development of more efficient reactors, thus creating the fear of a further 

rise in uranium prices and constraints on its availability. When the energy



GC(XXH)/OR.202 
page 32 

deficient developing countries turned towards nuclear power, they faced the insurmountable 
hurdles created by a calculated policy of denial of the nuclear 
technology which was desperately needed for development. That double squeeze 
was creating a dilemma for the poorer nations, which were being forced to develop 
independent nuclear programmes because of the insecurity produced by the withholding 
of supplies. Pakistan believed that the policy of denying nuclear technology 
and using it as a political weapon against the Third World was selfdefeating 
and counter—productive and that it would certainly destroy confidence 
between the countries of the North and South. A serious dialogue should be initiated 
between the supplier States and the recipient States of the Third World 
so as to reach an understanding on the norms and rules which should govern the 
supply and use of nuclear technology. The alternative was misunderstanding 
and possible confrontation, which everyone wanted to avoid. Pakistan was 
convinced that proliferation was essentially a political problem. The real 
tasks were to develop a global policy for optimal utilization of world energy 
resources and available technologies, to meet the needs of the industrialized 
countries and the projected requirements of the developing countries, to transfer 
technology to the Third World and to satisfy the legitimate security concerns 
of non-nuclear countries. 

120. In order to deal with such broad issues, the General Assembly of the United 
Nations had adopted resolution 32/50, in which all States were invited to consider 
convening an international conference on the economic, political, social 
and technical problems of promoting international co-operation in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. Such a conference could be held after the completion 
of the INFCE study and the NPT Review Conference. 
121. In 1977, together with 25 other co-sponsors, Pakistan had tabled an amendment 
for the expansion of the Board in order to ensure more equitable representation 
for the areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia. During 
the ensuing debate, 39 countries had supported the principle underlying that 
amendment. The General Conference had decided through Resolution GC(XXI)/REs/353 
to refer the matter to the Board and to ask it to report the results at the 
twenty-second regular session of the General Conference. The General Assembly 
in its 32nd session had also adopted a resolution in which it was stated that 

due consideration should be given to the request of developing countries for 

an increase in their representation on the Board of Governors of the Agency. 

GC(XXII)/OR.202 
page 33 

122. During 1978, very intensive discussions had taken place within the Board 
and outside in order to find a way to correct the imbalance in the representation 
and arrive at a solution which would command the widest possible support in' the 
General Conference. While Pakistan believed that the original proposal calling 
for three additional seats for Africa and two for the Middle East and South Asia 
offered a most equitable, just and fair solution, it had, in a spirit of compromise, 
co-sponsored a resolution calling for the addition in the immediate future 
of only one seat each for the two areas. It was to be hoped that the new 
proposal, which had been endorsed by a large number of Member States, would, command 
the overwhelming support of the General Conference and that the spirit of 
compromise shown by the co-sponsors would be fully reciprocated by other areas. 
The moderate increase of two seats would still keep the representations of Africa 
and of the Middle East and South Asia at 25$ and 29$ respectively as compared to 
the revised average of 33$ for the Board as a whole. Pakistan believed that 
the painful discussions on the1 issue should not be prolonged,because that would 
only add to the sense of frustration felt by the countries of the areas concerned, 
which had long suffered from the denial of their legitimate rights of 
adequate representation on the Board. 
123. The national nuclear programme in Pakistan had placed continued emphasis 
on the development of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy in the fields 
of power generation, agriculture, medicine and industry. The nuclear power 
reactor at Karachi had been operating satisfactorily for sir years, and it had 
been found necessary to develop local means for the production of spare parts 
and other supplies. There had been an accelerated search for uranium, and 
significant deposits of zirconium and other nuclear materials had been located. 
Plans for the construction of a fuel reprocessing plant were being implemented 
and work was expected to start soon on a 600-MW nuclear power plant. The 
construction of a centre for nuclear studies for training up to 100 scientists 
a year in nuclear technology had been completed and another centre for nuclear 
power reactor engineers, operators and technicians had been started. A sixth 
nuclear medicine centre had been finished and the construction of a seventh was 
about to begin. In agriculture, a number of new varieties had been evolved 
through radiation-induced mutations and one had already been released for 
cultivation. In June 1977, the Third Summer College on Physics and Contemporary 
Seeds had been organized with the technical co-operation of the International 

OC(XXH)/OR.202 
page 34 

Centra for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. The next college, to be held in 
June 19791 muld be devoted to the problems of meeting global energy needs, with 
particular reference to the developing countries. 

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 


GC(XXII)/OR.203 
April 1979* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER 1978 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRD 
PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Tuesday, 19 September 1978, at 3.10 p.m. 

President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
agenda** 

General debate and annual report for 1977 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Czechoslovakia 
Mexico 
Norway 
Hungary 
Canada 
Brazil 
Yugoslavia 
Poland 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
Portugal 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 4 October 1978. 
** GC(XXII)/605. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXII)/INF/179/Rev.2. 

78-12098 

Paragraphs 

1 


1 11 



23 29 



45 53 
64 
71 
81 
101 


 
105 

10 
22 
28 


44 


52 


63 


70 


80 
100 
105 



GC(XXn)/OR.203 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT TOR 1977 (continued) 

1. Mr. BARABAS (Czechoslovakia) recalled -that the Agency played a vital 
role in the maintenance of peace by furthering international detente and general 
disarmament. In that connection, he stressed the importance of the peace 
initiatives of the Soviet Union taken under the leadership of Mr. L.I. Brezhnev, 
General-Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union and President of the Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, in an 
effort to put an end to nuclear armaments, bring about disarmament, achieve 
detente, strengthen international security and ensure the independence of 
nations. 
2. He referred to the proposals submitted to the United Nations by the Soviet 
Union in connection with the prohibition of new weapons of mass destruction, 
the convening of a world disarmament conference and a declaration on the intensification 
and reinforcement of international detente, and to the unequivocal stand 
taken by the representatives of the Soviet Union at the recent special session 
of the United Nations on disarmament. It was for those reasons that the 
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, along with the other peace-loving countries, 
laid emphasis on all the progressive aspects of the Agency's activity. 
Czechoslovakia's foreign policy was based on the Pinal Act of the Conference on 
Security and Co-operation in Europe and was opposed to anything which would tend 
to distort or degrade its meaning. His country would follow the same course in 
participating in the Agency's international activities. 
3. It was in the content of the cause of detente that Czechoslovakia followed 
the development of the international situation and it condemned whatever was 
detrimental to that cause. All constructive trends should apply in the military 
domain as well so that detente could make even further progress. In a period of 
more than 20 years the Agency had become not only an instrument of scientific and 
technical development and co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy but 
also a guarantor of the efforts made in that direction. 
4. The current year marked an epoch, for it was the tenth anniversary of the 
adoption of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)i/ by the 
United Nations. Recalling the basic provisions of NPT, he said his country was 
aware of the importance of that instrument and considered it essential that the 
Treaty should be made universal. Up to the present, 104 Governments, including 
three nuclear Powers (the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States) 
1/ Reproduced in document INPCIRC/14O. 

GC(XXII)/OR.2O3 
page 3 

had signed it but certain other nuclear Powers and countries which possessed or 
would soon possess the means of producing nuclear weapons stil l remained outside 
the Treaty. That situation was obviously a matter of concern to all forces of 

peace. 

5. As for the Agency's immediate activities in the area of safeguards and 
control, there were grounds for criticism in connection with the safeguards 
agreement concluded with the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM), the 
implementation of which represented the most difficult task before the 
Secretariat. Czechoslovakia approved the changes which had been introduced in 
the Agency's activities in the safeguards sector and the measures adopted during 
the reorganization of the Department of Safeguards, including the creation of 
two Divisions of Operations and a Division of Safeguards Information Treatment; 
it also stressed the need to increase the staff of the safeguards evaluation 
section. Although it was true that problems still persisted and that after 
ten years not all countries had acceded to NPT, a system of international control 
without precedent had been established. The Agency's safeguards embraced 
nearly all countries which engaged in nuclear activities, and were applied to 
some 600 nuclear facilities. Still further progress needed to be made so that 
the way could be opened for solving the great problems facing the world of 
today. 
6. The Agency was preparing a draft convention on the physical protection of 
nuclear material which should become a powerful weapon in the control of 
nuclear terrorism, which Czechoslovakia like other peace-loving countries 
unreservedly condemned. Such a convention deserved the support of the 
greatest possible number of countries. 
7. At the International Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle, 
organized by the Agency at Salzburg in 1977, it had been shown that nuclear 
power, in spite of the current difficulties, was likely to be in the forefront 
of the energy programmes of the developed and developing countries because i t 
alone could replace fossil fuels. For more than 20 years, the nuclear power 
stations now in operation had given proof- of exceptional safety. The 
cooperative action organized by the Agency to solve the problems of safety, 
environmental protection and physical protection of nuclear material should 
therefore be intensified. 

GC(xm)/OR.203 
page 4 

8. Czechoslovakia welcomed the growth of the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) and the results it had achieved. It was pleased to note that 
50 Member States and 13 international organizations were already participating 
in INIS and that the number of items processed, which was already 70 000 per 
annum, was continuing to increase. 
9. His country was also interested in technical assistance and appreciated the 
Secretariat's work in that sphere. It was confident that the Secretariat would 
make the best use of the resources available to it . In that connection, he 
drew attention to the importance of the application of safeguards in connection 
with the provision of technical assistance, especially where the transfer of socalled 
sensitive technologies was concerned, for technical assistance should in 
no case result in proliferation. 
10. His country was offering to act as host to two special meetings of the 
Agency in 1979; it also proposed to contribute 300 000 Czechoslovak crowns to 
the technical assistance fund, to make available five long-term fellowships in 
higher educational institutions, four annual fellowships for work at institutes 
of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences or other research institutes associated 
with the Czechoslovak nuclear programme and, also, to make additional funds 
available for the three annual fellowships provided through the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP). 
11. Mr. GARCIA-LOPEZ SANTAOLALLA (Mexico) said he had studied very 
carefully the annual report submitted by the Director General and wished to 
make the following observations. 
12. The International Atomic Energy Agency continued to be the principal 
international authority dealing with matters of co-operation and control in 
the area of the peaceful application of nuclear energy. The Mexican Government 
therefore considered that the decision-making machinery of the Agency should 
always involve all Member States, as the decisions taken were of primary 
concern to them. 
13. For that reason Mexico had proposed that the work of the International 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) be co-ordinated by the Agency, thereby 
acknowledging the great experience of the Secretariat in that area. The 
Mexican Government wished to take that opportunity to thank the Agency for its 
untiring efforts in connection with the INFCE programme. Mexico had 

GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 5 

participated in three HJFCE working groups and was following very closely and 
with great interest the progress being made. Mexico considered that, although 
the results and recommendations of that study might not involve any obligation 
on the part of the international community, many of the questions under study 
came within the Agency's province, so that the final reports of the various 
INFCE working groups could prove of great value for the Agency's future 
activities. 

14. It could be seen from the annual report that the Agency had intensified 
its activities for the benefit of Member States as regards both co-operative 
ventures and safeguards. That had inevitably resulted in an appreciable increase 
in the contributions which Member States would have to make for 1979. The 
Mexican Government was aware that that increase was associated with the Agency's 
ambitious work programme and with monetary phenomena over which i t had no 
control. Mexico was resolved to fulfil its obligations as soon as the Mexican 
Congress had given the approval required by law. 
15. The Mexican delegation was gratified at the results achieved by the Agency 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and remained convinced that with a strong 
political will on the part of Member States it would be possible to accelerate 
economic and social development, particularly in the developing countries. In 
that connection he recalled that at the inaugural meeting of the fourth session 
of the World Food Council, held recently in Mexico, the President of Mexico had 
stressed the importance of seeking ways of deploying the resources made available 
by the application of disarmament measures for more worthy causes such as solving 
the world food problem. He also recalled the statement made by President Lopez 
Portillo on 17 May 1978, during his official visit to the Soviet Union, to the 
effect 
that the application of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
2/ 
in Latin America (the Tlatelolco Treaty)-' should be extended to limiting conventional 
armaments in Latin America. Subsequently, Mr. Santiago Roel, the 
Mexican Minister of Foreign Affairs, had proposed to the Foreign Affairs 
Ministers of other Member States of the Organization of American States that 
negotiating machinery be established for agreeing on the limitation or prohibition 
of certain conventional weapons. 

2/ Reproduced in IAEA Legal Series No. 9 (STl/PUB/387). 


GC(XXII)/OR.203 

page 6 

16. He informed the General Conference that the objective laid down in the 
Tlatelolco Treaty was on the point of being attained, with the creation of the 
world's first denuclearized inhabited zone. When the Treaty had first been 
proposed, the majority of nations had regarded it as Utopian and many were 
convinced of the impossibility of establishing such a denuclearized zone. Now, 
after 11 years, that objective was close to being attained and even exceeded, 
as the Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
(OPANAL) had initiated a study of machinery for promoting the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. Thus OPANAL. by virtue of the experience it 
had acquired and the co-operation agreement it had concluded with the Agency, 
was destined to become an organization for regional planning and a Latin 
American information centre with the task of co-ordinating the efforts of and 
assisting Latin American countries wishing to carry out energy projects. Its 
function was not just to supervise the strict application of the prohibition 
of nuclear weapons provided for in the Tlatelolco Treaty but also to stimulate 
co-operation between all Latin American States in regard to the transfer of 
peaceful nuclear technology on that continent. 
17. That spirit had led the General Conference of OPANAL, at its fifth regular 
session, to adopt unanimously a draft resolution calling on its Secretary 
General to propose concrete measures for launching a programme of co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and requesting members to supply the 
information necessary for compiling an inventory of requirements. 
18. The Mexican Government, within the framework of negotiations aimed at 
achieving general and complete disarmament under international control, 
commencing with nuclear disarmament, supported the principle of non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons as one of the most effective measures for achieving that 
objective. To that end Mexico based its position on three international 
instruments: the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America. 

GC(xm)/OR.203 
page 7 

19. Mexico was willing to participate in negotiating procedures for 
strengthening safeguards machinery and to renounce any possibility of 
carrying out nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, provided that such 
renunciation were part of a global agreement involving a complete ban on 
any type of nuclear test. 
20. The Tlatelolco Treaty should serve to ensure that the measures required 
to bring about the development of nuclear energy in the region were adopted 
through the establishment of complete sub—regional cycles or by means of 
special agreements. All the same, each country should continue to develop 
its own peaceful nuclear technology. That objective would only be attainable, 
however, once a clear policy for the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy 
had been laid down. 
21. The Government of Mexico had already informed the Secretary-General of the 
United Nations that it supported the convening, under the auspices of the United 
Nations system, of one or several international conferences concerned with 
promoting international co-operation in the peaceful application of nuclear 
energy in accordance with the objectives of Resolution 32/50, approved by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations on 8 December 1977. In that connection, 
the Mexican Government had proposed that, before such conferences were convened, 
a working group comprised of representatives of a certain number of Member 
States of the Agency, selected on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, 
be set up. That group would be given the responsibility of preparing 
a draft convention on the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy for economic 
and social development which would be submitted for examination and approval 
by the General Assembly. 
22. In conclusion he said that one of the objectives of Mexico's foreign policy 
was to render support to international organizations. He pledged his 
Government's continued support for the International Atomic Energy Agency in 
the belief that, acting in concert with other organizations, it would perform 
even better the tasks for which it had been set up. 

GC(xm)/OR.203 
page 8 

23. Mr, NORD (Norway) called attention to the work on nuclear energy 
in Norway, which had started 30 years earlier, and had to do mainly with the 
OECD reactor at Halden. That project, which had been made possible by 
continued international support, had been a fertile source of information 
on fuel utilization and management and had provided a basis for improving 
the surveillance and control of reactor operations. Norway had had early 
access to irradiation and isotope techniques and had been able to contribute 
to progress in neutron physics. 
24. In the past, Norway had covered a large part of its energy requirements by 
drawing on its own traditional- resources. Oil from the continental shelf in 
the North Sea had brought about a further improvement and, thus far, his country 
had had no need of nuclear energy. In spite of the country's abundant water 
resources, thermal power could offer certain economic advantages and, at the 
request of the National Assembly, his Government had in 1976 appointed a committee 
to carry out a general study on the question of nuclear energy. The 
committee had already drafted its report, which would probably be submitted to 
the National Assembly at the beginning of October 1978 to serve as the basis 
for a debate on the possible introduction of nuclear energy in Norway in the 
eighties. 

25. His country was more concerned with the Agency's regulatory functions 
than with its promotional activities. Norway considered that the Agency 
should be provided with all the means necessary to accomplish its safeguards 
tasks; it realized, however, that the regulatory and promotional activities 
had to be harmonized. 
26. The Norwegian delegation noted with satisfaction that several safeguards 
agreements, including that between the Agency, EUHATOM and the United Kingdom, 
had entered into force, and that an Agreement between the Agency, EURATOM and 
Prance had been concluded. He reiterated the hope that the safeguards agreement 
between the Agency, EURATOM and the non-nuclear-weapon States Members of 
EDRATOM would become fully implemented during the current year. He sincerely 
hoped that the Agency would have adequate resources at its disposal to ensure 
the strict application of safeguards, in spite of the increase in work-load, 
and the engagement of properly qualified inspectors. 
CC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 9 

27. With reference to budgetary matters, he said he shared the misgivings of 
other delegates in regard to the budget increase, although the 1979 budget was 
an exceptional one because of inflation, the declining dollar, and the extra 
expenses in connection with the move of Headquarters, in addition to the 
increase in the volume of safeguards work. Taking all those things into 
account, the Norwegian Government was ready to support the budget proposals 
for 1979. 
28. In conclusion, he wished to emphasize his country's interest in the Agency's 
activities relating to nuclear safety and environmental protection, and 
especially the drafting of codes of practice and safety manuals, and in the work 
of INIS. Norway also hoped that the Agency would establish an international 
system for the management and storage of plutonium and possibly of spent fuel, 
and that it would consider the possible revision when appropriate of its recommendations 
regarding the dumping of radioactive waste in the sea. Norway also 
had a keen interest in the elaboration of a convention on the physical protection 
of nuclear materials and in the results of INFCE. 
29. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary) said that the main objectives of his 
country's foreign policy were: the strengthening of peace and security throughout 
the world, and the maintenance of international detente to help reinforce 
European safety, expand international co-operation and contribute to the success 
of the Agency's activities. The Hungarian Government was therefore cooperating 
with all countries working on behalf of detente; similarly, it was 
opposed to any action which could threaten detente. Peaceful co-existence and 
dStente were in its eyes the only means of preserving world peace. 
30. Hungary hoped that the special session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations had given new impetus to the disarmament negotiations. His country 
would continue to support the extension of NPT and the strengthening of the 
Agency's safeguards system. It was following with interest the three-Power 
talks on the complete cessation of nuclear weapons testing. It also supported 
the proposal of the Soviet Union to include on the agenda of the regular session 
of the General Assembly of the United Nations an item relating to an international 
convention on the strengthening of guarantees for the safety of non— 
nuclear-^weapon States. In his country's opinion it was becoming increasingly 

GC(XXtl)/OR.203 
page 10 

important to draft an international agreement prohibiting the development and 
manufacture of new types of weapons, and Hungary also thought that neutron 
weapons should be prohibited. 

31. The Hungarian delegation was satisfied with the contents of the Agency's 
annual report for 1977 • It believed that the programme for 1979-80 took due 
account of the needs of Member States and would contribute to the development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
32. Scientific and technical co-operation was a very important; field of 
activity. The previous year, the Agency had contributed to that co-operation 
by organizing the Salzburg Conference, the conclusions of which were to the 
effect that the satisfaction of mankind's future needs depended on the utilization 
of atomic energy. The Conference had drawn attention to those problems 
- primarily in the nuclear fuel cycle and radioactive waste disposal areas - in 
the solution of which the Agency had an important part to play. 
33. In view of the success of the Salzburg Conference, Hungary recommended that 
the organization of conferences on the peaceful utilization of atomic energy 
which were convened by a decision of the General Assembly of the United Nations 
should be entrusted to the Agency. As a first step, such a conference should, 
if possible, be held in Vienna, the seat of the Agency's Headquarters. 
34. The Agency's technical assistance programme was making a decisive contribution 
to the development of nuclear technology in individual countries; 
Hungary supported the Agency's technical assistance activities and would make 
a voluntary contribution of one million forints to the General Fund. His 
country was satisfied with the use made by the Agency of the Type II fellowships 
placed at its disposal. 
35. The Hungarian delegation supported the idea of long-term projects, which 
should make it possible to provide technical assistance for operations on a 
broad scale. The Secretariat was to be complimented on the work it had done 
in that connection. 
36. In Hungary's view, there was no incompatibility between technical assistance 
and the regime instituted by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT), i.e. the Agency's efforts to ensure that the assistance it gave 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 11 

was used for peaoeful purposes. For that reason, States party to NPT should 
enjoy priority in the granting of technical assistance. 

37. The Agency had a decisive role to play in preventing the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and in strengthening international control in that area. 
Hungary hoped that the NPT would become universal in application. 
38. Delays in the application of the safeguards agreement concluded with 
the EURATOM countries were damaging to international co-operation and, in 
fact, to the Agency's authority. Hungary believed that a single safeguards 
system should apply to all non-nuclear-weapon States. 
39. A prerequisite for the satisfactory implementation of safeguards and 
granting of technical assistance was the availability of adequate budgetaiy 
resources and their rational employment. In that connection, Hungary was 
deeply dismayed at the serious damage done to the Agency by the depreciation 
of certain currencies. The Agency was constantly having to revise its budget 
allocations and that made it difficult for Member States to evaluate the 
new budget. Nevertheless, Hungary accepted all the obligations resulting 
from that budget. It did not think the Agency's difficulties could be overcome 
by modifying the method of constituting the different funds and was in 
favour of the current system being maintained. 
40. Hungary thought that, with its existing composition, the Board of 
Governors guaranteed proper representation of the different geographic areas 
and that there was no reason to modify the Statute in that connection. 
41. The Hungarian delegation regarded the Agency's co-operation with the 
United Nations, the Ebod and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
and the World Health Organization as highly useful and fruitful. Its cooperation 
with the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) was just 
as important. A report issued by the CMEA Secretariat had drawn attention 
to the results of co-operation between socialist countries in the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. CMEA's long—term programmes were a guarantee of 
optimum conditions for the development of nuclear energy. 
42. Hungaiy, +00, had achieved much in the peaceful applications of atomic 
energy. Construction of the first nuclear power station at Paks on the Danube 
was proceeding apace. A new centre for the storage of radioactive waste 

0C(XXII)/OR.203 
page 12 

had been put into operation during the current year and the participants in a 
study tour organized by the Agency would be visiting it shortly. A facility 
for the radiation sterilization of medical products and equipment had also been 
put into service. 

43. Many Hungarian research institutes were working under contract with the 
Agency, especially on questions of agricultural interest to developing countries. 
For example, a new, improved variety of rice had just been developed in Hungary. 
A course on the applications of neutron generators had just been completed; it 
had attracted participants from all parts of the world. 
44. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the work of the 22nd regular 
session would prove fruitful. 
45. Mr. CARTER (Canada), referring to the special session which the United 
Nations Organization had devoted to disarmament, said his country believed that 
a consensus had been reached on a positive programme of action and that the 
special session had marked a step forward in the international effort to prevent 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons, both horizontal and vertical. The 
Canadian Government was convinced that a further spread of nuclear weapons 
would seriously diminish world security and that it was the duty of all 
Governments to pursue policies based on the presumption that proliferation 
could be stopped. He hoped the international community would continue to 
support the Agency's efforts in that direction. 
46. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons remained the main 
instrument by which \he international community confirmed its commitment to 
oppose the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to share the benefits of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. The number of States which had signed 
NPT and concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency was increasing. For 
its part, Canada adhered firmly to the two principles which had inspired the 
Treaty and on which the Agency's Statute was based. Nuclear energy, which was 
likely to play an important part in helping more and more countries to meet 
their increasing needs for energy, was the product of an ever-evolving technology. 
It was essential that the world community should realize that fact 
and ensure that nuclear technology was applied in the service of peace, health 
and prosperity throughout the world and that it was not employed for military 
purposes. 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 13 

47. Those were the considerations which had led Canada to take an active part 
in the work of INPCE, which had started in Washington in November 1977. The 
task of INPCE was to make an evaluation of the various nuclear fuel cycle technologies 
and of their associated proliferation risks. The evaluation would be 
useful both to countries which had already decided to produce nuclear energy 
and to those which were considering the possibility of doing so. 
48. However, the development of nuclear techniques had to go hand-in-hand with 
the development of safeguards techniques, since the Agency had to apply safeguards 
to installations which were increasing not only in number but also in 
complexity, and which required new safeguards methods. The Agency therefore 
had to assume greater responsibilities than in the past and consequently 
needed additional resources. It would be able to accomplish its mission only 
if it enjoyed the support of all Member States. It could be assured of the 
support of Canada. 
49. He noted with satisfaction that the Federal Republic of Germany was making 
a substantial contribution for research and development in safeguards technology. 
Since the United States of America and Canada were also working in that area in 
collaboration with the Agency, the latter would be better able to carry out its 
tasks. 
50. Canada had participated in the Agency's promotional activities by sending 
many of its specialists to meetings of technical committees and advisory groups 
and to symposia organized by the Agency. It had participated in the technical 
assistance programme and in the discussions relating to the guiding principles 
and general operating rules of that programme. 
51. The Agency's budget for 1979 represented a considerable increase over that 
for 1978. Since many countries - including Canada - were following a policy 
of fiscal restraint, the Agency's budget for I98O would have to be carefully 
scrutinized from the point of view of the selection of priority activities, 
since the proposed increase for 1979 should not be allowed to become a regular 
event. Canada would continue to support the Agency in its essential programmes, 
but the Agency, on its side, would have to set priorities if the current 
financial difficulties persisted. 

GC(XXII)/OR.203 

page 14 

52. Recently, Canada had negotiated, or renegotiated, bilateral safeguards 
agreements and nuclear co-operation agreements with more comprehensive safeguards 
provisions. His country recognized, however, that there were limits 
to the contribution that unilateral action could make, and that the real 
solution was to be found in international collaboration. The Canadian 
Government proposed to do its utmost to help in working out supply assurances 
and constraints as part of an international system of non-proliferation. His 
country would continue to participate in INFCE and to give its full support 
to Agency activities. 
53. Mr. de CARYALHO (Brazil) reminded the delegates that world petroleum 
and gas reserves would soon be exhausted -a circumstance which had led the 
international scientific and technological community to look into alternative 
energy sources. Such sources would have to be developed before the end of the 
century; and, in order to ensure a smooth transition, vigorous efforts towards 
international co-operation would have to be made. Of the various new sources 
of energy, nuclear energy had the advantage of being practically inexhaustible; 
a decisive choice in its favour should therefore be made now. 
54« In addition to the energy crisis which confronted many States, there was 
a growing technological gap between developed and developing countries. Only 
international collaboration would enable them to close that gap; the 
International Atomic Energy Agency had a major task especially in that 
connection. 

55. The Agency's two main tasks were the provision of technical assistance and 
the implementation of safeguards. The two types of activity were not, however, 
of equal interest to all countries. Although the developing countries wholeheartedly 
supported the Agency's safeguards programme, they felt that technical 
assistance was essential to them if they were to emerge from their present 
status of consumers of advanced technology supplied by the industrialized 
nations. The latter, on the other hand, laid stress on the Agency's safeguards 
activities and were less concerned with the supply of technical assistance. He 
endorsed the Director General's appeal to all Member States to increase their 
voluntary contributions to the technical assistance programme. 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 15 

56, As part of the programme, the Agency had, since 1975, been organizing 
nuclear power project training courses which the Brazilian Government deemed 
extremely useful for all developing countries. By the end of the current year, 
530 participants from some 36 countries in that category would have attended 
them. Brazil was pleased to note the expansion of Agency activities in that 
field and the fact that they had become a main component of the Agency's 
training programme. The Agency should continue its efforts on those lines, 
since the organizing of such courses was a measure of its readiness to respond 
to Member States' requirements. 

57« A sector in which the Agency's assistance would be the most effective was 
that of uranium resources availability. Any country having a nuclear power 
programme must in the first place assess its uranium resources in order to 
determine whether it was self-sufficient in them or would have to import fuel. 
Because of the energy crisis, prospecting had been stepped up in all regions 
of the world. The developing countries were where most of the zones not 
hitherto prospected were located, and it was in them that a large part of the 

future reserves were sure to be found. For the past two years, the Agency 
had been receiving a growing number of requests for technical assistance in 

uranium exploration and production. It was indeed providing some assistance 
in that field - largely thanks to substantial funds made available through 
UHDP. However, it had still not given due attention to the importance of 
uranium prospecting, despite that activity's place in the nuclear power pro


grammes of most Member States -a point to which he wished to draw the 

Secretariat's attention. 

58, He congratulated the Deputy Director General for Technical Assistance and 
Publications on the clear and precise information given in the report on the 
provision of technical assistance for 1977. In order better to implement that 
programme, Brazil, as soon as the relevant proposal had been put to it, had 
appointed an officer for liaison between the Agency and the Brazilian Nuclear 
Energy Commission in matters relating to technical assistance. 

59» Brazil was very optimistic about its own uranium resources, since its vast 
territory contained highly favourable geological features and a wide variety of 
uraniferous rocks. The Government had launched a prospecting programme, for 
which it had earmarked over $10 million per annum. Many experts, including 
140 geologists, had been assigned to the programme. In 1977 Brazil's assured 
reserves amounted to 32 300 tons; the amount of inferred reserves was even 
greater. 


GC(XXH)/OR.203 
page 16 

60. Brazil congratulated the Agency on the establishment of codes of practice 
and safety guides. They were the outcome of experience acquired in the various 
fields reviewed and were drafted in such a way as to be directly applicable by 
Member States; moreover, they would greatly enhance the transfer of technology 
from the industrialized nations to the developing countries. 
61. With regard to power generation, Brazil was steadily improving its technology, 
despite the effects of world inflation, the oil shortage and the particularly 
unfavourable weather conditions of the current year. Energy demand 
was growing at the rate of some 12.5$ per year; electricity generation in 1978 
had amounted to 110 000 million kWh, representing almost one half of the figure 
for Latin America. Brazil had an installed power-generating capacity of 
25 000 MW(e), which would be almost tripled when the power plants currently 
under construction had been completed. At the present rate of development, 
the country's total installed capacity should far exceed 200 000 MW(e) by the 
year 2000. 
62. Since Brazil's total hydroelectric potential did not exceed 170 000 MW(e), 
recourse to other energy sources was essential. Electricity generation from 
fossil fuels was unlikely to continue for long; priority, therefore, clearly 
had to be given to nuclear energy, first of all in the South-East Region, where 
the hydroelectricity resources were already almost fully exploited, and next in 
the North-East. To begin with, the nuclear plants would provide only a complementary 
source of power; from 1990 onward, however, they would account for the 
major part of Brazil's electricity output. The country's first nuclear plant, 
built at Angra dos Reis was due to go into service in 1979, to be followed by 
two further units - the result of remarkable co-operation between Brazil and 
the Federal Republic of Germany which had led to a transfer of technology in 
such fields as nuclear engineering and the fuel cycle. 
63. Under the circumstances, he fully agreed with the Director General that the 
rise of an anti—nuclear movement was to be deplored, that the question of nonproliferation 
should be seen in its true perspective and that a way should be 
found to reconcile the requirements of the regulatory bodies in respect of plant 
operational safety and those of operators, whose task was to produce electricity, 
finally, he thanked the countries which had assisted Brazil through the Agency, 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 17 

and expressed his conviction that the latter would continue to fulfil its role 
of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy whilst preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. 

64. Mr. PRIBISEVIC (Yugoslavia) said that during the previous year the 
Agency had succeeded, in spite of difficulties, in carrying out its statutory 
obligations to the benefit of all Member States. The efforts of the Director 
General should be especially commended; in his excellent speech he had given 
an extremely valuable analysis of the situation and his conclusions were fully 
approved by the Yugoslav delegation, 
65. It was noticeable that certain nuclear-weapon States were imposing restrictions 
on the transfer of nuclear technology by invoking the increasing danger of 
proliferation. At the same time, there was a tendency to over—emphasize the 
safeguards activities resulting from NPT to the detriment of the role the Agency 
could play in the transfer of technology. The failure of the nuclear Powers to 
carry out their obligations under NPT was to be deplored. In particular, no 
progress had been made towards nuclear disarmament. The situation was causing 
strong reactions against the development of nuclear energy, especially in 
countries whose progress was tied to this type of energy production. At its 
thirty-second session, the General Assembly of the United Nations had adopted by 
consensus a resolution insisting on the right of all countries, without discrimination, 
to have free access to nuclear technology and materials under a truly 
democratic international safeguards system. Certain nuclear Powers were fortunately 
ready to place their peaceful nuclear facilities under the Agency's safeguards; 
it was to be hoped that all nuclear-weapon countries would follow that 
example. 
66. The resolution also invited United Nations Members to examine the possibility 
of convening one or more conferences to promote international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The United Nations special session on disarmament 
had rejected attempts to apply disarmament measures in a way which 
might limit the right of countries to develop and to acquire nuclear technology. 
The non-aligned countries which met in Belgrade in July 1978 gave special 
attention to the problem of atomic energy. They deplored the monopolistic 
policies of the nuclear powers and insisted that the transfer of nuclear 
technology should be free from all discrimination. They supported the idea of 
convening an international conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. 
The Yugoslav Government believed that the problems related to the use of nuclear 


GC(XXH)/OR.203 
page 18 

energy in general and to safeguards in particular could only be resolved by 
political means. It was clear that the results from scientific meetings could 
be very useful in providing the technical data necessaxy for arriving at 
political solutions, 

67. The Agency could play an extremely important role by studying various 
aspects of the needs of developing countries in the nuclear field, such as for 
example the possibility of pooling their resources. It was essential to resolve 
international problems related to nuclear energy. Yugoslavia itself would require 
an installed nuclear capacity of about 12 000 MW by the year 2000 to complement 
its other energy sources. International regulations and stability in the nuclear 
field were needed if such a programme was to be realized. 
68. Several items on the agenda for the session could be profitably examined 
only in an atmosphere of understanding and co-operation. In particular, that was 
true of the Agency's programme for 1979-84 and the budget for 1979. The document 
containing the six-year programme, although of outstanding quality, did 
not provide the expected solutions to the problem of accelerating the transfer 
of nuclear technology. A further example was the budget for 1979» which although 
much larger than that for the previous year did not give priority to the 
needs of the developing countries. Technical assistance related to the development 
of resources and the fuel cycle ought to receive greater financial support. 
It was high time for technical assistance to be provided by a long-term method 
of financing which did not depend on voluntary contributions. Moreover, 
Yugoslavia was finnly opposed to the idea that technical assistance should be 
limited to HPT countries because that would be a form of discrimination contrary 
to the provisions of the Agency's Statute. 
69. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, Yugoslavia had 
shown its unconditional support for the adaptation of the Agency's activities 
to the current needs of Member States and to the changing world situation. 
70. The co-operation between the Agency and Yugoslavia had been particularly 
fruitful. Yugoslavia wished to strengthen that co-operation by giving the 
Agency unconditional support in all its activities related to the rapid 
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 19 

71. Mr. FELICKI (Poland) said that the coming twenty years would see a 
rapid development of nuclear energy even in countries which did not yet possess 
nuclear plants. If the worldwide demand for energy and the needs of the world 
population in the year 2000 were to be met, energy production would have to be 
increased through the construction of many different types of power plant. 
However, there was a fear among nations that tons of plutonium and enriched 
uranium might accumulate and might be used to manufacture weapons of mass 
destruction. 
72. It was an essential task of the Agency to protect humanity against that 
threat by implementing an efficient system for preventing proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. The Polish delegation was very satisfied with the results 
obtained by the Agency in setting up a safeguards system based on the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), but it regretted the fact 
that several States which possessed a significant nuclear potential had not 
shown any intention of acceding to NPT. The Polish Government approved the 
conclusions in the final document from the special session of the United Nations 
on disarmament relating to the ways and means of reducing to a minimum the danger 
of nuclear weapons proliferation. All States had the right of access to nuclear 
technology, equipment and materials for peaceful purposes but collaboration in 
that field should be subject to the Agency's safeguards. The Agency should 
intensify its efforts to make NPT universal and to improve its safeguards and 
control system. In that endeavour, it could count on the support of Poland. 
73. The Polish Government was following with great interest the negotiations 
on the establishment of effective controls in the non-nuclear-^weapon States 
Members of EUEATOM. It was disturbed at seeing those negotiations being prolonged 
as a result of certain difficulties and appealed to EUHATOM and its 
Member States to remove the obstacles in the way of full implementation of an 
Agency control system since that was very important for security and cooperation 
in Europe. 
74. Poland supported the initiative taken by the Agency with a view to the 
establishment of an international plutonium handling system. The subject 
should be included in the agenda of the next NPT Review Conference. 

GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 20 

75. Kie Polish delegation appreciated, in particular, the Agency programmes for 
preparing codes on the operation of nuclear power stations. The documents already 
produced would assist those countries which, like Poland, were beginning to construct 
such plants. 
16. Beginning with 1979» the Agency might usefully undertake research into methods 
of neutralizing radioactive waste. Poland would take an active part in such a 
programme. 
77» For many years, Poland had supported the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. In 1979f it would contribute a total of 2.5 million zlotys to the 
technical assistance fund, but the Secretariat should try to make it easier for 
contributions in local currencies to be utilized. The industrial potential of 
Poland was such that the sums contributed could be used to purchase equipment 
which would be of value to countries which were carrying out research on the 
applications of atomic energy. 

78. The Agency could have recourse in a number of areas to the considerable 
experience acquired by the socialist countries in their attempts to find 
collective solutions to many scientific, technological and economic problems, 
including the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. In that connection, 
the co-operation between the Agency, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
and the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research should be increased. 
79. With regard to the Regular Budget for 1979» the Polish delegation believed 
that a peimanent analysis of the indirect costs should be undertaken and that 
all possible savings which could be made without detriment to the basic 
programmes should be introduced. 
80. An analysis of the Agency's activities during the previous year showed 
that there had been satisfactory development. Gratitude was due to the 
Director General and to the Secretariat for the efforts they had made to carry 
out their difficult tasks. For its part, Poland would maintain its support to 
the Agency, which was playing an important role in international co-operation 
and the maintenance of world peace. 
GC(XXII)/OR,203 
page 21 

81. Mr. NEMBTS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that in the 
world situation there had been positive changes which to a large extent 
were the result of the peace-loving foreign policy of the socialist States 
and of all the progressive forces in the world. However, the most urgent 
problem remained, namely that of stopping the arms race which, fuelled by 
the forces of reaction and imperialism, was swallowing up enormous material 
resources and was creating terrible means of mass destruction. 
82. Mr. L.I. Brezhnev, General-Secretary of the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party and President of the Praesidium of the Supreme Soviet of the 
USSR, had said that it was time to realize that the arms race would not benefit 
anyone, that it had to be stopped and that steps should be taken towards disarmament. 
The special session on disarmament of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations had been an important move in that direction. At that session 
the Soviet Union had put forward a large number of constructive and concrete 
proposals covering all the main aspects of disarmament. The points relating to 
the Agency's functions were of particular interest to the General Conference; 
they concerned mainly the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. The Soviet Union's proposals had found wide support at the special 
session of the General Assembly and had been reflected in its final act. 
83. Ten years had elapsed since the Hon-Proliferation Treaty had been opened 
for signature. In that relatively brief period, the cause of non-proliferation 
had made much progress. 
84. The desire to prevent any further proliferation of nuclear weapons had 
influenced policy governing the export of nuclear technology. Transfers of 
equipment, facilities and technology had generally become subject to conditions 
and 15 Member States of the Agency had adopted guidelines reflecting certain 
agreed minimum conditions. 
85. In 1977 the safeguards agreements concluded with EURATOM and Japan under 
NPT had come into force. By the end of that year 102 States, including three 
nuclear-weapon States and almost all the large industrial countries in the 
world had become parties to the Treaty. The Ukraine regretted, however, that 
HPT was not universally applied and that two nuclear powers, the People's 
Republic of China and Prance, had not signed it. In addition, certain nonnuclear-
weapon States which were capable of making their own nuclear weapons 
by reason of their industrial development had not acceded to it. 

GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 22 

86. As had been pointed out by Mr. Brezhnev, the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons would not increase the security of any country; on the contrary, it 
increased the threat of a nuclear conflict from which no "nuclear umbrella" 
would provide protection. For that reason steps should be taken towards a 
universal solution of the problem. 
87. His delegation believed that nuclear weapons would be particularly 
dangerous in the hands of States situated in areas of conflict and tension. 
For that reason the plans of the Republic of South Africa and of Israel to 
develop nuclear weapons were worrying. The realization of those plans must 
not be permitted because that would increase the nuclear threat for the whole 
of humanity. 
88. In the context of non-proliferation, it was important to guarantee the 
security of non-nuclear—weapon States. To that end the Soviet Union had announced 
at the special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations that it would 
never use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States which renounced the 
production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and did not have such weapons on 
their territories. 
89. The establishment of nuolear-weapon-free zones could also contribute to the 
reinforcement of the non-proliferation system. In that context the Soviet Union 
had signed Additional Protocol II of the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
90. In view of current scientific and technical trends there was hardly any 
alternative to the intensive development of nuclear energy. According to data 
of the Agency, 206 nuclear installations, representing 5.3$ of the installed 
electricity generating capacity in the world, had been in operation at the end 
of the previous year. By 1980 the contribution of nuclear energy would reach 
8$. The development of nuclear power in non-nuclear-weapon States and the 
mastery of nuclear technology by those States also involved a risk of the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. The quantity of plutonium that had accumulated 
in non-nuclear-weapon States could already be measured in tonnes. 
91. The main function of the Agency was therefore to set up an effective system 
for safeguarding all non-military nuclear activities. As pointed out in the 
final act of the special session on disarmament of the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, international co-operation on peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy should be backed up by international safeguarding measures. 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 23 

92. The Agency should pay special attention to the implementation of the 
safeguards agreement concluded with the seven non-nuclear-weapon EURATOM 
countries. Eighteen months after that agreement had entered into force, 
HJRATOM was still trying, by using delaying tactics, to reduce the Agency's 
control over EURATOM facilities. In addition the European Community was 
constantly attacking the fundamental principle of the Agency's safeguards 
system, namely, the right to independent verification. The Ukraine was deeply 
disturbed by the content of the report by the Commission of the European 
Communities on the operation of the Common Market in 1977, according to which 
eight agreements had been signed for deliveries of some 1400 kilograms of plutonium 
produced in Community countries. The report did not contain any additional information 
and the Commission had refused to give any explanations on the pretext that 
confidential commercial information was involved. In the opinion of the Ukraine 
that situation was totally unacceptable and it was essential for the negotiations 
between the Agency and EURATOM to be concluded as quickly as possible. 
93. Many countries, and particularly the socialist States, had on several occasions 
put forward proposals for strengthening safeguards which involved the 
following: extending the Agency's regulatory functions to all nuclear installations 
and not only to materials delivered to non-nuclear-weapon States under bilateral 
agreements; improving safeguards instrumentation; carrying out more 
detailed inspections; and considering the establishment of regional fuel cycle 
centres. In order to prevent international co-operation from contributing to 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons it was also very important to ensure the 
physical protection of nuclear materials. 
94. He said that, in accordance with the established tradition of Conference 
general debates, he would describe the main results of his country's work on 
the utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The wide range of 
fundamental and applied research done in the Ukraine included, in particular, 
work on nuclear power and on the application of ionizing radiation. Great progress 
had been made during 1977 and in September of that year the first unit of 
the Chernobyl'sk nuclear power station, which had meanwhile reached its 
nominal capacity of one million kW, had been put into service. Preparations 
for putting the second unit into service were making good progress and other 
power stations were being constructed. During the period I98O-I985 the total 
installed capacity of Ukrainian nuclear power stations would reach 4-6 million 
kW and that figure was expected to double during the following five years. 

GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 24 


The Ukraine was also planning to construct nuclear plants for urban heating and 

for providing industrial process heat during the 1980s. Those facts demonstrated 
the implementation of the programme for development of the nuclear power industry, 
which had priority in the Ukraine. 

95. Scientific research occupied an important place in that regard. The 
work done related mainly to the safety of power station operation, to new 
component fabrication techniques and to the scientific and technical principles 
involved in the construction of fast-breeder reactors. As part of that work, 
close attention was being paid to studies of the effect exerted by nuclear 
power stations on the environment and to environmental protection. A large 
amount of work had been done on nuclear physics; for those studies use was being 
made of one of the largest isochronous cyclotrons in Europe, a research reactor 
and various types of accelerators. 
96. In various subjects research involved more and more uses of ionizing 
radiation and the results obtained were used extensively and profitably in 
the national economy. Radiation devices of all types were used in numerous 
branches of industry where they made the mechanization or automation of many 
labour-intensive operations possible. The use of ionizing radiation sources 
in medicine and agriculture was also developing continuously. 
97« The Ukraine welcomed the developments which had taken place in 
scientific and technical relations with the Agency, In 1977 an Agency meeting 
of experts and an Agency advisory group meeting had taken place in Kiev. The 
Ukraine was also taking part in the exchange of scientific and technical 
information with the Agency, particularly in connection with the IWIS system 
and on the subject of nuclear constants. Several Ukrainian research centres 
were working under contract for the Agency. 

98. Recently, a group of specialists from developing countries had visited 
the Ukraine on a study tour concerned with the uses of isotopes and radiation 
in medicine. Another tour, on agricultural applications of nuclear techniques, 
would be organized in October. Before the end of the year the Agency would 
organize, in Crimea, a training course on national systems of nuclear materials 
accounting and control. The Ukraine would do its best to contribute to the 
success of the course. 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 25 

99. Such study tours and courses were organized in the framework of 
technical assistance and were financed by voluntary contributions from the 
Ukraine. His country was willing to continue that form of assistance to 
developing countries. He wished to mention in that connection the importance 
of voluntary contributions made by Member States in their national currencies, 
a system which made it possible for the host country to organize the assistance 
required quickly and to make full use of the contribution, independently of 
fluctuations in exchange rates on the world market. Tentative calculations 
showed that the two study tours and the course which he had mentioned would 
absorb the Ukraine's voluntary contributions for two years. 
100. His country would pay a voluntary contribution of 80 000 roubles in 
national currency to the Agency's General Fund for technical assistance in 
1979- Those funds could be used for the purchase of Soviet equipment, for 
the provision of assistance to developing countries, with priority being 
given to countries which had signed NPT, and for the organization of courses 
and study tours in the Ukraine in the context of technical assistance. 
101. Mr. SACADURA CABRAL (Portugal) observed that with the 22nd session 
of the General Conference his country was completing its term as a Member 
of the Agency's Board of Governors. It had attached a special importance 
to its election to the Board because it had practically been excluded from 
international organizations before its return to parliamentary democracy. 
It had returned to the international scene with the firm intention of making 
up for lost time and of participating fully in the work of the governing 
bodies of international organizations. It had therefore endeavoured, as a 
Member of the Board, to strengthen its relations with the Agency in the 
areas of technical assistance and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
102. The Agency's activities in uranium prospecting, production of uranium 
concentrates, nuclear safety, production and application of isotopes and use of 
ionizing radiation had greatly benefited Portugal. Moreover, in order to 
collaborate with the Agency in an effort to control the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and to strengthen peace and security in the world, his country had 
signed HPT and also a safeguards agreement with the Agency under that Treaty. 
The subsidiary arrangements which must follow that agreement were under 
negotiation. 

GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 26 


103. Portugal's participation in the work of the Board had resulted in more 
fruitful and closer relations between its experts and the experts of the 
Agency. His country had only small reserves of low-quality coal, and oil 
prospecting had so far proved unsuccessful. It therefore had to depend 
on oil and coal imports and on its hydroelectric resources, more than 55$ 
of which had already been developed and which generated amounts of 
electricity varying from year to year. Nuclear energy therefore represented 
the only means by which Portugal could attain a level of economic development 
comparable with that of other European countries and diversify its 
sources of energy. The feasibility studies carried out in the preceding 
decade had led to the conclusion that the first nuclear power plant could 
be commissioned in the early eighties. However, for various reasons the 
competent authorities had been compelled to postpone its construction, and 
hence the delay in the drafting of a national nuclear power plan and in the 
training of the necessary personnel. The matter had been referred to 
Parliament, which would shortly have before it a white paper on nuclear power 
plants. No decision would be taken before early 1979. If Portugal took the 
nuclear option, it would no doubt have to make an unprecedented economic and 
technical effort, but on that depended its future. 
104. Meanwhile, Portugal had recently reorganized its nuclear activities in 
the public sector, which had formerly been concentrated in the Nuclear 
Energy Board, by distributing those activities among several bodies. For 
example, the Directorate General of Mining had been made responsible for 
uranium prospecting. A Government-owned company had been established for 
the mining and chemical processing of uranium ores. Laboratory activities, 
including the production of radioisotopes, protection against ionizing 
radiation and nuclear sciences, had been entrusted to a national laboratory 
which was responsible for all research relating to industrial applications. 
Another body was in charge of the safety problems of nuclear power plants. 
GC(XXII)/OR.203 
page 27 

105. In conclusion, he pointed out that at present the Department of Nuclear 
Energy in the Ministry of Industry and Technology was co-ordinating all 
activities related to the industrial applications of nuclear energy, namely 
the management of uranium, -the nuclear fuel cycle and power reactors, 
relations with international organizations, safeguards activities connected 
with nuclear materials and public information. 
The meeting rose at 5-45 p.m. 



International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
May 1979* 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 


 SEPTEMBER I978 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTH 
PLENARY MEETING 
Held aton Wednesday, 
the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
20 September 1978, at 10.5 a.m. 
President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire.) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
4 General debate(continued) 
and annual report for 1977 
Statements by the delegates of: 

Netherlands 
Malaysia 
Romania 
Israel 
Italy 
Australia 
Byelorussian SovietUnited Republic ofJapan 
Sweden 

 Socialist Republic 
Tanzania 

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 


Zaire 

Paragraphs 
1 - 153 

1 14 
.15 23 
24 43 
44 50 
51 61 
62 76 
77 104 
105 108 
109 127 
128 139 
140 146 
147 153 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 22 September 1978. 
**/ GC(XXII)/605. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXII)/INF/l79/Rev.2. 

78-12102 


GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1977 (continued) 


1. Mr. de BQSR (Netherlands) said that the current session of the General 
Conference was taking place at a time when the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
were being intensely debated. It was regrettable there were more misunderstandings 
than agreements on a subject which was crucial for mankind's future wellbeing. 
The Director General had quite rightly pointed out the need for a new 
international consensus which would permit more harmonious relations between 
the suppliers and recipients of nuclear equipment and technology. His delegation 
agreed that such a consensus should be based on free non-discriminatory access 
and self-restraint by all concerned and that it was necessary to strike a balance 
between those two potentially contradictory requirements, which matter lay at 
the heart of the controversy on non-proliferation. There should be freedom 
to apply and develop nuclear energy for economic and social development, but 
freedom without restraint might create nuclear anarchy. However, restraints had 
to be voluntary in order to be effective. The Agency could play a vital role in 
finding a way between those extremes. The Netherlands, for its part, was always 
ready to participate in the common search for a new international consensus on 
effective measures to minimize the danger of proliferation without jeopardizing 
access to much-needed energy supplies. 


2. His Government wished to express its support for the continuing efforts to 
refine the Agency's safeguards system and commended in particular the Director 


General's innovative approach in preparing the study on international plutonium 


management; an agreed set of rules on such management could indeed significantly 


contribute to improving the Agency's safeguards system. 


3. The Netherlands took a keen interest in the matter, as was shown by its 
agreement with Brazil, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United Kingdom, 
and hoped that an international plutonium storage regime could be established in 
conformity with Article XII.A.5 of the Agency's Statute. It also wished to 
participate in the meetings of the consultants' group which the Director General 
might convene. 
4. He considered that the establishment of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres 
would strengthen the non-proliferation regime and welcomed the study which the 


Agency had completed on the subject. He was confident that the Director General 


would once again show his innovative spirit in giving practical shape to the 


results of the study and thereby make a concrete and effective contribution to 


non-proliferation. It was hoped that the subject would also receive due 


attention during the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE). 


GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 3 

Expressing appreciation of the valuable contributions made by the Agency's 
Secretariat to the work of INFCE, he urged all INFCE participants to avail 
themselves as much as possible of the Agency's services and experience in 
order to avoid duplication of efforts and to-save time and resources in bringing 
INFCE to a positive conclusion. His Government regarded INFCE as an important 
exercise because the development of nuclear energy and technology and also the 
rapid expansion of their use in many countries had reached a point where important 
deoisions must be taken on the future course to follow as regards the fuel cycle. 
INFCE was providing an opportunity to the international community to have a 
discussion in depth, especially on the non-proliferation aspects of the present 
and future use of nuclear energy. It was to be hoped that the INFCE study would 
significantly contribute to reaching a new international consensus on the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and provide a starting point for a more harmonious international 
co-operation in that sphere. 

5. His Government was gratified to note the ever growing support for the Treaty 
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NFT)-^, as was evidenced by the accession 
to the Treaty of three more States and by the entry into force of six additional 
NPT safeguards agreements during the preceding year; a number of non-NPT safeguards 
agreements had also been concluded. Since the broadening of the scope of 
the Agency's safeguards involved a considerable expansion of the work of the 
safeguards staff, there was full justification for the increase in the number of 
inspectors, who performed a vital function. 
6. One of the most serious obstacles to further development of nuclear energy 
was the problem of nuclear waste management, and the delays in many national 
nuclear programmes could be overcome only when an effective solution, also 
acceptable to public opinion, had been found to that problem. The Netherlands 
Government had therefore made further expansion in nuclear power generating 
capacity dependent on finding such a solution. 
7. The problem of nuclear waste management, given it s nature and complexity, 
transcended national boundaries and for that reason the initiative had to be 

taken by several international bodies in carrying out activities including re


search programmes. In that context the Agency's initiative was laudable since 

it was one of the best equipped organizations to deal with that matter. The 

Netherlands was particularly interested in, and would gladly participate in the 

preparation of, codes concerning criteria for waste acceptance and codes con


cerning siting, both of which were mentioned in the Agency's programme for 
1979-84. 

l/ Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 



GC( XXII)/OR. 204 
page 4 

8. As regards the Agency's work in the field of technical assistance, his 
delegation had pleasure in announcing the Netherlands' decision, subject to 
Parliamentary approval, to contribute US $129 000 to the General Fund for 1979, 
which amount was based on its rate of assessment for the Regular Budget. 
9. His Government had noted with great interest the Agency's activities in 1977 
and especially approved of the fact that considerable assistance had been provided 
in the applications of isotopes and radiation in agriculture, for agricultural 
production was of paramount importance in developing countries. By helping those 
countries to improve their knowledge of soils, plants, animals and food, and also 
of health problems, the Agency could contribute to the betterment of the living 
conditions of the poorest people in the world. 
10. The Motherlands had always advocated the central role of the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) within the United Nations system for the provision of 
technical assistance, and it therefore welcomed the current trend of increase in 
UNDP-financed activities. 
11. His Government viewed with some concern the Agency's continuing problems 
resulting from contributions to the General Fund in non-convertible currencies. 
Although the situation was not new to many of the organizations in the United 
Nations system, it could have serious implications for the Agency's future ability 
to implement its programme, and his delegation hoped that all Member States would 
co-operate with the Agency so that it could fully discharge its obligations in 
future. 
12. Referring to a resolution, adopted at the 32nd session of the United Nations 
General Assembly, on the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the 
United Nations system, which strongly emphasized the cohesion of the United Nations 
system, including the Agency, particularly with respect to the drafting of 
programmes, budgets and medium-term plans, the role of the Economic and Social 
Council of the United Nations (EC0S0C) and inter-agency co-operation in general, 
he said that the Netherlands Government supported the recommendations in question. 
It was in favour of harmonization of the programme budgets of the agencies, 
although each agency could follow its own approach to a certain extent. That 
would enable individual governments to comment more meaningfully on the programme 
budget and have a better understanding of the problems involved, 
13. As for the Agency's programme for 1979-84, his delegation felt that the 
concept of a medium-term plan had been interpreted rather restrictively and that 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 5 

the activities for those years were often indicated very briefly and superficially 
so that there hardly seemed to be a clear plan at all. It was hoped 
that the Director General would be able to improve the situation in the future. 


14. The Netherlands approved the Agency's budget for 1979, as recommended by 
the Board, and considered the increase in the appropriations to be justifiable. 
In conclusion, he assured the Agency of his country's fullest co-operation. 
15. Mr. SALLEH (Malaysia) said that his country, having provided the 
Chairman of the Board of Governors during the past year, had been able to study 
closely the developments within and outside the Agency and to contribute to them. 
It noted with satisfaction and reassurance, on the twenty-first anniversary of the 
Agency, that the latter had, during its lifetime, developed an effective safeguards 
system, as was shown by the conclusion of the Special Safeguards Implementation 
Report for 1976, to the effect that no significant quantity of safeguarded 
nuclear material had been diverted. 
16. On the other hand, progress in expanding the use of atomic energy to promote 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world had been unduly slow. In vast 
areas of the world there was still no routine application of nuclear techniuqes 
in food and agriculture, medicine and industry. There was a disquieting lack of 
international co-operation to enable the Agency effectively to tackle the problems 
of poverty, hunger, malnutrition and disease which had long beset the overwhelming 
majority of its Members. Moreover, on account of the link between nuclear energy 
and nuclear weapons proliferation, a growing number of developing countries were 
finding difficulty in co-operating with advanced countries with a view to making 
nuclear power a significant part of the response to their energy requirements. 
17. It was timely to recall, therefore, the foresight of the Agency's founders 
in realizing that, in order to gain the adherence and confidence of the Agency's 
whole membership, the importance of both areas should be acknowledged. 
18. His Government, as a signatory of NPT, welcomed the fact that 104 countries 
had now ratified that treaty and the fact that a growing number of nuclear 
facilities, even in countries not party to NPT, were being safeguarded by the 
Agency. In that connection, his Government firmly believed that universal 
adherence to NPT was one way in which the international community could effectively 
contribute to international peace and security; it was firmly committed to 
helping the Agency play its rightful and crucial role for that purpose. NPT still 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 6 

represented the most effective international consensus to date and should be upheld, 
therefore, by recipient and supplier States alike. It would not he fair to expect 
those countries - most of them developing countries, like his own - which had 
forsworn nuclear weapons to relinquish their rights or to bear any longer the 
discrimination of the past three decades. Countries already having the technology 
had a moral, and indeed statutory, obligation and responsibility to see that the 
benefits of nuclear energy were shared widely and fairly, as stated in Article II 
of the Statute and Article IT of NPT. The dwindling world resources of fossil 
fuels made it all the more important for nuclear power to be speedily established 
as part of the future energy plans of many nations, particularly the developing 
countries. 

19. Therefore, it was disconcerting to many delegations that the Board - the 
Agency's executing and policy-making organ - was still being hampered by disputes 
about targets for voluntary contributions for technical assistance programmes and 
about relatively small programme increases in promotional activities. It was 
hard to understand why, when countries were being advised to submit large-scale 
multi-year projects for national, socio-economic development plans, a shortage 
of funds had forced the Agency to reject a number of small but viable projects; 
in that connection, his delegation fully endorsed the Director General's appeal 
for generous contributions by all Members. 
20. A further growing constraint on developing countries was that they lacked 
skilled manpower, an adequate industrial infrastructure, access to advanced 
technology and an assured supply of nuclear fuel and fuel cycle services. It 
was difficult for the Agency and its Member States even to obtain a speedy 
transfer of research reactors using low-enriched fuel. 
21. Therefore, it was clear that the Agency oommunity, after two decades of 
experience, had still not found a means - or perhaps the political will - to 
ensure the transfer of nuclear technology within the existing framework, although 
such transfer was, in his delegation's view, the best way to prevent the independent 
development of such technology, which might well lead to proliferation. 
Renewed effort aimed at international co-operation, both within and outside the 
scope of the Agency, was required but could be achieved only through a sincere 
desire, on the part of the entire membership of the Agency and the international 
community as a whole, to ensure a fair balance between promotional and regulatory 
activities. Any unilateral attempt to impose decisions on others would be 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 7 

counterproductive and could cause ill will. The fact that the General Assembly 
of the United Nations, at its thirty-second session, had adopted several resolutions 
having a direct bearing on the Agency reflected the international 
community's desire for democratic decision-making. Likewise, the proposal to 
amend Article VI of the Agency's Statute reflected the sponsors' desire for 
fuller participation by Member States in the Board's decisions. 

22. Although Malaysia had only recently started to participate in INFCE, it 
viewed it as a commendable form of international co-operation; HJFCE gave cause 
for hope that the developing countries' particular needs, including an assured 
long-term supply of nuclear technology, nuclear fuel and fuel cycle services, 
would receive due attention. His delegation was pleased to note that the Agency 
was identifying and protecting the needs and interests of developing countries. 
His Government fervently hoped that HtFCE would, following the Agency's International 
Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle, help to restore the 
credibility of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and would pave the way to a 
new and workable international agreement, acceptable to recipient and supplier 
States alike and providing a legal and moral basis for a new nuclear world order. 
23. Malaysia had acted as host for the first regional training course on nuclear 
laboratory technicians' training, in October and November 1977, and the seventh 
meeting under the Regional Co-operative Agreement with Member States in Asia 
and the Pacific for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science 
and Technology (RCA), in June 1978 - the first RCA meeting held in that region. 
In hosting the RCA meeting, Malaysia had demonstrated its support for that 
collective endeavour and its commitment to regional co-operation. In that 
connection, it called upon the Agency to seek ways to increase the funding of 
that activity and to strengthen the institutional structure within the Agency 
in order to foster the programme; it also appreciated the action taken by Japan 
in that regard and hoped that the rich members of RCA would make appropriate 
contributions. 

GC(XXII)/0E.204 
page 8 

24. Mr. GROZA (Romania) said that, in the present era of scientific and 
technical revolution, the peaceful application of nuclear energy was one of 
the cornerstones of programmes for the economic and social development of 
nations. Romania considered, as had been stated by its President, Mr. Ceausescu, 
in his message to the 21st regular session of the General Conference, that 
the Agency bore a great responsibility and should work towards putting an 
end to the nuclear arms race, eliminating the monopoly of certain States with 
regard to the production and utilization of nuclear energy and facilitating 
the free access of nations to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, 
in order to accelerate the progress of all countries, particularly developing 
countries, and to raise the standard of living and level of civilization of 
all mankind. 
25. In the international sphere a new policy of collaboration between States 
on the basis of principles of full equality and respect for national independence 
and sovereignty, non-interference in the internal affairs of others and mutual 
advancement was in the emergence. That was the only policy which could assure 
democratic development of the world, friendly and co-operative relations between 
all nations, security, peace and progress. It was Romania's firm conviction 
that the adoption of effective disarmament measures would pave the way for the 
establishment of the new international economic and political order. Romania 
also felt strongly that efforts aimed at achieving disarmament should be 
concentrated on nuclear disarmament in view of the great threat which nuclear 
weapons posed to the future of humanity. 
26. At the same time, he wished to stress that the measures aimed at reducing 
the nuclear arms race should not be allowed in any way to impede the use by 
States of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In that context he wished to 
stress the need to assure free access of all States to the latest advances in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the unhindered large-scale transfer of 
nuclear technology, material and equipment, and the reduction and elimination 
of the gap existing between the developed and developing countries. To that 
end the Agency should give more effective assistance to developing countries 
endeavouring to obtain the full benefits of the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy, particularly as regards the introduction of nuclear power 
programmes. 
GC(XXH)/OR.204 
page 9 

27. The Romanian delegation considered that the Agency should involve itself 
more closely in the efforts being undertaken within the United Nations system 
to bring about a new international economic order. It was in that context 
that his country had proposed the elaboration and adoption of a comprehensive 
action programme under the auspices of the Agency for international collaboration 
in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and declared itself ready 
to join with other Member States in setting up such a programme. 
28. In the past year the Agency had achieved significant results in its efforts 
to support the activities of Member States, in particular through its technical 
pssistance programme. Significant results had likewise been achieved in fields 
such as training of personnel, nuclear safety and radiological protection. 
29» At the same time, Romania shared the conviction that the Agency should and 
could respond to a greater degree to the legitimate requests of Kember countries, 
particularly developing countries, for an increase in technical assistance, 
which had suffered in recent years as a result of the trend within the Agency 
to concentrate resources on the safeguards function. The time had arrived 
when the proposals that had been made for restoring the balance between the 
promotional and control aspects of the Agency's programme should be examined 
and acted upon. 

30. The Romanian delegation supported the Agency's draft programme for the siz 
coming years because it contained numerous activities corresponding to the 
principal requirements of developing countries, including Romania, with respect 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In particular, Romania welcomed the 
priority accorded to nuclear power, nuclear technologies, nuclear safety and 
nuclear physics training activities. His delegation felt that of all the 
activities being pursued by the Agency the highest priority should be accorded 
in the years ahead to the technical assistance programme. If the Agency were 
to fully discharge its obligations in the field of technical assistance, it 
would be necessary to increase the resources allocated for that purpose to the 
level of those expended on safeguards. 
31. The Romanian delegation supported proposals to establish large-scale 
projects which, being spread over several years, could help resolve some of 
the major problems of the recipient countries. 

GC(mi)/OR.204 

page 10 

32. The adoption of new guiding principles for -the provision of -technical 
assistance should help to strengthen the Agency's activities in that field. 
33. Romania would contribute to the General Fund for 1979 in an amount 
corresponding to its base rate of assessment* 
34. Romania, a developing socialist country, was convinced that the peaceful 
application of nuclear energy was very important if not indispensable for rapid 
technical progress and for harmonious and dynamic development of the national 
economy* 
35« In Romania the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were being applied to resolve 
problems in the most diverse sectors of the economy, particularly in fields of 
scientific research and engineering of direct application to industry, agriculture, 
medicine, biology, hydrology etc. 

36. As a result of concerted efforts significant progress had been made in Romania in 
the fields of nuclear physics, solid-etate physics, plasma physics and neutron 
physics. That had made it possible to resolve a number of problems in various 
branches of industry, produce a wide range of isotopes for domestic application 
and design equipment and facilities for use in that area* 
37« The technical assistance and support which Romania had received from the 
Agency and UNDP in connection with the introduction of certain nuclear techniques 
had proved of particular value. 

38. In order that the basis might be established for wider'participation of 
developing countries in the activities of the Agency and its decision-eaaking 
processes, the Romanian delegation had supported and would continue to support 
recent initiatives aimed at_ achieving more equitable representation of those 
countries on the Board of Governors and the General Committee of the General 
Conference. 
39* In the same spirit the Romanian delegation was pleased to see the 
delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam present at the General Conference 
for the first time and extended to it a warm welcome. 

40. In conformity with the position adopted by the Romanian Government, his 
delegation wished to express its solidarity with the people of Korea in their 
quest for peaceful unification without any external interference in accordance 
with the proposals put forward by the Government of the Democratic People's 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 11 

Republic of Korea, and in consequence it contested the right of the delegation 
of South Korea to speak in the name of the whole of Korea. 

41. The particular importance of the peaceful application of nuclear energy 
was also evidenced by the role it was accorded at the United Nations, where a 
large number of actions had been initiated aimed at promoting international 
co-operation in that area and increasing the contribution of the atom to the 
process of development and to reducing and eliminating the gap between the 
developed and the developing countries* 
42. That concern with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a means of 
promoting economic and social development was reflected by Resolution 32/50 
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations at its 32nd session, 
inviting all States to consider convening an international conference, under 
the auspices of the United Nations, aimed at promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. The Romanian Government supported that initiative, as it 
considered that suoh a conference could play an important role in assuring the 
access of developing countries to the peaceful applications of nuclear energy 
and the unhindered transfer of nuclear technology, materials and equipment 
on a large scale to those countries. 

43. The Romanian delegation valued highly the contribution being made by the 
Agency to the INPCE programme and hoped that all the objectives drawn up at 
the initial INPCE conference would be achieved. 

GC(mi)/OR.204 
page 12 

44. Mr. BILAM (Israel) said that his country regarded nuclear power as an 
economically acceptable solution to the world's energy requirements in general, 
and to Israel's national needs in particular. Since the 1960s, Israel had 
considered various types of nuclear plants, with special emphasis on dualpurpose 
types. The first plants considered had been those with a capacity of 
200 MH and able to desalinate 150 x 10 m of water a year. During the past 
decade the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission had examined the possibility of 
installing bigger reactors in order to keep up with the new national energy 
programme. Economic surveys had shown later that capacities of 600 MW, or 
even °XX> MW, possessed considerable advantages; it would be possible to desalinate 
100 x 10 m of water a year in the case of each 900 MH reactor, only 
8% of the installed capacity being lost, 
45« Israel was convinced that nuclear power programmes could be implemented 
in developing countries only within the framework of wide-scale international 
co-operation and under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
Furthermore, because of the experience required, the Agency was the most 
appropriate international body to promote the study, development and utilization 
of other, non-conventional energy sources, from wind power to nuclear fusion. 

46. It was encouraging to see that, in spite of difficulties, the Agency's 
technical assistance programme had led to the successful implementation of 
national nuclear programmes in a number of other developing countries. He had 
followed with great interest the efforts made and the results gained by the 
Division of Technical Assistance in improving its operational system, and it 
was to be hoped that the new criteria for evaluating national requests for 
technical assistance would be applied in the future on an equal basis in all 
cases in order to reduce inconsistencies to a minimum. 
47. The Member States of the Agency were looking forward to the re-unification 
of the Agency's different functions under one roof during the coming year, and 
there was no doubt that the transfer to the U1K) City and the physical re-grouping 
of the various units would increase its efficiency to the benefit of all Member 
States. 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 13 

48. He noted with satisfaction the Agency's training programme in general, and 
the special emphasis placed on training courses in the field of nuclear power 
plants, from which Israel had itself benefitted in the past, and would surely 
do so in the future. 
49 • The Agency was to be commended on the initiative taken in sponsoring 
deliberations on a convention for the physical protection of nuclear materials. 
It was only natural that certain differences existed in the approach adopted 
by suppliers and consumers of nuclear materials in defining the scope of 

such a convention, but all countries were clearly convinced that the world 
should stand united against all forms of terror that might threaten and 
endanger the existence of a community, a nation or even the whole of 
humanity if nuclear materials were not ensured of the appropriate physical 
protection. 

50. In conclusion, he stated that Israel, for its part, would do everything 
possible to promote international and regional co-operation in all fields of 
energy and overall progress. The recent discussions held at Camp David would 
hopefully help in that endeavour and also in combatting what the Director 
General had termed "the pollution of poverty" in order to create a better 
world. 
51. Mr. CAGIATI (Italy), after congratulating the President on his 
election, recalled that at the last General Conference the Italian delegation 
had emphasized the important aims which it believed the Agency would have to 
pursue in the immediate future, such as contributing to the widest possible 
dissemination of nuclear information and technology, promoting the availability 
of nuclear materials and verifying that nuclear technologies and materials 
were not diverted to non-peaceful ends. Those aims had been stressed because 
of the fear that the so-called non-proliferation policies being developed in 
certain States might have negative effects on nuclear development at the very 
time when the international community was becoming aware that it would 
inevitably have to make use of the new energy source. 
52. Italy fully shared the current anxiety about proliferation and realized 
that certain States might feel a special sense of responsibility. However, 
there was no reason to seek new unilateral solutions outside international 

GC(XXn)/OR.204 
page 14 

agreements already in force. Such solutions might, in fact, give rise to 
doubts as to whether there was any real intention of collaborating actively in 
the solution of one of the most serious contemporary problems, namely the 
provision of adequate energy supplies. 

53. The fundamental task remained that of implementing, and if necessary 
improving, the existing international instruments, especially KPT, which 
continued to be the basic defence against the risk of proliferation. The new 
non-proliferation policies had only arisen because of the obvious intrinsic 
weakness of NTP, a weakness which was essentially due to two causes: the fact 
that the Treaty was not universal and the disparity in the treatment of 
nuclear-weapon and non-nucleai^-weapon countries. The first factor had led to 
discrimination between those non-nuclear-weapon countries which had acceded to 
BPT and those which remained outside it and in practice enjoyed greater 
liberty to develop their own nuclear activities. 
54. The Italian delegation fully agreed with the Director General's remark 
that the real threat to peace was represented by the existing nuclear 
weapons arsenals that were continuing to grow steadily. Moreover, the 
nuclear-weapon States were, at least potentially, the largest suppliers of 
facilities and technology. They were therefore in the best position to remedy 
the situation by abolishing the discrimination created by HPT, reducing their 
national nuclear arsenals and collaborating actively in the development of the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. If Articles IV and VI of the 
Treaty were put into the fullest possible effect, there would no longer be any 
temptation to retain the option of developing nuclear weapons and remaining 
outside the Treaty. 
55. The fact that the United States, the United Kingdom and Prance had 
voluntarily concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency was a first step 
towards eliminating the discrimination. The nuclear-*»eapon States must show 
they had the political will to end the nuclear and conventional arms race and 
to proceed along the road to general and complete disarmament under strict andeffective 
international control. The Agency had an important role to play in 
seeing that nuclear development was not endangered in that procedure. 
56. Italy was convinced that if the current DIFCE studies were carried out 
effectively and with strict objectivity and a sense of responsibility, they 
would prove a useful attempt to find optimum solutions which might satisfy both 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 15 

exporting and recipient countries. For its part, Italy was ready to contribute 
to the study of any initiative, such as the creation of regional fuel cycle and 
excess plutonium storage centres, which might truly contribute to halting 
proliferation while guaranteeing rapid supply at competitive prices of the fuel 
required by countries undergoing nuclear development. Some of those initiatives 
raised considerable political, legal and economic difficulties whose solution 
required the maximum goodwill and collaboration from all concerned, but if a 
price had to be paid for reducing the risk of proliferation, that price must be 
equitably divided, because peace and security were assets which belonged to the 
whole international community. 

57 • Among the various activities undertaken or initiated by the Agency, special 
mention should be made of the preparation of an international agreement on the 
physical protection of nuclear material, since that was a measure which had 
been urgently needed. 

58. Italy had noted with satisfaction the principal conclusions of the 
Safeguards Implementation Report, including the fact that the number of 
facilities and the amount of material under safeguards were showing a constant 
and substantial increase. However, the quantification of such extremely 
difficult concepts as "threshold amount", "quantities of safeguards 
significance" and "conversion time" was too difficult a problem to be left to 
the limited number of experts in the Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards 
Implementation (SAGSl). The concepts should be developed and approved at the 
highest international level so that universal agreement could be achieved. 
In drawing up its safeguards policies and procedures, the Agency should also 
bear in mind possible contributions that might be made by other systems. In 
that respect, the supranational experience of the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EORATOM), which covered a period of 20 years, was unique. 
59. During 1978, hundreds of scientists from all over the world, had taken 
part in the numerous activities organized by the Trieste International Centre 
for Theoretical Physics, thus confirming its unique role as a meeting point 
and scientific facility for scientists from the developing countries. It was 
because the Italian Government realized the importance of the Centre and the 

GC(XXH)/OR.204 
page 16 

need for it to continue its activities that it had decided to increase its 
financial contribution to more than US $700 000 as from 1978. 

60. Italy, which at the beginning of the 1960s had, together with the United 
States and the United Kingdom, been at the forefront of world nuclear power 
production, had during 1978 approved a major programme for the construction of 
new nuclear power stations to be added to the four already in operation and the 
additional four ordered in 1974. The Caorso power station, which had attained 
criticality at the end of 1977, had started generating power in May from an 
850 MW(e) boiling-water reactor (BWR). The construction of the plant had 
taken only seven years and brought the country's total installed nuclear capacity 
to 1400 MW(e). In spite of serious difficulties, the Montalto di Castro 
power station, which was to be equipped with two BWRs of approximately 1000 MW(e) 
each, was finally under construction. The siting details of a further station 
were on the point of being decided. The national Energy Programme approved in 
December 1977 foresaw the construction of a further eight nuclear reactors 
and the relevant tenders had been invited. Steps had been taken to enable the 
nuclear industry to respond more fully to the national needs, especially with 
regard to the rapid implementation of the national Energy Programme. 

61. Finally, Italy wished to congratulate the Agency on its activities and 
on the contribution it was making day by day to the solution of serious world 
problems. In reconfirming its full support, Italy hoped that the Agency would 
continue to be in a position to meet its important responsibilities. 
62. Mr. GEORGE (Australia), after congratulating the President on his 
election, thanked the Director General for the stimulating account given in his 
opening statement on the situation in the nuclear power industry today. The 
Director General's opinions were valuable and all would, he was sure, take 
careful note of his imaginative and penetrating approach and advice. 
63. The Director General, in common with the rest of the world, had witnessed 
over the past year an increased world-wide interest in nuclear power generation 
and nuclear matters despite a downward revision of the projected growth rates 
of nuclear power programmes by some advanced industrial nations; he had pointed 
out some of the difficulties faced by the nuclear industry, as also what was 
needed to remove those difficulties. Without going over the same ground, he 
would like to point to some of the matters that had caused that increase of interest 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 17 

both in nuclear matters and in the Agency itself, and then to outline briefly 
relevant developments in Australia since the last General Conference session. 

64. All were aware that during the past year the range of issues and tasks 
that the Agency had been called upon to deal with had broadened. The main 
new task had been associated with the Agency's valuable support of MFCE. 
As the Director General's statement indicated, a decisive stage had been reached 
in IHFCE. For its part, Australia was encouraged at the progress made. The 
work seemed to be going well and many of the Agency's Member States were 
working co-operatively and productively. 
65; The Agency had continued to carry out its traditional roles in the 
promotion of the use of nuclear energy and the application of nuclear techniques 
for peaceful purposes and in the strengthening of a comprehensive safeguards 
regime. Technical assistance was a vital activity of the Agency and Australia 
strongly supported the programme in that area. It was glad to see so much effort 
being put into the task, Australia also attached vital importance to effective 
Agency safeguards. It was necessary that safeguards should be continually 
revised and improved; the Safeguards Implementation Reports constituted a 
valuable means to that end, as well as serving to provide significant assurance 
to the international community. Australia welcomed the conclusion in the Annual 
Report for 1977 that in none of the 4° States in which inspections had been 
carried out in 1976 had there been any diversion of a significant quantity of 
safeguarded nuclear material. It noted with satisfaction that, on the basis 
of the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1977, a similar conclusion was 
possible in respect to inspections carried out in 1977. 

66. In common with other nuclear suppliers, Australia recognised that i t had 
a responsibility to ensure that adequate safeguards were applied in respect to 
any nuclear material it exported. Australia regarded the action taken in 
January 1978 by major nuclear supplier countries in notifying the Director 
General of common guidelines for their nuclear exports as a significant and 
welcome development. For its own part, Australia had indicated that it s 
nuclear export policy encompassed, among other things, all of the elements 
comprising the common guidelines in question. 

GC(XXri)/OR.204 
page 18 

67. The Agency had. had an important role to play in -the negotiations designed 
to lead to the conclusion of a convention on the physical protection of nuclear 
materials, facilities and transports, to which Australia attached great 
importance. With the progress made recently in discussion on the scope of 
such a convention, it was to be hoped that an agreed text would emerge early 
in 1979. 
68. The Agency's budget for 1979 had been the subject of strong criticism. 
Australia recognised that the Agency was engaged in carrying out important 
tasks, as also that certain factors, such as the transfer to the Donaupark 
and currency fluctuations, had greatly increased its costs. Obviously all 
costs should be kept under strict review but, given that the Member States 
themselves had imposed those important tasks on the Agency, the funds to do 
the job had to be forthcoming. 
69. In 1977, he had attempted to inform the General Conference about the background 
to Australia's decisions on the development of- its uranium resources 
and the strengthening of non-proliferation and nuclear safeguards regimes, 
and he would like to bring it up to date about some of the developments since 
then. 
70. As a major source of uranium, his country accepted that it had a 
responsibility to help provide the world with its uranium requirements in 
order that the world's legitimate energy needs might be met. In the past 12 
months shipments of uranium totalling over 1300 tonnes to meet approved 
export contracts had been exported from the re-commissioned Mary Kathleen mine 
and from the Government's stockpile of yellow cake. At the past weekend the 
Australian Government had been able to announce agreement with the aboriginal 
members of the Northern Land Council which would allow the Ranger Uranium 
Project in the Northern Territory to proceed. The Ranger project was one 
of the largest in the world and it was hoped that construction of the mine 
would start before the beginning of the wet season about six weeks ahead, so 
that the first production would come on to the market by 1981. 
GC(XXH)/OR.204 
page 19 

71. On 1 June 1978, the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia had announced the 
general guidelines that would govern the commercial arrangements relating to 
the export of Australian uranium. To ensure the orderly development and export 
of Australia's uranium resources, shipments would be controlled on the basis 
of individual consignments for which export certificates would be issued once 
all aspects of Government policy were satisfied, including compliance with the 
regulation that the consignment was in accordance with an approved contract 
relating to an approved project. In addition, Australia's safeguards policy 
had to be fully complied with. 
72. At an appropriate time a Uranium Export Authority was to be established, 
to advise the Minister for Trade and Resources on those matters and to carry 
out other functions related to the supply of, demand for, and development of 
uranium resources. That machinery would ensure that the Government maintained 
strong regulation and, control over uranium exports in the national interest, 
in a manner consistent with its policy on uranium development as announced in 
August following receipt of the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry results. 
73. Australia had already signed bilateral safeguards agreements with 
Finland and the Phillippines and negotiations were under way with other 
potential customers. In accordance with its approach to the matter of risk of 
nuclear weapons proliferation, Australia would continue to work vigorously for 
a workable international regime. Its exports were directed towards countries 
that were signatories of HPT. 
74. As he had said, Australia strongly supported technical assistance in the 
nuclear field. It had given support to Agency programmes in that area and 
would be making its voluntary contribution to the General Fund target of 
US $8.5 million in accordance with its base rate of assessment. 
75* In 1977, it had acceded to the Regional Co-operative Agreement for 
Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology for South Asia, South-East Asia and the Pacific (RCA) and that 
agreement was providing a focus for its special support to technical assistance, 
over and above its contribution to the Agency's voluntary funds. An RCA 
meeting had been held recently in Kuala Lumpur and the proceedings had 
proved most helpful in identifying activities to which Australia felt it 
could usefully contribute. Australia would be making specific proposals to 
RCA members at a meeting to be held later in the week. It also had under 


GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 20 


study a major training scheme for Malaysian scientists and technicians to staff 
the new nuclear institute in that country. Finally, it noted with satisfaction 
that Japan had decided to join the RCA, a development which would further 
strengthen that exciting regional initiative. 


76. In conclusion, he said that everyone knew that nuclear issues affected the 
whole of mankind. Australia recognized that there were issues yet to be resolved 
and that one of the great heeds was to gather information on which to base balanced 
judgements. All were agreed, he thought, on the need for winning public support. 
Australia had become involved in many activities in the nuclear field. As one of 
the co-chairmen of Working Group 3 of INFCE and a participant in the other working 
groups, Australia was trying to contribute to the search for a system which, apart 
from providing for the world's energy needs would be acceptable to all and harmful 
to none. It recognized that the work being done in INFCE supplemented the work of 
the Agency in that area. The following year would bring INFCE to the culmination 
point and that would herald a time of decision-making for all. It was to be hoped 
that deliberations at the present session would contribute to those decisions. 
77• Mr. KOLYKHAW (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) said that his delegation 
welcomed the representatives of the Socialist Republic of Viet Ham at the 
present session of the General Conference. The courage and steadfastness of the 
Vietnamese people in their long struggle for freedom and national unity, and their 
present struggle to preserve the inviolability of their territory and their independence, 
had given Viet Nam well deserved international authority. His delegation 
was convinced that the participation of Viet Nam in the Agency's activities would 
further enhance the Agency's role in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 


78. In the third decade of its highly varied and fruitful work, the International 
Atomic Energy Agency now found itself at a juncture where the need to stop the arms 
race and achieve ultimate disarmament, through the efforts of the socialist countries 
and of all peace-loving States, stood at the centre of international politics. 
The special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament 
and the decisions taken in the course of that session - including the decision to 
convene a universal conference on disarmament in the very near future - testified 
to the earnest desire of the peoples of the world to curb the dangerous arms race. 
"To stop the arms race, to make progress towards reducing and ultimately eliminating 
the threat of a nuclear catastrophe" was, in the emphatic words of Leonid Brezhnev, 
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union, "the main problem on the agenda of our lives". At the special session of 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 21 


the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament the Soviet Union had 
addressed itself to all States of the world with the appeal that agreement should 
be reached on a number of urgent measures capable of halting the arms race. 


79- Reports about the development and imminent manufacture of a neutron bomb 
were causing profound alarm throughout the world. The conclusion of a convention 
prohibiting that weapon would be practical evidence of the determination of States 
to halt the nuclear arms race and save the world from nuclear war, 


80. The Soviet Union persistently emphasized how vital it was not to allow the 
development of new types of weapons for mass destruction; it urged that negotiations 
should be started with a view to halting the production of nuclear 
weapons of all kinds and gradually reducing the stocks of such weapons until they 
were ultimately eliminated altogether, and urged likewise that further efforts 
should be made to strengthen the international non-proliferation regime. The 
Soviet Union had, moreover, declared that it would never use nuclear weapons 
against States which renounced the production and procurement of such weapons 
and did not possess them on their territory. 
81. On the eve of the 33rd session of the General Assembly of the United Nations 
the Soviet Union had come forward with a new initiative in the interests of peace, 
proposing the inclusion on the agenda for the session, as an important and urgent 
question, of an item entitled "Conclusion of an international convention to 
strengthen guarantees for the safety of non-nuclear-weapon States", and at the same 
time submitting the draft of such a convention. Thanks to the firm and consistent 
efforts of the Soviet Union and other countries belonging to the socialist community, 
together with all peace-loving countries on earth, some progress had already 
been made towards curbing the nuclear arms race. 
82. Fifteen years before, the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, 
in Outer Space and Under Water (the Partial Test Ban Treaty)-', to which 
more than 100 States had subsequently adhered, had been signed in Moscow, At the 
present time trilateral negotiations were continuing between the Soviet Union, the 
United States of America and the United Kingdom with a view to drafing an agreement 
for a complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests. 
83. The past decade had shown that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) had become an important barrier to the spread of nuclear weapons and 
2/ The text of the Treaty is reproduced in Legal Series No. 9 (STl/PUB/387). 



GC(XXn)/OR.204 
page 22 


had ushered in a qualitatively new era in the peaceful utilization of atomic 
energy. However, serious concern was felt at the nuclear preparations of South 
Africa and Israel, which were supported by imperialist circles and were in 
flagrant contradiction to the efforts of the Agency aimed at eliminating the 
danger of nuclear proliferation. Those activities were not compatible with the 
stand taken by the independent countries of Africa and the Near East, which were 
aimed at turning the African continent and the Hear East into a non-nuclear zone. 
One could not help being perplexed, too, by the position of the non-nuclear-weapon 
States Members of EURATOM, which in every possible way were deferring the effective 
application of Agency safeguards to their nuclear industry and were thereby 
seeking special privileges for themselves. 


84. The Byelorussian SSR actively favoured all proposals aimed at limiting the 
arms race and achieving disarmament. Colossal financial and material resources 
would then be liberated for peaceful uses. 
85. At present and in the foreseeable future, further development of nuclear 
power was clearly essential; power reactors and research reactors were needed 
in larger sizes and greater numbers, as were fuel reprocessing plants and supplies 
of fuel. Verification procedures could be applied to such operations with the 
requisite efficiency and reliability only on the basis of automated systems for 
the collection, transmission, storage and processing of information. Byelorussia 
accordingly supported the organizational changes that had already been carried out 
or were being planned in the Department of Safeguards, and it was also in favour of 
activities aimed at further technical development of safeguards procedures. 
86. Attributing great importance as it did to the provision of technical assistance 
to developing Member States, Byelorussia would be making a voluntary contribution 
of 20 000 roubles (in national currency) for that purpose; an effective 
combination of technical assistance with essential safeguards measures would further 
strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime and would accordingly allow further 
accomplishment of the tasks arising out of the Agency's Statute and out of NPT. 
Thus Byelorussia supported the proposal that safeguards should be applied in 
connection with technical assistance. Indeed, it believed that safeguards should 
be applied in connection with all forms of technical assistance, but particularly 
in sensitive areas such as fuel reprocessing, uranium enrichment and plutonium 
production technology. 


87. Byelorussia objected to the provision of technical assistance to Israel, 
the Chilean Junta and the South Korean regime. 


GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 23 


88. His delegation had carefully studied the Agency's programme for 1979-84 
which was now before the Conference. It considered that the programme was, on 
the whole, in line with the requirements of Member States, the Agency's capabilities, 
and the organization's goals and tasks as they emerged from the Statute. 
The very considerable and successful work done by the Secretariat in preparing 
the Agency's programme in such highly important areas as safeguards, nuclear 
power and reactors, and nuclear safety and environmental protection deserved 
commendation. 
89. The chapter on nuclear power and reactors gave, in the opinion of his 
delegation, a correct reflection of current trends in power generation; it 
took account of the increasing difficulty of forecasting the development of 
nuclear power and the rate at which it would be introduced in various branches 
of the economy; and it dealt satisfactorily with fuel cycle questions and the 
technical problems associated with the development of new reactor types. Thus, 
a growth in the programme entitled "Energy forecasts and the economic assessment 
of nuclear power and its fuel cycle" was justified. 
90. The Agency was doing excellent work in the collection, evaluation and 
annual publication of data on operating experience with power reactors of 
"proven types". At the same time it would be extremely useful to have more 
abundant information on the development and operation of experimental (demonstration) 
power plants using breeder reactors of various kinds and reactors 
designed to produce low-temperature and high-temperature nuclear heat. 
91. Among the most important tasks under the programme on nuclear safety and 
environmental protection was the gradual production of clear, comprehensive and 
internationally acceptable codes and guides on questions related to nuclear 
safety. Another important task was the provision of up-to-date information on 
what had been achieved in that field in Member States. 
92. The Agency's work on the physical protection and safety of nuclear materials 
was vital to international security and the preservation of human life and health. 
Of urdoubted importance, too, was the study of all questions connected with the 
establishment of regional fuel cycle centres. 
93. Further improvements in the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) 
designed to provide Member States with comprehensive information on nuclear 
subjects deserved universal support and approval. 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 24 

94. However, while the technical aspects of the programme could in principle 
elicit no objections, the planned budgetary increase for 1979 of 26.9% and the 

corresponding increase of assessed contributions by 30.2% - with an increase of 

only 5-6% for actual programme expansion - was something that could not but 

cause serious concern. It would be useful to review the programme for the years 

ahead and either reduce or exclude activities which could be carried out by other 

international organizations or on the basis of agreements between States, and also 

to curtail those activities which had already become common in the majority of 

developed countries - in particular work in certain fields of biology, the food 

industry and agriculture. 

95. The Byelorussian SSR was moving, in the full bloom of creative power, 
towards a glorious jubilee - the sixtieth anniversary of its foundation as a 
Soviet Socialist Republic. Sixty years of building socialism and communism, 
the practical realization of Lenin's programme on the national question - those 
achievements had confirmed the Byelorussian people's sense of national identity 
and had abolished its economic and cultural backwardness. 
960 Within the harmonious family of Soviet peoples, Byelorussia had met with 
outstanding success in economic and cultural development and had become a 
highly-developed industrial and agrarian socialist republic. By 1940 industrial 
production in Byelorussia had grown to more than eight times the 1913 level. 

97. The homeland had suffered severely during the Second World War. The 
fascists had demolished and burnt 209 towns and district centres and 9200 villages 
in Byelorussia alone. But the whole country had helped to overcome 
the consequences of destruction, and by 1950 Byelorussia's industrial production 
had risen above the pre-war level. 
98. The emphasis in the Republic's industry now lay on machine and instrument 
construction, petroleum chemistry, radio electronics, the production of mineral 
fertilizers and other branches of production in the forefront of modern science 
and technology. 
99. In the years of Soviet power industrial production in Byelorussia had 
increased by a factor of 192, agricultural production by a factor of 3.5, and 

the national income - in just the last 20 years - by a factor of 4.8. Jimong 

the Republic's workers, 72% had enjoyed intermediate and higher education, 

whereas before the Revolution eight out of ten Byelorussians could neither read 

nor write. 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 25 

100. Socialism had created- unlimited possibilities for science to flourish, 
too, in all national regions of the Soviet State. The country's vast and 
steadily growing potential enabled Byelorussian scientists to work productively 
in all branches of the natural sciences and the humanities. 
101. In some branches of scientific research the institutes of the Byelorussian 
Academy of Sciences were leading the field; the Republic had established 
authoritative schools in such disciplines as spectroscopy and luminescence, 
heat exchange and mass transfer, differential equations, computer techniques, 
the mechanics of metallic polymers, nuclear power and so on. 
102. Radioisotopes and irradiation techniques were being used extensively 
in the most various branches of science and technology, medicine and agriculture, 
to produce new engineering and construction materials or to modify 
old materials. Unique irradiation facilities were being installed for those 
purposes. 
103. Work in the nuclear power field was being pursued in two directions: 
firstly, the development of nuclear plants using proven reactor types to 
supply low-potential heat to Minsk and other industrial centres, and, 
secondly, the development of plants using a radically new coolant and 
working fluid - nitrogen tetroxide. In the latter sphere a broadly based 
programme of fundamental research and design work was being carried out at 
the Institute for Nuclear Power of the Byelorussian Academy of Sciences. 
Nuclear power stations using a gas-cooled fast reactor had been shown, by 
the studies carried out in Byelorussia, to have a number of advantages over 
plants using liquid metal and helium coolant. As a necessary stage on the 
road to building large power plants of that type, a pilot plant with a 
capacity of 300 MW was being designed which would enable the systems and 
equipment needed for the large commercial power stations of the future to 
be developed. 
104. The peaceful utilization of nuclear energy constituted one of the most 
important tasks of the modern era; i t was a task that could be accomplished 
for the good of mankind only through broad international co-operation, in a 
world enjoying a stable peace and security for all. That being so, Byelorussia 
attached great value to the Agency's activities and itself took an active part 
in them. His delegation accordingly wished the Agency every success in its 
future work. 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 

page 26 

105. Mr. CHAGULA (United Republic of Tanzania), after congratulating the 
President on his election, expressed his gratitude to the Government of Austria 
for the facilities it had placed at the disposal of the Agency since its inception 
He also commended the efforts made in securing the Agency's Permanent Headquarters. 
He then congratulated the delegation of Viet Nam, which was participating 
in the General Conference for the first time after a long and successful 
struggle against imperialist aggression. 
106. Turning to the needs of the developing countries, which formed the greater 
part of the Agency's membership, he said that they were mainly attracted by the 
Agency's technical assistance programme and particularly by the aid given in the 
form of training, equipment and the services of experts. Their concern, however, 
was that too littl e technical assistance had so far been provided to the 
developing countries and the Agency had been unable to meet the expectations of 
most of the recipient countries. The usual policy had been to associate technical 
assistance provided by the Agency with a project. That was a fair policy so long 
as the recipient country had the capacity to continue with a project after the 
departure of the Agency's expert. There was also a small group of Member States 
who were engaged in the first stages of developing their nuclear programmes and, 
in Ms view, the Agency should not overlook their needs. Their priority was the 
development of the necessary manpower to carry out the projects associated with 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy for their country's development; his country 
belonged to that group. Projects were limited not only by the lack of manpower 
but also because the short-term training- courses organized by the Agency were 

not designed to cater for their needs and therefore Member States just beginning 
to develop their nuclear power programmes found that their effective participation 
in the Agency's technical assistance programme was very limited. He pointed out, 
however, that his observations on technical assistance had been partially overtaken 
by recent events. In 1977 "the Agency had noted with concern that most 
developing countries were not benefitting sufficiently from the technical 
assistance available. The Secretariat had, therefore, appointed a team of experts 
to explore and recommend a course of action to help developing Member States and 

it was gratifying to note that no time had been lost in implementing the Expert 
Group's recommendations. Among the latter's recommendations had been the 

introduction of programming missions aimed at assisting Member States to formulate 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 27 

their requests to the Agency and to identify areas for the provision of medium


and large-scale technical assistance. In July 1978, Tanzania had been visited by 

a programming mission, which had concentrated mainly on agriculture, health and 
mining. The visit had afforded his country a rare opportunity to collaborate in 
formulating projects in each of those three sectors - for the development of the 

phosphates and uranium deposits at Minjingu, the establishment of a nuclear 
medicine facility for diagnostic, treatment and research purposes, and the 

establishment of a radiation protection service unit. However, from the little 

experience of technical assistance which had been gained over the past two years, 

and taking into consideration some of the problems of recipient countries, he felt 
that the Agency should make a greater effort to achieve a more effective technical 
assistance programme. In many developing countries the problem was a lack of 

sufficient trained manpower, of equipment and of the scientific and technological 
basis necessary for the effective application of atomic energy, and he strongly 
requested that the Agency should give priority to those Member States which were 
just beginning to build up their nuclear energy capabilities, particularly in 
training and in the procurement of equipment. His country was of the opinion 
that the Agency's technical assistance programme should be accorded a high 
priority in the Agency's budget and that its dependence on the voluntary contributions 
of Member States should be reduced. 

107. Turning to the question of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT), he said that from its inception the United Nations had been very 
seriously concerned about weapons of mass destruction. Although since then 
the United Nations had considered the subject to be most urgent, the threat of 
nuclear war on a world-wide scale had increased considerably and after the 
General Assembly's resolution on disarmament in 1946 no concrete action on 
disarmament had been agreed upon until 1965, when the Partial Test Ban Treaty 
(PTBT) was concluded. By then the five permanent members of the United Nations 
Security Council possessed nuclear weapons. PTBT had been the result of long 
and difficult negotiations, but those negotiations had produced a treaty 
prohibiting tests only in the atmosphere and had not resulted in an agreement on 
the prohibition of underground testing. The United States and the Soviet Union 
had already developed the technology for the underground testing of nuclear 
weapons, and therefore the ban on nuclear weapons testing in other environments 
did not put an end to their tests. Prance and China had not developed underground 
nuclear weapons testing technology and consequently they did not sign PTBT. 

GG(XXII)/OR.204 
page 28 

108. Tanzania signed FTBT, however, and the rest of the United Nations and other 
non-member States had welcomed it because it constituted a gesture of intent 
by the United States and the Soviet Union towards the elimination of nuclear 
weapons. However, no agreement to destroy existing nuclear weapons or even to 
ban underground nuclear weapons testing had been reached. With MPT, an attempt 
had been made in 1968 only to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to those who 
did not possess them. HPT did not require States which had nuclear weapons to 
destroy them, nor did it prohibit any further development or manufacture of such 
weapons. The Treaty was therefore plainly inadequate and avoided tackling the 
main issue, because those against whom HPT was directed had, at least at the time, 
no capacity to manufacture nuclear weapons. In fact, such a treaty did more harm 
than good to the world's disarmament efforts. It might be thought that Member 
States who held that view were in the minority. However, during the 1975 conference 
to review the implementation of the Treaty, a great deal of dissatisfaction 
was expressed by most non-nuclear-weapon Member States, who stated that the undertaking 
of the nuclear-weapon Member States to proceed with effective nuclear 
disarmament negotiations had so far not yielded any tangible results. And four 
years after that review conference, hardly any progress had been made by the 
nuclear-weapon Member States in reducing the nuclear arms race. Indeed, many 
parties to the Treaty, including Tanzania, felt frustrated and concerned that 
some nuclear-weapon States Members of the Agency who were parties to the Treaty 
were continuing to supply nuclear weapons technology to States such as South Africa 
and Israel. Tanzania strongly condemned such collaboration. The Agency should, 
therefore, think seriously about reviewing the Treaty so as to make it more 
equitable and more likely to benefit all mankind. Otherwise, Tanzania would 
continue to adhere to its current stand on the Treaty. That did not mean, 
however, that Tanzania did not appreciate the Agency's safeguards methods or its 
technical assistance programme as a whole. That programme was particularly 
welcome in the areas of training and planning for nuclear power stations in 
developing countries. Tanzania fully supported the concept of establishing 
regional nuclear fuel cycle centres, not for non-proliferation reasons but for 
the assistance they would provide to those non-nuclear-weapon Member States which 
were ready to embark on nuclear power programmes. It was, however, to be hoped 
that the use of regional nuclear fuel cycle centres would not be subject to 
Member States being a signatory to HPT, as that would considerably reduce the 
effectiveness of the Agency's technical assistance to developing Member States. 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 29 

Finally he emphasized that Tanzania was grateful to those countries which had 
contributed generously to the General Fund. Tanzania intended to contribute 
to the Fund an equivalent of US $850 for 1979. 

109. Mr. KATORI (japan) said that since the Agency's foundation twenty-one 
years earlier its activities had broadened and diversified, and it now faced 
today new challenges, the solution of which required joint efforts. 
110. The Agency's basic task was concerned with the utilization of atomic energy 
for the welfare and progress of mankind. The world had been compelled to 
recognize in the face of the so-called "oil crisis" that atomic energy was a 
necessity and that it could replace fossil fuel in the shorter and the longer 
term. That fact was also mentioned in the Agency's Annual Report for 1977 
(document GC(XXII)/597), and it was appreciated in particular by many countries 
such as Japan which were not endowed with large quantities of natural energy 
resources such as oil, coal or natural gas. For those countries, research on 
and the development of the peaceful uses of atomic energy were a matter of the 
greatest urgency in order for them to be able to sustain their national existence 
in the future. That should be understood both by the nuclear-weapon States and 
by States rich in natural resources. 
111. It was imperative for Japan to establish a nuclear fuel cycle to utilize 
its limited resources better. His Government was fully aware, however, that, in 
order to preserve world peace and security, atomic energy should be used solely 
for peaceful purposes and should not be diverted for military purposes. 
112. Concern to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons while promoting the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy was not new but had been one of the most important 
reasons for the establishment of the Agency. The Agency had so far fulfilled 
the hopes placed in it and should continue to play a central role in preventing 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
113. Apart from the efforts made by the Agency, it was also necessary to endeavour 
to make the Treaty on the Hon-Proliferation of Huclear Weapons (HPT) universal. 
Those States which were not yet party to HPT should join it as soon as possible. 
114. However, in order to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons on a longterm 
basis, it was not sufficient simply to take measures to prevent non-nuclearweapon 
States from possessing weapons. Steps should also be taken to try to 
eliminate the various factors which might encourage the possession of weapons. 
One of those steps would be the realization of nuclear disarmament. HPT would be 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 30 

rendered more effective if the inequality between nuclear-weapon States and 
non-nuclear-weapon States were eradicated by the abolition of nuclear weapons. 
In that connection, he very much welcomed the fact that the United States, the 
United Kingdom and Prance had volunteered to submit to Agency safeguards. Those 
States which had not yet made the same offer should follow suit. 

115. Another step to be taken was the creation of an international environment 
in which every State, regardless of size, behaved in strict compliance with the 
principles set forth in the United Nations Charter, so as to make it impossible 
for new nuclear-weapon States to emerge. Through the combined efforts of the 
non-nuclear-weapon and the nuclear-weapon States, on the basis of self-restraint 
and international co-operation, it would be possible to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
116. However, while the prevention of proliferation was undoubtedly one of the 
Agency's most important tasks, it should not be its only function. Peaceful uses 
of atomic energy were not only a source of power, but contributed to the welfare 
of mankind in other ways. 
117. The results of research and development work in fields such as the use of 
isotopes must, therefore, be shared by all nations. Technical assistance by the 
Agency to developing countries was very important, and measures should be taken 
to make such assistance more effective. In that connection, it would be a 
very constructive move to resolve outstanding issues such as that of unobligated 
balances. 
118. In the past, Japan had paid 100$ of its share of voluntary contributions 
and in 1977 it had also made additional funds available to the Agency. As for 
1979» his Government was in the process of taking the internal measures necessary 
for making the voluntary contribution corresponding to its base rate of assessment 
119. Japan hnd recently joined the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Unclear Science and Technology (RCA) and 
intended to make a positive contribution to nuclear technology research and 
development and to technical co-operation through its participation in the RCA 
projects which were needed in Asia. Japan believed that it was desirable to 
establish a mechanism within the framework of RCA, such as a regional co-operation 
centre or institute, to promote co-operation in atomic energy research and 
development. 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 31 

120. The promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy in Japan had always 
been linked inseparably with the Agency. Japan had fifteen commercial nuclear 
power plants with a total capacity of 8800 MH in operation, producing 8% of the 
total electric power of the country. The fraction of the country's total electric 
power produced by means of nuclear reactors was expected to increase to 15-18$ 
by 1985. 
121. As a basic policy for energy security, Japan had been striving to establish 
a national fuel cycle and to develop advanced reactor types. Because of those 
efforts, the I65 MW(e) JUGEN advanced thermal reactor had gone critical in 
March 1978 and had begun to produce electricity in August. As to fast breeder 
reactors, the JOYO experimental reactor had attained an output of 50 MH in May 
and was continuing to operate successfully. 
122. The Tokai reprocessing plant had started its hot test run in September 19771 
and it was expected that it would finish the final test run during 1978 and be 
ready for normal operation in 1979- In addition, another reprocessing plant was 
in preparation. 
123. In the meantime, considerable progress had been made towards achieving 
national consensus in favour of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It was to 
be hoped that, with the establishment of the Nuclear Safety Commission in 
October 1978, better conditions would be created for public acceptance. Also, 
the nuclear ship "Mutsu" was expected to go into operation again in the near 
future. 
124. In the area of fusion, Japan's experimental critical plasma facility, 
JT-60, was under construction. His Government had initiated talks concerning 
co-operation in research and development with the United States in an effort 
to achieve controlled nuclear fusion, and it was prepared to co-operate with 
other countries with an interest in fusion. 
125. In promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, Japan had followed a 
consistent course which proved the compatibility of peaceful uses of atomic 
energy with the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. When it began to utilize 
atomic energy its basic policy had already been determined, namely that 
research on and the development and utilization of atomic energy should be 
limited to peaceful purposes as stipulated by Japan's Basic Atomic Energy Law. 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 32 

That policy was also reflected in Japan's "Three Non-Nuclear Principles". In 
that context, his Government had readily accepted Agency safeguards. 

126. The conclusion of subsidiary arrangements under Japan's HPT safeguards 
agreement, which were being negotiated by the Government of Japan and the .Agency, 
was near at hand and it was to be hoped that final agreement would be reached in 
the very near future. Along with the development of peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, the safeguards system needed to be improved. In that connection, Japan 
was undertaking, through a programme called "TASTEX", ;joint research with the 
United States and France and in conjunction with the Agency for the development 
of more effective safeguards techniques to be applied at reprocessing facilities. 
The Japanese Government was prepared to co-operate fully with the Agency in that 
endeavour, 
127. The Agency had never before been faced by so many complicated tasks, and 
those had to be undertaken with limited human and financial resources. The 
ability of Member States to share the burden was also limited, and the Secretariat 
should be asked to make further efforts to ensure balanced distribution 
and efficient implementation of its limited budget in line with the Agency's 
objectives as laid down in the Statute. Likewise, Member States had the responsibility 
of co-operating closely with each other in order to consolidate the 
Agency's central role in the uses of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. The 
future of the peaceful uses of atomic energy depended primarily on maintaining 
the Agency's credibility, 
128. Mr. ATi'FIR (Sweden) said that in many countries the past year had seen 
a lively and sometimes heated debate concerning nuclear power as a source of 
energy. Safety and economy were aspects that had received special attention. 
In particular, questions were being raised regarding the risks of proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and of the handling and long-term storage of spent fuel and 
radioactive waste. 
129. The Agency had an important role to play within the field of safeguards 
and in the international effort to develop codes and standards aimed at ensuring 
the safety of nuclear power plants. 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 33 

130. The basis of the Swedish Government's policy of preventing any spread 
of nuclear weapons was NPT, with full-scope safeguards covering all nuclear 
facilities. The safeguards system administered by the Agency was a vital 
element in the non-proliferation effort. It was of great importance that the 
Agency should be given adequate resources to carry out that important function 
and also that the effectiveness of the system should be continously improved. 
131. In Sweden the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1977 had been studied 
with great interest. His Government hoped that the Director General would 
continue to prepare and circulate safeguards implementation reports and that 
the Agency would take steps to improve accounting systems where those had been 
found not fully to meet the high standards required. 
132. Sweden welcomed the coming into force of the NFT safeguards agreement 
between the Agency, EORATOM and the seven non-nuclear-weapon States Members 
of the Community. The agreement concluded with Japan meant that the NPT 
safeguards system was coming closer to being universal. 
133. It was with close attention that his delegation had studied the Agency's 
programme in the nuclear safety and environmental protection sector. In it s 
view the issuing of safety codes and guides was a most appropriate and 

valuable activity on the part of the Agency. 

134. The back-end of the fuel cycle was considered more and more crucial to 
any increased use of nuclear power, and adequate solutions to the problems in 
that context had to be found. The Agency's activities in the waste management 
field were arousing great interest in Sweden, which expected to participate 
actively in them. 
135« His country was participating in the work to prepare an international convention 
on the physical protection of nuclear material and it was its hope that 
a convention could be drafted in the not too distant future. 

136, The present debate regarding nuclear power should be seen as a stimulant 
to the Agency, which should respond by deepening its work on safety, in the widest 
sense of the word, covering all stages of the fuel cycle. 

137. In Sweden it was a requirement of law that new nuclear power plants could 
not be brought into operation unless the operator had demonstrated how and where 
completely safe terminal storage could be achieved either of spent fuel or of 

GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 34 

highly radioactive waste after reprocessing. Government analysis of applications 
to fuel two nuclear reactors was in its final stage. The utilities 
concerned had made considerable technical efforts to meet the legal requirements. 
An analysis of the suggested solutions for safe terminal storage of highly radioactive 
waste had been made by both Swedish and foreign institutions and scientists. 
The Agency had also provided valuable assistance by convening a panel to scrutinize 
the waste management report prepared by Swedish nuclear power plant operators. 

138. He wished to confirm that, for 1979 also, Sweden was in a position to pledge 
a voluntary contribution to the General Fund equal to the amount calculated from 
its base rate of assessment. 
139. In conclusion he stressed the high priority which the Swedish Government 
attached to Agency safeguards and to the Agency's work for nuclear safety. 
Nuclear safety in Sweden meant not only operational safety but also the protection 
of future generations against the hazards accruing from the waste generated in 
the nuclear fuel cycle. 
140. Mr. AL-ESKANGI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said he wished to comment first 
on a matter of utmost importance as far as the basic functions of the Agency were 
concerned, namely, the question of what benefit the developing countries actually 
derived from the organization. The question that was raised every year and 
stil l remained unanswered was whether any serious effort had been made by the 
Agency and its big—Power Members to reduce the gap between developed and developing 
countries in the applications of nuclear technology. Despite the concern that 
had been voiced in the various sessions of the General Conference almost no 
progress had been made. 
141. The United Nations .had been aware of the problem and had adopted General 
Assembly Resolution 32/50 concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as 
applied to economic and social development and the right of all States, including 
the developing countries, to acquire the nuclear technology necessary for those 
applications. The resolution also called on the more advanced countries to 
assume their responsibility in helping the developing countries in that endeavour. 
142. His country's delegation was confident that the Agency would pay increasing 
attention to its technical assistance programmes, which at present were not 
providing adequate help. Not only were the available funds inadequate but the 
system for implementing programmes was not efficient enough. Sometimes it took 
GC(XXII)/OR.2O4 
Page 35 

more than two years before a technical assistance request was approved. 
Obviously, such delays affected the planning of the country submitting the 
request. He realized the difficulties which existed in that respect, but he 
was confident that the Agency could do something about it. 

143. His country's delegation wished to express its gratification at the 
activities of the Group of 77, which it believed would not only be of great help 
to the Agency but also serve as an instrument through which the developing 
countries could improve their contribution to the Agency's activities. 
144. As regards the proposal to amend Article VI of the Statute, his delegation 
found it difficult to understand the negative attitude of some delegations 
towards the justified demands of the sponsors. 
145* His country was going ahead with its programme for introducing the peaceful 
nuclear technology relevant to its economic development plans. Construction 
and civil engineering work at the Libyan Nuclear Research Centre was progressing 
according to schedule; about 60$ of the construction work on different 
buildings, laboratories and other facilities had been completed. The training 
of .technical and scientific personnel was going forward at the same time. By 
the beginning of 1979 the installation of equipment would be started, so that 
testing and commissioning could be carried out in I98O. In the meantime, 
Libyan specialists would be returning home from their study missions abroad 
and would join the country's experts in operating the centre. 

146. Libyan plans for uranium prospecting were also going forward: the objective 
was to locate areas with uranium deposits of commercial interest. Some success 
had been achieved and it was hoped that the country's capabilities in that 
respect could be increased. 
147. Mr. GAHURAfflET TANGANUCA (Zaire) said that his country had been among 
the first to sign and ratify the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons and had since then negotiated and signed safeguards agreements with the 
Agency. His Government had thus signified its unswerving advocacy of the use 
of atomic energy solely for peaceful purposes. It continued to attach great 
importance to the Agency's programme and would like to see the safeguards 
programme strengthened not only in strictly budgetary terms but also with regard 
to operative clauses, which should be made more restrictive so as to make any 
diversion of nuclear material for military purposes as difficult as possible. 

GC(XXH)/OR.204 
page 36 

148. Along the Agency's welcome initiatives in that connection was the study of 
the possible establishment of regional fuel cycle centres, which would include 
reprocessing plants and could also have storage facilities added. That study, 
complemented by the one relating to the exercise by the Agency of the powers, 
conferred on it by its Statute, to require deposit with it of any excess of 
Plutonium or other special fissionable materials, could lead to international 
Plutonium management, which would have clear advantages. 
149. The Plutonium management plan at present being studied within the Agency 
should be extended to the problem of irradiated fuel storage. In order to avoid 
storage of extracted plutonium, a non-discriminatory system should be established, 
capable of universal application, to control the putting of plutonium into 
circulation, both for export and for domestic use. 
150. His delegation welcomed the Secretariat's report on the implementation of 
safeguards in 1977 and shared the satisfaction that in 1977 there had been no 
significant diversion of Agency-safeguarded nuclear material. With regard to 
the Secretariates efforts to develop further the notion of "safeguards effectiveness", 
including the establishment of a system to ensure the early discovery of 
"illicit movements of fissionable materials", a permanent and independent 
verification procedure was necessary in order to reduce the "detection time". 
The last condition was vital; it was highly desirable that the .agency should 
accept no compromise on that point in its negotiations with certain highly 
industrialized Member States. 
151. Technical assistance was no less important than safeguards, although much 
progress still needed to be made with regard to the former. Despite the 
Secretariat's praiseworthy effort to draw up a body of guidelines and overall 
rules for the provision of technical assistance, his delegation could not agree 
with all of them. In particular, the provision of technical assistance should 
be based on the principle of non-discrimination. There should be much more 
emphasis on the provision of equipment and fellowships than on the sending of 
experts. On strictly budgetary matters, his delegation had insisted in the past 
that technical assistance should be financed 100$ from the Regular Budget instead 
of relying on voluntary contributions, which were always uncertain. At all 
events it was necessary, in order to avoid the growing distortion in the Agency's 
budget as between technical assistance programmes and safeguards, to establish 
GC(XXII)/OR.204 
page 37 

a link between the Agency's Regular Budget and the funds earmarked for technical 
assistance, so that any increase in one was matched by an increase in the other. 

152. With regard to the proposed amendment of Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute, his 
country had been a co-signatory of the original proposal to provide three 
additional seats on the Board of Governors for the area of Africa and two for 
the area of Middle East and South Asia. Subsequent discussions in the Board 
during the past year had in many ways been discouraging; in that matter, as 
in many others, Africa was still suffering from discrimination, which reflected 
no credit on the organization. It was to be hoped that, during the current 
session, a solution would be found which would give the area of Africa equitable 
representation on the Board of Governors. 
153. It should be noted that Africa was likewise poorly represented in the 
Secretariat. Serious efforts should be made to recruit more Africans for 
high-level posts. 
The meeting rose at 12.45 P.m. 


I 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER 1978 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held, at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 21 September 1978, at 10.5 a.m. 
President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
3 Arrangements for the Conference 

(b) 
Closing date of the session 

(c) 
The twenty-third • (1979) 
regular session 

4 
General debate and annual re 
for 1977 (continued) 

Statements by the del egates 

Indonesia 
Ireland 
Republic of Korea 
Viet Nam 
Kuwait 
Finland 
Holy See 
Philippines 
Thailand 
Egypt 
Tunisia 
Ghana 
Guatemala 
Mongolia 
Saudi Arabia 

port 
of: 

Paragraphs 

1 

-5 

1 -3 

4 -5 

6 - 132 

6 - 19 
20 - 25 
26 - 34 
35 -' 36 
37 

- 45 
46 - 58 
59 - 68 
69 - 78 
79 

- 86 
87 

- 100 

101 

- 108 
109 - 112 
113 - 117 
118 - 127 
128 - 132 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued, on 28 September 1978. 
**/ GC(XX**)/605. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in 
document GC(XXII)/INF/l79/Rev.2. 


78-12106 


t30(XXtl)/OR.205 
page 2 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(b) CLOSING BATE OF THE SESSION 
1. The PRESIDENT recalled that, under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure, 
the Conference had to fix a closing date for the session, on the recommendation 
of the General Committee. 
2. The General Committee had considered the matter and had authorized him to 
recommend on its behalf that 22 September 1978 be fixed as the closing date. 
3. The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted. 
(c) THE TWENTY-THIRD (1979) REGULAR SESSION (GC(XXII)/603) 
4. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee had 
recommended fixing Tuesday, 4 December 1979, as the opening date of the twentythird 
regular session, which would be held in New Delhi at the invitation of the 
Indian Government. The Committee had also recommended that the Director General 
be requested to thank the Indian Government for its invitation and to conclude 
with it the necessary agreement on behalf of the Agency. 
5. The recommendations of the General Committee were accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT TOR 1977 (GC(jDCIl)/597) (continued) 

6. Mr. KAML (Indonesia) congratulated the President, the eight 
Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and the six additional 
members of the General Committee on their election, and commended the Director 
General on being the conscience of mankind in the field of nuclear energy. The 
Director General had been right to analyse the present difficult situation of 
nuclear energy in his opening statement instead of presenting the usual summary of 
the year's work. 
7. There had been, of late, growing concern that proliferation might emanate 
from developing countries embarking on nuclear power programmes to secure the 
energy needed for their economic development. His delegation felt that such 
concern could be removed by closer co-operation with the Agency in the full 
implementation of all of its safeguards functions and of any new ones that might 
become scientifically necessary. There was no relationship between the expansion 
of nuclear power and the development of nuclear explosives. Instead of creating a 
new institutional framework, the Agency's system should be strengthened. 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 3 

8. As an important part of the United Nations system, the Agency could not afford 
to ignore the ideas conceived and actions carried out within the international 
community as a whole. It was, therefore, only right for the General Conference 
to consider problems and ideas arising in other international fora, the solutions 
of which might have a bearing on the Agency's mission. The ministers of foreign 
affairs of the non-aligned countries, after their meeting in Belgrade in 
July 1978, had issued a declaration on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. They 
had regretted the unacceptable monopolistic policies of the nuclear countries and 
demanded that conditions be created for unhindered transfer of nuclear technology. 
They had stressed the principle of free access to nuclear technology and the right 
of each country to conduct programmes for the utilization of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes in accordance with its economic and social development. 
Realizing the necessity of drawing up and adopting programmes for future joint 
action, the ministers had supported the idea of convening, under the auspices of 
the United Nations, an international conference on the use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes with the aim of promoting international co-operation in that field. 
9. The Indonesian Government therefore supported Resolution 32/5O passed by the 
General Assembly of the United Nations on 28 December 1977, which called for the 
holding of such an international conference. 
10. The International Conference on Nuclear Power and its Fuel Cycle, held at 
Salzburg in 1977, had once more clearly brought out the indispensability of nuclear 
power as an energy source, and the Declaration of the General Assembly's Special 
Session on Disarmament had stated that it was the inalienable right of all States 
to apply and develop programmes for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for their 
economic and social development. Indonesia strongly believed that that inalienable 
right should be accompanied by a commitment to safeguards acceptable to the 
international community. In that connection his delegation wished to state that 
the Indonesian Government had submitted the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT)i/ to Parliament for ratification. There seemed to be a 
consensus in Parliament that it should be ratified without further delay. 
Indonesia's need for a peaceful nuclear capacity to secure the energy needed for 
its economic development was becoming increasingly evident. However, many members 
of Parliament had expressed concern at the non-implementation of some of the 
articles of NPT, especially Articles IV and VI, by a number of signatory States. 
A treaty was valid only to the extent that the signatory parties honoured its 
provisions. 
l / Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 


GC(XXn)/OR.2O5 

page 4 

11. With regard to the technical assistance provided by the Agency in 1977, he 
welcomed the fact that the Agency's capacity for carrying out its technical 
assistance programme was growing and that the number of Member States receiving 
such assistance had increased. His delegation was confident that the Agency 
would continue to give objective consideration to project proposals and would 
select projects in a non-discriminatory manner. 
12. There continued to be a decline in the value of the technical assistance 
provided by the Agency, partly as a result of the decrease in the value of the 
dollar and of price increases. Although it might sound repetitive, he wished 
to stress again that the two main functions of the Agency - namely, promotional 
and regulatory activities - should be given equal treatment. The imbalance 
between budgetary resources for safeguards and for technical assistance, which 
the Director General had referred to as "a cornerstone of the Agency's work" in 
his opening statement, should be redressed. 
13. He was gratified to note that the Regional Co-operative Agreement for 
Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA) 
was growing from strength to strength. He welcomed Australia and Japan, both 
advanced countries, into the ranks of the countries which had accepted RCA* It 
was hoped that their participation would significantly strengthen that system 
of regional co-operation. RCA was a unique form of co-operation among countries 
in a particular region that all faced the same problems. The achievements during 
the six years of its existence had brought about an expansion of that co-operative 
endeavour to other projects of common interest. There were now eleven projects 
under way, representing an estimated cost of about US $234 000 in 1978. The venture 
deserved adequate financial, moral and technical support both from the Agency and 
from donor countries. 
14. For some time developing Member States had been trying to remedy the 
inequitable geographical representation of the developing countries in the 
various organs of the Agency. Their efforts indicated that the Statute of the 
Agency no longer reflected current conditions. Many great changes had occurred 
since the adoption of the Statute. The number of nuclear powers had increased, 
nuclear technology had advanced, the interest of developing countries in using 
nuclear energy had grown, and the number of developing countries that were 
Members of the Agency had also increased. It was time to start thinking of 
reviewing the Statute with a view to finding a comprehensive solution to the problems 
faced by the Agency 22 years after its establishment. In that spirit the 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 5 

Indonesian delegation supported the amendment of Article VI.A.2 proposed by 
Pakistan and other co-sponsors with a view to enlarging the Board of Governors. 

15. With regard to the Agency's programme for 1979-84, his delegation fully 
endorsed the expansion of the Agency's nuclear power programme and of activities 
relating to safety, waste disposal and the application of nuclear techniques in 
food and agriculture, in the life sciences and in other fields. The efforts of 
the Agency to make available training courses for the staff of nuclear power 
plants of developing countries were particularly appreciated, 
16. He noted with satisfaction the progress made by the International Nuclear 
Information System (iNIs) and fully supported the decision to expand the INIS 
subject scope to include the medical applications of ionizing radiation and 
radionuclides, as that would contribute to increasing the effectiveness of the 
system, which in turn would involve more participation by Member States. 
17. His delegation also noted with satisfaction the achievements of the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics, which offered excellent training opportunities to 
scientists from developing countries and served as a meeting place for scientists 
from both developed and developing countries. He sincerely hoped that the Agency 
would continue its fruitful collaboration with the host country of the Centre, Italy. 
18. In conclusion, he wished to recall that, when the Board had met in June 1978 
to consider the budget for 1979, it had had to extend its meetings for several days 
in order to arrive at a compromise acceptable to all Members of the Board. He did 
not wish to refer to the substantive aspects of the discussion which had necessitated 
the prolongation of the meeting, but simply to request that lengthier and more 
intensive consultations be held before such Board meetings between the Secretariat 
and all Member States and also between representatives of the various regional groups. 
19. He had been requested, as Chairman of the group, to announce that a number of 
countries represented in the Agency's policy-making organs had formed a group known 
as the Group of 77, with a view to co-operation between its members, consultations 
and negotiations with other groups, and liaison with the Secretariat. The Statute 
divided the world into artificial sub-regional groups and for that reason the 
representatives of Latin American, African and Asian countries and of Yugoslavia 
and Romania had felt it necessary to work together as the Group of 77 in the Agency. 
On behalf of its members he wished to express the desire of the Group of 77 to 

GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 6 


establish and maintain the closest relations with the other regional groups, 
the Board, the Director General and the Secretariat. 


20. Mr. O'SULLIVAH (Ireland) said that his delegation would like to join 
in congratulating the President, whose election served to underline the interest 
of the countries of Africa and of the rest of the Third World in the work of the 
Agency, as also the fact H;hat the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were of 
importance to all the Agency's Member States, large and small, and not simply 
to those with highly developed nuclear power programmes. 
21. The role of the Agency in the safeguards field was a vital element in the 
maintenance of world peace. It had been greatly enhanced by HPT. As delegates 
to the General Conference were perhaps aware, the Government of Ireland had played 
an important part from an early stage in promoting the concept of HPT and in the 
preparation of the proposals which had led to the adoption of the Treaty. The 
prevention of the further spread of nuclear weapons, for example through the misuse 
or diversion of technology intended for peaceful ends, was a matter of vital 
interest and concern to all nations. Ireland's commitment to that aim was well 
known and all its actions in the international field relating to the matter were 
informed by it. The steadily developing work of the Agency in the safeguards 
field provided as good a guarantee as could be that such misuse or diversion would 
not take place in the countries that had submitted their nuclear installations and 
materials to inspection controls. Moreover, the solidarity of the nations who 
accepted such controls made it increasingly difficult for those remaining outside 
their scope to acquire the facilities they would need to build nuclear weapons. 
Any nation wishing to acquire nuclear plants was now bound to agree to safeguards 
at least equivalent to, if not greater than, those required by the Agency, which 
constituted the standard model. 

22. The safeguards system was an important, indeed essential, precondition for 
the fulfilment of the Agency's main objective, i.e. the peaceful development of 
nuclear energy. That form of energy was already making a significant contribution, 
with which it would be very difficult to dispense, to the needs of industry and 
the progress of the entire economy, at least in the developed world. Apart from 
the contribution made by the conventional nuclear power station, technologies 
were being developed which would make even more efficient use of uranium resources. 
The investigation of how those resources could be made safe from the danger of 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 7 

proliferation was the task of the International Unclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (iOTCE), 
which was now nearly half-way through its work. That work was supported by the 
Agency and by a majority of its Member States, many of which, like Ireland, had 
decided to make a contribution to its costs. The results could be of considerable 
significance for the future development of nuclear power, 

23. For smaller countries with little first-hand experience of nuclear technology, 
the Agency's work in organizing up-to-date information services and publishing the 
results of experience in nuclear technology was of considerable assistance in 
evaluating the developments relevant to their needs. The preparation of draft 
safety codes and guides by the Agency was also of special value to countries which, 
like his own, were considering or in the early stages of planning a nuclear power 
programme. Although the funds available for the sponsorship of research projects 
were relatively small, research grants from the Agency could provide a useful 
stimulus and encouragement to the building up of technical expertise. 
24. Ireland had studied with great interest the Director General's report to the 
Board on the provision of technical assistance in 1977. It recognized the value 
and importance of technical co-operation in helping to spread skills which were vital 
to economic development, and had consistently supported the work of the Agency in 
that field by voluntary contributions. It had been pleased to be able to accept 
the Agency's invitation to hold the Interregional Training Course in Nuclear 
Electronics in Ireland during 1978. The course, held at Trinity College, Dublin, 
from 19 June until 8 September, had been attended by 16 participants from all parts 
of the world. Five of the participants from developing countries had been sponsored 
by the Irish Government and had received stipends under its bilateral aid programme. 
Although the final assessment was not yet available, the course had been, it was 
believed, successful and Ireland would be happy to host a similar initiative again 
in future years, if invited to do so by the Agency. 
25. Ireland was at present over 80$ dependent on imported energy, and it was 
therefore necessary for it to diversify its sources of primary energy as much as 
possible in order to reduce its dependence on imported oil. The decision to 
build a nuclear power station had been approved in principle by the Government 

GC(xni)/OR.205 
page 8 


in November 1973t but had not been proceeded with owing to the recession. The 
proposed site at Camsore Point at the south-eastern tip of Ireland was regarded 
as one of the best in Europe. Pending a final decision whether or not to proceed 
with the nuclear project, the Minister for Industry, Commerce and Energy had 
published a discussion document on aspects of the energy situation in Ireland, 
including the nuclear option which, it was hoped, would lead to informed public 
debate in Ireland on the matter. Further information programmes by public 
authorities were planned on the safety and other aspects of nuclear power generation 
which, it was hoped, would help to correct possible misconceptions regarding 
the matter. In that connection, his delegation had been impressed by the 
thoughtful remarks of the Director General in his opening statement about the 
problem caused by opposition to nuclear energy among some sections of the public. 
Democratically elected governments were, of course, always responsive to public 
opinion and had the duty, at the same time, to ensure that the public was provided 
with the fullest and most reliable information, especially on a subject such as 
nuclear energy which was of such importance for public welfare in the future. It 
was entirely understandable that such a great technological revolution should 
arouse doubts and fears, especially among young people, who had seen sufficient 
proof that, unfortunately, technological progress did not always produce a better 
world. But nuclear power had too much potential for human welfare to be simply 
condemned as a dangerous pollutant. The "turmoil of unclear thinking" to which 

the Director General had referred had to be avoided. How to do that - how to 
bring home to public opinion the benefits inherent in the wise use of that new 
source of energy - was one of the most challenging tasks to face the Agency and 
its Member States in the years ahead. 

26. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea), after joining in the congratulations to 
the President and the expressions of appreciation for the work done by the 
Director General and his able staff, said he believed that all present shared the 
view that, since the previous session of the General Conference, the .agency had 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 9 

made further noteworthy and commendable progress in promoting the peaceful uses 

of nuclear energy and in administering safeguards. The Republic of Korea, as a 
founding Member of the Agency and as a party to KPT, had played a full part in 
the common task of enhancing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and would 
continue to do so. 

27. As to the nuclear energy programmes being carried out in the Republic of Korea, 
the country's first nuclear power station had gone into commercial operation in 
March 1978. In addition, four other units were now under construction. Under the 
country's long-term plans, more than 4° nuclear power stations of approximately 
50 000 Mtf(e) capacity were scheduled to go into operation by the year 2000. It 
could thus be seen that, for Korea, nuclear energy was a matter of great importance. 
28. Turning to the question of how better to promote international co-operation 
in carrying out common tasks within the framework of the Agency he said that, as 
all were aware, more needed to be done in that direction in a number of fields. 
29. Close and effective co-operation among Member States was a vital necessity, 
for nuclear energy was not likely to remain merely an alternative source; it was 
more likely to become a major source of energy for many countries. As the 
Director General had said in his opening statement, the installed nuclear capacity 
in the world had increased dramatically over the past decade. Despite some 
fluctuation in orders recorded in the past two years, the general trend now seemed 
to be for more countries to be planning to utilize nuclear energy as their primary 
source for the generation of electricity. Their plans were likely to be based on 
two assumptions: first, that a long-term and stable supply of source materials 
and nuclear fuel cycle services could be secured; and second, that the current 
power reactors would eventually be replaced by more advanced reactors providing 
for improved fuel utilization. 
30. Needless to say, a stable supply of nuclear fuel and fuel cycle services was 
an indispensable prerequisite for any nuclear power programme. Without it many 
of the countries about to initiatenucjear energy programmes would soon be faced 
with serious difficulties. The anxiety besetting them was that, lacking supply 
assurances, recipient countries would have to suffer not only from the rising 
cost of imported energy but also from delays and uncertainties in their vital 
programmes. The question was not a hypothetical but a real one for many recipient 

GC(X3!Il)/OR.205 
page 10 


countries in that position. Accordingly, his delegation earnestly hoped that IHFCE 

would lay a basis for the long-term assurance of a stable supply of fuel and fuel 

cycle services. In the relationship between suppliers and recipients of source 

materials, there should be a spirit of co-operation and mutual trust. The same 

spirit should also govern the administration of safeguards. 

31. In view of the pressing demand for peaceful applications of nuclear energy, 
the call for an increase in the promotional activities of the Agency was likely 
to grow even more in the years ahead. His delegation was inclined to think that 
so far promotional activities had been accorded less weight, proportionally 
speaking. Without underestimating the many remarkable achievements of the Agency 
in the promotional area or discounting the importance of its work in the 
non-proliferation field, it might be maintained without prejudice that over-emphasis 
of the latter often tended to obscure the former; his delegation would like to see, 
in future programmes of the Agency, more emphasis placed on promotional activities 
in the form of technical assistance and training, technical operations and work in 
the field of research and isotopes. 
32. As a Member State participating actively in the programme of the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement (RCA), his delegation wished to commend the Secretariat 
for its contribution to the development of excellent projects at the regional level 
under RCA. There was an increasing demand for the industrial application of 
radioisotopes and radiation processing techniques in various sectors of industry. 
His delegation hoped that technical co-operation in that field could be promoted 
more actively through such projects. 
33. Finally, he again expressed the hope that the Agency would give more emphasis 
to such matters as the stable supply of fuel and fuel cycle services and the 
promotional aspect of nuclear energy. Any difficulties there might be could 
surely be overcome by joint action in a spirit of co-operation, mutual trust and 
harmony, 
34. Before concluding, he wished to express his deep regret that a political 
statement concerning his country had been made in the General Conference the day 
before. Since the statement in question was not worthy of any reply, he would 
refrain from commenting further upon it, the more so as the General Conference 
was not the right forum for entering into political polemics. 
Gc(xm)/OR.205 
page 11 

35. Mr. HGUYEH MASH CAM (Viet Nam) said it was the first time his country was 
participating in the Agency's General Conference. It was doing so as a nation which, 
after a struggle lasting nearly a third of a century, had regained its independence, 
freedom and unity. As a result of Viet Ham's recent history, the level of nuclear 
technology in his country was still low compared with many other countries, but 
even during a period of war, efforts had been made to promote education and science. 
In the framework of the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research at Dubna in the 
Soviet Union, and the Da Lat reactor installation, it had been possible to train 
staff and to promote the use of radioisotopes and nuclear methods in medicine, 
geology, agriculture, industry, etc. His country wanted to intensify its exchange 
and co-operation relations with other countries and with scientific organizations 
abroad and, in that context, he wished to express the gratitude of his country 
for the approval of its requests for technical assistance under the Agency's regular 
programme for 1979. 
36. How that peace had been established, Viet Nam had difficult tasks to perform: 
it had to cleanse its war wounds, to restore and develop the economy, and to 
promote culture and science in order to build a peaceful, independent, united and 
prosperous Viet Ham. The Vietnamese people had only one desire and that was to 
have a durable peace on which to build, and it was also determined to preserve the 
independence and freedom which it had gained with such a great sacrifice. In 
foreign politics, therefore, the Socialist Republic of Viet Ham was following a 
policy of peace, friendship and co-operation with other countries - an independent, 
sovereign policy - which would allow it to develop relations with other countries 
on the basis of peaceful co-existence. His country therefore wholly supported the 
objectives laid down in Article II of the Agency's Statute: ",... to accelerate 
and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world." The Socialist Republic of Viet Ham undertook to play an 
active part in the efforts to dispel for ever the risk of a nuclear war and to 
defend the cause of world peace. 
37. Mr. ABU EED (Kuwait) congratulated the President and other officers 
on their election. He also complimented the Secretariat, under Dr. Eklund, for 
the efficient manner in which it had conducted the Agency's work. 

GC(xm)/OR.205 
page 12 

38. In September 1976, at the twentieth regular session of the General Conference, 
he had referred to the obstacles encountered by developing nations in their efforts 
to launch nuclear power programmes. In particular, he had stressed the shortage 
of trained manpower for the planning and implementation of nuclear power programmes 
and had proposed to the Conference the idea of establishing a number of regional 
nuclear training centres each incorporating a small dual-purpose nuclear power 
plant designed mainly for training. That idea was borrowed from the Nuclear Power 
Programme of Kuwait, which envisaged the establishment of such a dual-purpose 
nuclear power plant for the generation of about 40 MH of electric power and the 
desalination of about 10 000 m of water a day. Kuwait had developed the idea 
of the small dual-purpose nuclear power plant and taken it to the bidding stage. 
The outcome of that exercise had been described in a paper he had presented in 
October 1977 at the Advisory Croup Meeting on Small and Medium Power Reactors, 
in Athens. In view of the widespread interest in small and medium power reactors, 
he wanted to dwell briefly on Kuwait's idea of a small nuclear plant for training 
purposes and also for power production and desalination. Such an installation 
could form the hub of a nuclear training centre not only for Kuwait but also for 
other countries in the region. It had been decided to invite bids after extensive 
consultations with expert bodies including the Agency. Bidding had been in two 
stages. The first stage had consisted of preliminary contacts in which the general 
concept and the basic requirements had been communicated to major nuclear reactor 
firms in Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, Prance, Japan, Sweden, the 
United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union and subsequently to firms in 
Belgium, Italy and the Netherlands. The purpose of the preliminary inquiry had been 
to identify seriously interested firms willing to submit a complete bid, and to obtain 
their comments on the proposed concept. Five positive responses had been received, 
39. The second stage had been to invite formal bids. The bids were to cover 
engineering services, training, comprehensive fuel services, supply of the entire 
plant including the reactor, steam generators, turbine-alternator, distillation 
plant, electrical power system, mechanical equipment and civil engineering and 
building works (except off-shore marine work for the cooling water supply). 
Provision for physical protection and the application of safeguards in accordance 
with Agency requirements had been specified. 
GC(XXEl)/OR.205 
page 13 

40. The nominal size suggested had been about 50 MW(e), for driving a 40 MW(e) 
turbo-generator and supplying steam to a 10 000 m /day distillation plant. The 
reactor choice - between pressurized water, boiling water and pressure tube types had 
been left open. 
41. Invitations to bid had been sent to interested suppliers in November 1976; 
after interim discussions, bids had been received by 15 June 1977 from the 
Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom and France. 
42. The bids submitted had been of a high technical standard and had reflected 
the interest and competence of the bidders in the small reactor field. Technically, 
the bids had generally complied with the broad lines of the specification, but 
in their commercial and contractual aspects they had been less compliant, 
particularly in the scope and pricing of the fuel services. 
43. 
The main criteria used in evaluating the bids had been: 
(1) 
The relevance of the small reactor to large commercial plants 
in actual operation - a key aspect from the training point of view; 
(2) 
The status of the reactor design: all the reactors offered had been 
based, in varying degrees, on existing technology, but certain novel 
and interesting features had been apparent; 
' (3) The safety of the reactor: the specification had referred to the 
appropriate regulations of the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission as 
a safety standard. The evaluation had revealed that novel features 
appearing in some of the designs had not yet been submitted to 
licensing authorities internationally; 

(4) 
Fuel service: since Kuwait did not yet have a nuclear infrastructure, 
comprehensive fuel services had been asked for; 
(5) 
Contractual and commercial aspects, including the conditions of 
contract, firmness of prices, warranties on completion, output, 
efficiency, fuel performance, availability and maintenance: some of 
the bidders had offered firm prices for design, fabrication, supply 
and execution of plant, but most had not done so for civil works. 
All prices offered had been subject to escalation and, in some cases, 
to changes in exchange rates. Fnel warranties had been either limited 
or not mentioned; 

GC(xxn)/OR.2O5 

page 14 

(6) 
Co-operation with the customer: some bids had included full 
co-operation and had offered the Kuwait Ministry of Electricity 
and Water (MEW) full participation in the design, safety analysis, 
project management, etc. Other bidders had made no co-operation 
proposals; 
(7) 
Programme for completion: an early start and a short completion 
period had been desirable in order to obtain maximum operating 
training in advance of the first commercial plant, planned for 1986; 
(8) 
Operational and training aspects: all bidders had offered training 
programmes for HEH personnel, but the programmes had varied in the 
degree of comprehensiveness; 
(9) 
Bid prices and net outputs: the bid prices had been very much 
higher than expected. A number of factors had been thought to have 
led to the high bid prices, particularly the desire on the part of 
the bidders to recover a large part of the cost of developing the 
small reactor for the first client. The bid prices had varied 
from about US $300 million to about US $600 million. The net 
electrical output had varied from 30 MVf(e) to 50 MW(e), all for an 
output of 10 000 m of distilled water a day; 
(10) The bid prices 
had been adjusted to allow for various factors and 
to include owner's costs, fuel loading, contingencies, interest 
during construction, cost escalation and exchange rate fluctuations 
up to 1984. The estimated total capital cost to 1984 had varied 
between US $600 million and US $1200 million. The average specific 
total capital cost had been about US $17 000 per net kw(e), after 
allowing for extra capacity of about 10 HW(e) equivalent to the 
distillation plant. 
44. It had been concluded that the unexpectedly high capital costs reflected by 
the bid prices shed doubt on the value of such a small training reactor in relation 
to its overall contribution to Kuwait's future nuclear programme. The previously 
envisaged nuclear programme of Kuwait was, therefore, being reconsidered. 
45» The negative result, however, could not be looked upon as the end of the 
idea of the development of small and medium nuclear reactors as a useful tool for 
developing countries. The size chosen for the exercise had definitely been too 

GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 15 

small and its potential market very limited, but medium-sized commercial nuclear 
reactors of 200-500 Mw(e) might have a tremendous potential market in developing 
countries, and it was definitely worth following up the idea. 

46. Mr. PIETIKSH (Finland) said that one of the major aims of organized 
international co-operation was to preserve mankind from the horrors of war and in 
particular of nuclear war, and the role of the Agency in that endeavour was 
demanding and difficult. Finland considered that the acceptance and application 
of a universal and strict safeguards system was in the interest of all States. 
47. Many initiatives had been taken to strengthen HPT, and, although it had not 
fulfilled all its expectations, KPT was still the most effective tool of 
non-proliferation which the international community possessed. His Government 
hoped that the Second Review Conference of the Parties to HPT would further 
strengthen the non-proliferation regime and contribute to a broader consensus on 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Review 
Conference should also find ways of creating conditions where no State outside HPT 
could reasonably argue that remaining outside the Treaty was compatible with its 
considered national interests. At its preceding session, the General Assembly 
of the United Nations had adopted a resolution on the subject on the initiative 
of the Finnish delegation. Finland would continue to promote non-proliferation 
and urged those non-nuclear-weapon States party to HPT which had not yet concluded 
safeguards agreements with the Agency to expedite finalization of such agreements. 
48. The new safeguards agreements and arrangements negotiated by the Agency 
would make greater demands in terms of personnel and funds, but the sum allocated 
for the purpose was a modest price to pay. 
49. The different parts of the Agency's programme were equally important and no 
part should be neglected in favour of another. Considering the scarcity of energy 
sources, it was not surprising that the developing nations were assigning a more 
important role to energy in their national plans and looked to the Agency for 
assistance, thereby increasing the demand for such assistance. It was perhaps 
time to examine the question of technical assistance in all its aspects and 
consider how the available funds could be increased and used better. In 
Resolution 32/lS7f, the General Assembly had also emphasized the urgent need for 
common efforts towards a substantial increase in such assistance. 

GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 16 


50. In the programme of technical assistance, priority should be accorded to 
areas where the Agency was the sole contributor - for example, reactor safety 
and physical protection. Finland would co-operate with the Agency in expanding 
its activities in such areas. 
51. His country regarded the study of a possible plutonium bank to be of great 
importance because it would strengthen the non-proliferation regime and also 
contribute to the availability of energy resources, and it hoped to be of 
assistance in the further elaboration of the project. 
52. The Agency promoted the progress of nuclear technology and science through 
an extensive programme of meetings, seminars and symposia, and Finland was pleased 
to be hosting a meeting in 1979. Considering the public's interest in nuclear 
matters, it might be worth holding another conference like the one on nuclear 
power and its fuel cycle held at Salzburg in 1977. 
53. His country was very interested in the work of IMFCE, which, judging by 
what it had achieved to date, would make a valuable contribution to creating 
conditions under which nuclear energy would be able to play its part in meeting 
world energy requirements while assuaging the growing popular concern about 
nuclear energy and minimizing the dangers of nuclear proliferation. 
54. IHFCE could also provide guidance concerning the proliferation resistance of 
the various fuel cycles, which would be useful to individual countries and to the 
world community in planning nuclear policies. Finland looked forward to practical 
results relating to physical protection, environmental and health aspects, and so 
on. Further information should also be gained on the financial aspects of the 
back end of the fuel cycle. Within the framework of IUFCK such questions as the 
need for innovative legal arrangements and the international management and 
storage of plutoniura and spent fuel would have to be tackled. The Agency's 
Secretariat deserved to be commended on the assistance which it had provided to IHFCE 
His Government supported the fifteen countries which were endeavouring to formulate 
a common policy with regard to the export of nuclear materials, equipment and 
technology and which had circulated a document containing the basic principles and 
guidelines which they had agreed to follow in their export policy. Having been 
engaged for many years in promoting international arrangements which would make 
the non-proliferation regime more effective, it considered that the adoption of 
those guidelines would be a significant step in that direction. However, acceptance 
by the recipient countries of the principle of full-scope control was a necessary 
condition for ensuring an effective safeguards system. 

GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 17 

55. Finland, for its part, had already assumed obligations relating to nuclear 
exports under HPT and the recommendations of the Zangger Committee and intended 
to apply export conditions accordingly. In recent years the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime had become more cumbersome and complicated with the 
adoption of different export criteria by different countries and the negotiation 
of bilateral agreements. That trend had brought about unnecessary administrative 
and practical difficulties. It might be helpful to hold a meeting of the parties 
concerned in order to reach comprehensive international agreements satisfying 
both the need for administrative straightforwardness and certain stringent 
safeguards criteria. 
56. It was gratifying to note that some progress had been made towards a 
convention on the physical protection of nuclear material; it had now been agreed 
that at the first stage the future convention should apply only to nuclear material 
during international transport, protection of which was imperative because of 
phenomena like terrorism. His Government was in favour of such a convention and 
hoped it would be accepted universally. 
57. As regards the Agency's programme and budget for 1979» his delegation fully 
understood the problems and appreciated the Director General's efforts to arrive 
at balanced budget estimates, which it supported. It would not be to the advantage 
of the Agency to try to bypass the current problems by delaying their solution. 
As a token of its support for the technical assistance programme, Finland would, 
as in previous years, pay its share of voluntary contributions to the General Fund. 
58. The special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations had provided 
the basis on which future concrete disarmament steps could be taken. While 
disarmament was possible only under conditions of dStente, the interaction 
between disarmament and detente did not automatically follow from a political 
relaxation of tensions. Peace, security and social progress called for common 
efforts by all, and the Agency's role in that context was pivotal. 
59. Mr. ABS (Holy See) said that the past few years had seen a growing 
debate about the use of nuclear energy, especially in technologically sophisticated 
countries. Positions had been taken both in defence of and in opposition to the 
use of nuclear energy. In that debate churches, church groups and individual 

Gc(xxn:)/oR.205 
page 18 


church leaders and spokesmen had been active, and appeals had often been made 
to the Catholic Church to make some declaration on the subject. It was not the 
Holy See's task to decide on technical matters but, because such questions had 


• ethical and moral implications, the Church did have the 
wid e social,
responsibility of shedding light on their ethical and moral aspects in order to 
safeguard fundamental values for mankind. Pope John Paul I had said in that 
context that the Church was called to give co the world that strengthening of 
the spirit which was so needed and which alone could assure salvation, 

60. The main problem connected with the utilization of nuclear energy was the . 
possibility of its military use. The late Pope Paul VI had addressed a message 
to the United nations Special Session on Disarmament on the need for disarmament; 
in it he had said that the Church appreciated very much the initiatives that had 
already been taken in connection with disarmament, but that all countries must 
be encouraged to continue and to develop initiatives with the final goal of 
completely eliminating the atomic arsenal; at the same time, means must be found 
for giving all peoples access to the immense resources of nuclear energy for 
their peaceful use. 
61. Unfortunately, much remained to be done. HPT could not of itself guarantee 
progress towards disarmament so long as only those of its provisions were 
implemented which dealt with the obligations, on the one hand, of the non-nuclearweapon 
States and, on the other hand, of the nuclear-weapon States to assist the 
non-nuclear-weapon States with the peaceful use of atomic energy. The restriction, 
and even the elimination, of horizontal proliferation was totally inadequate unless 
it was accompanied by the restriction and eventual elimination of all vertical 
proliferation. The nuclear arms race had to be stopped as soon as possible. 
62. However, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy also required careful note to 
be taken of their social, cultural, moral and ethical aspects, lfliile the 
technological and scientific advances made in the field of nuclear energy had 
been immense, technology and science still needed to be measured against the 
needs and hopes, the aspirations and values of men and women where both their 
own lives and the lives of generations to come were concerned, 
63. In recent years there had been a deeper assessment of and more realistic 
discussions about the uses of nuclear energy. Public debate had helped inform 
citizens, and governments had not hesitated to reassess energy questions in the 
context of the current and future needs of society. 
64. At the 1977 session of the General Conference, the Holy See had encouraged 
the .Agency to keep the nuclear debate open. The three points he had made at that 
time (paragraphs 17-19 of document GC(xXl)/OR.196) were still valid. 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 19 


65. In addition, there was a fourth question, namely that of human rights. 
Countries which experienced an energy gap might have to turn increasingly to 
nuclear power, and that development carried with it certain social risks. That 
would be particularly true where a plutoniun! economy was adopted, as the risks 
involved and the increased need to protect nuclear materials could cause 
invasions of privacy, increased surveillance of the public, and any number of 
social and political changes which might threaten fundamental human rights. 
Although a "police state" was not automatically the result of an increase in the 
use of nuclear materials, everyone should be aware of that possibility. The 
convention on the physical protection of nuclear material that was under discussion 
might provide solutions to that problem. In any case, everything possible should 
be done to ensure that nuclear activities did not develop at the expense of 
human rights. 
66. However, an increase in research on and the development of applications of 
nuclear science to health and food and crop production was to be encouraged. 
The Holy See had supported an integral approach to problems connected with 
a new world order, development and peace, and Pope Paul had asked that means be 
found for giving all peoples access to the immense resources of nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes. Kuclear energy had an important role to play in 
agricultural development and health care, including preventive medicine. 
67. Finally, he stated that the question of the advisability of the utilization 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was of world-wide importance and should 
be solved by international co-operation. In that respect the Agency had to 
continue to play a leading role. A common, internationally accepted decision 
should be taken about whether nuclear energy was to be employed; that implied a 
world-wide or at least a regional plan for sharing the benefits and risks of 
nuclear energy justly. 
68. An appeal for world-wide co-operation in the use of nuclear energy might 
seem untimely in an era in which States sometimes guarded their sovereignty 
most jealously. However, such co-operation would show whether members of the 
international community were capable of working together on the solution of a 
problem of world-wide importance. 

GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 20 

69. Mr. VELASCO (Philippines) congratulated the President of the General 
Conference on his election and commended the Agency on its twenty-first year of 
service to the international community. The increasing membership of the Agency 
and the growing interest in the Agency's activities were clear manifestations 
of the confidence that the Member States, especially those from the developing 
world, had in the present Management and Secretariat and of their rising 
expectations of greater benefits from the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The 
main concerns of the developing countries were accelerated economic development, 
improved health and sanitation, and increased agricultural and industrial production. 
They look to atomic energy as a means to help solve those problems, 
70. The Philippine Government was grateful for the support it had received over 
the years from the Agency. The application of radioisotopes and nuclear techniques 
in medicine, agriculture and scientific research had already become generally 
accepted in the country. Efforts were currently being made to promote the 
industrial applications of radioisotopes. The construction of the first nuclear 
power plant in the Philippines was already well under way. It was expected to be 
in commercial operation in the second half of 1982. The Agency had extended 
technical assistance by sending safety missions to assist the local nuclear 
regulatory authority. 
71. The Philippine decision to "go nuclear" had been arrived at after consideration 
of the alternative resources available. While local circumstances favoured 
concentration on the use of geothermal, hydroelectric and other indigenous 
sources, the nuclear option was considered to be a further approach to ensuring 
the long-term availability and diversification of the energy supply within the 
current century and beyond. The Philippine case was not unique; other developing 
countries were looking increasingly to the use of nuclear power. There was thus 
greater reason for extending substantial technical assistance to the developing 
countries so that their nuclear power programmes could be implemented with a 
minimum of risk and could be operated by qualified local personnel. Criticisms 
had been made of the attempts by developing countries to establish nuclear power 
plants without the requisite national capability and infrastructure. That problem 
could be solved through assistance from the Agency. The proposed publication of 
a guidebook on nuclear manpower development was to be welcomed. I"t was impossible 

GC(XXII)/OE.205 
page 21 

to overemphasize the importance of making the guidebook available at the earliest 
possible time. 

72. The Philippine delegation was pleased to note that the Agency had already 
initiated moves for the accelerated implementation of its technical assistance 
programme. Increased and more effective assistance to the developing Member 
States in connection with their atomic energy programmes would ensure their 
continuing support for the Agency,s efforts at safeguards against possible 
diversion of nuclear materials and technology for non-peaceful purposes. 
73. The Philippine delegation appreciated the need for an increased Agency budget 
for 1979. However, the disproportionate increases in the establishment of new 
posts and in the budgetary allocations for the Agency's safeguards activities in 
comparison with its research and technical operations, particularly technical 
assistance and training, were matters of concern. Under its Statute, the Agencyhad 
a specific mandate to "seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". It had 
likewise been directed to "allocate its resources in such a manner as to secure 
efficient utilization and the greatest possible general benefit in all areas of 
the world, bearing in mind the special needs of the underdeveloped areas of the 
world". The provision of technical assistance to the developing countries, which 
represented almost 70$ of the membership, was therefore a basic function of the 
Agency. However, from 1971 to 1977 safeguards expenditures had increased 
from $1.6 million to $7.7 million, an average increase of $1 million a year. 
On the other hand, the allocation for technical assistance and training had risen 
from $0.64 million in 1971 to less than $2 million in 1977. Technical assistance 
had always been dependent on voluntary contributions, which never seemed adequate 
to service all the requests of Member States. It was difficult to understand the 
philosophy behind supporting safeguards activities under the regular programme 
while technical assistance was kept dependent on voluntary contributions. 

74. It was not the intention of the Philippine delegation to deny the importance 
of the Agency's nuclear safeguards functions. The Philippines had in fact 
demonstrated its support for the policy of nuclear non-proliferation by becoming 
a signatory of BPT and by signing a nuclear agreement with Australia which emphasized 

GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 22 


non-proliferation objectives. Pinal discussions were also being held on a 
separate nuclear agreement with another country. 

75. The non-proliferation objectives of HPT could be approached and the .Agency's 
safeguards responsibilities considerably reduced if there was less motivation for 
nations to develop their own nuclear weapons clandestinely. That could be done 
by eliminating discrimination among countries in the access to nuclear information 
and equipment, by ensuring the long—term availability under reasonable conditions 
of nuclear fuel and related services and by demonstrations of sincerity in 
effecting nuclear weapons disarmament. A non-proliferation strategy for the 1980s 
and beyond called for multinational co-operation and international understanding, 
IHFCE was a positive step in that direction. The study would be able to provide 
strategies and programmes to reduce the chances of proliferation and promote 
continued co-operation among developing and developed countries in the transfer 
of nuclear material, equipment, services and technology. 
76. The agitation by anti-nuclear groups to stop further development of nuclear 
power was already gaining world-wide momentum. The public, which was the ultimate 
beneficiary, should be given proper information about the benefits to be derived 
from nuclear power as well as about the associated potential hazards and social 
problems. The Agency could not remain unconcerned about current developments. 
It should intensify its work on the risk assessment and social problems of nuclear 
power, the development of internationally acceptable nuclear safety guides, codes 
and regulatory standards and the publication of technical information bulletins 
on the performance of nuclear power plants. 

77. The Philippine Government was especially interested in the Regional 
Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear 
Science and Technology (RCA), which was currently in its seventh year of implementation. 
Australia was most welcome as a new member and the increased assistance 
promised by the Agency and various Governments was greatly appreciated. The longterm 
RCA activities starting in 1978 were of a scope and magnitude that could 
demonstrate the usefulness of large radiation sources in the economic and social 
progress of developing countries. The projects could equally show the practicability 
of an exchange of scientific expertise among the countries within the region. The 
Philippines eagerly awaited the earliest possible implementation of the 
recommendations of the regional industrial radioisotopes mission that had visited 
RCA member countries early in 1978. Programmes on the commercial use of radiation 
for the preservation of fish and fishery products as well as of medical products 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 23 

and pharmaceuticals were urgently needed. It was to be hoped that the Agency 
would be responsive to the needs of the RCA countries in its future budgets. 

78. The Philippine Government recognized the attention and support given by 
the Director General and the Secretariat to the special needs of the developing 
countries. As a demonstration of its appreciation of, and full support for, the 
technical assistance programme, it was maintaining the offer of three Type II 
fellowships and would be contributing to the General Fund an amount in excess of 
that corresponding to its base rate of assessment. 
79. Mr. CHUCHOM (Thailand) said that the Director General's masterly opening 
statement and the concise but informative annual report provided an excellent 
basis for understanding the activities of the Agency. 
80. The General Conference gave Member States an opportunity to expound their 
views on various issues, and his delegation wished to begin with the subject 
close to the heart of all developing countries, namely technical assistance. 
81. The annual target for voluntary contributions to the General Fond, from 
which the Agency's technical assistance programme was largely financed, had 
always been a point of long discussion among Members of the Board of Governors. 
His delegation felt that some guideline or formula for arriving at the target 
should be agreed upon, so that the matter could be resolved more swiftly and 
rationally. Among the points to be considered in establishing such a guideline 
was that there should be some correlation between the target and the size of the 
Agency's budget. The present situation of practically no increase in the funds 
for technical assistance compared with a 27$ increase in the safeguards budget 
and an increase of over 20$ in the overall budget was clearly undesirable. In 
saying that, his delegation did not wish to minimize the important role of 
safeguards in the Agency's activities. However, the role of technical assistance, 
which was of direct benefit to the vast majority of Member States, should not be 
overlooked. 
82. The essentially voluntary character of the method of financing technical 
assistance had, alas, led to the problem of unobligated funds -a subject 
extensively dealt with in the annual report for 1977. His delegation wished to 
stress that that problem did not arise simply from the fact that some contributions 
were received in non-convertible currencies, since statistics showed that 
unobligated funds occurred in both convertible and non-convertible currencies, 

G0(XXEl)/OR.2O5 
page 24 

but was also in some measure due to deficiencies in project implementation. 
Thailand therefore welcomed the various steps being taken by the Agency to try 
and solve the problem. 

83. It was a matter for regret that many worthwhile projects were still having 
to be turned down owing to lack of funds. For example, that year a technically 
and economically sound project on uranium prospecting put forward by Thailand, 
could not be implemented for that reason and still remained as a "footnote a/" 
project. For a developing country like Thailand, which was still in the early 
stages of nuclear development, such a front-end fuel cycle project could be of 
immense value. 
84. Being a party to APT, Thailand supported the concept of full-scope 
safeguards, but at the same time it felt strongly that, if the safeguards 
programme was to be successful, provision must be made for developing Member 
States to have access to reliable fuel supplies as well as peaceful nuclear 
technology. All measures designed to achieve that objective were supported by 
his delegation. It was also in full agreement with the Director General's 
statement that nuclear-weapon Member States had an obligation to implement 
Articles IT and VI of DPT. 
85. As a party to the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Huclear Science and Technology (RCA), Thailand welcomed 
the meeting held recently in Kuala Lumpur to plan future RCA activities, and it 
also welcomed Japan as a new signatory. 
86. Thailand had always supported the work of the Agency, and it had always 
demonstrated its support by making its contributions to the General Fund and the 
Regular Budget at an early stage. For 1979 it had already pledged a contribution 
to the General Fond in the amount of US $9350> corresponding to its base rate of 
assessment. In conclusion, his delegation wished to thank the Chairman of the 
Group of 77, for convening a meeting of the Group for the first time during a 
session of the General Conference. That initiative should contribute to the 
effective participation of the Group of 77 in the work of the Agency. 
87. Mr. OSMAK (Egypt) said that the programme for 1979-84 as presented 
in document GC(xXIl)/600 reflected a considerable expansion in the Agency's 
activities over a wide range of peaceful applications of nuclear technology. 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 25 

Special emphasis had rightly been placed on nuclear power, nuclear safety and 
environmental protection, fuel cycle requirements and services and waste management 
and disposal. 

88. Everyone was aware of the complex and sensitive nature of the stage through 
which nuclear energy was passing, and in the years ahead solutions had to be found 
for a number of outstanding issues. 
89. In the first place, the world had to meet the growing demand for energy in 
order to maintain and enhance industrial development and to raise the standard of 
living in the developing world. Over the past few years nuclear power had 
assumed a unique and important role as the competitive alternative for meeting 
large-scale energy requirements in the future. It would no doubt continue to play 
such a role during the next few decades. 
90. But the development of nuclear power meant that three major challenges had 
to be met. The first and probably the most crucial challenge was that of the 
fuel cycle; after the discovery and mining of uranium ores, there had to be 
adequate enrichment services, fuel fabrication, irradiated fuel reprocessing and 
waste management and disposal. Secondly, it was necessary to protect the environment 
and to reassure the public about the safety of nuclear facilities. Thirdly, 
there was a need to stop proliferation and at the same time to further the transfer 
of nuclear energy and technology between supplier and recipient countries without 
pre-conditions or restrictions. 
91. Egypt appreciated the fact that the Agency had pursued a highly active role 
in providing advice and assistance to those Member States planning or embarking 
on nuclear power programmes to meet their immediate energy needs and, like other 
developing countries, had profited greatly from the training courses run by the 
Agency on the planning and implementation of nuclear power programmes. 
92. Among the notable achievements of the Agency during the past two decades had 
been those in the fields of health and nuclear safety and environmental protection. 
The Agency was to be specially commended for its programme on the development of 
standards and codes of practice for the safe operation of nuclear power plants. 
93. Another important accomplishment of the Agency was the International Buclear 
Information System (IMS), which provided an outstanding example of willingness on 
the part of States advanced in nuclear technology to share with others the results 
of their nuclear research and development programmes. IKIS had become valuable 
as a means for the distribution of technical information to all Member States. 

GC(XXII)/OE.205 
page 26 


94. The Agency's achievements had been made possible by ;the strong support and 
co-operation of it s Members, and, even more important, because decisions on 
nuclear policy had been made within the Agency by the competent bodies. But now 
it was found that major decisions were being taken outside the Agency by a limited 
number of Member States using non-proliferation as a pretext. 
95. Regarding the use of nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes (PNEs) there 
were certain obligations incumbent on nuclear-weapon States arising from Article V 
of NPT. PHEs had great economic potential in major engineering projects, such as 
the Qattara Depression project in Egypt, There had been a slowing down of 
development in that important field, and Egypt was distressed to see that the 
funds allocated under the Agency's budget for 1979 for the FNE Services Unit at 
the Agency had been reduced and that scheduled meetings on PNEs had been cancelled. 
It was time to establish an acceptable and well-defined Agency policy to assist 
in overcoming those difficulties and to draw up a programme to achieve the 
objectives set forth under Article V of HPT, a task which had rightly been entrusted 
to the Agency. He hoped that the Advisory Group on Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful 
Purposes would continue its work in order to find solutions for the important 
issues that were still outstanding according to the report the Group had 
submitted in 1977. The Agency should also define the steps necessary for 
undertaking a comprehensive survey of possible projects, for promoting and 
participating in feasibility studies for projects and for preparing the ground 
for the implementation of projects which proved to be technically, economically 
and environmentally feasible. He hoped that the Advisory Group meeting which the 
Director General had announced over a year before would be convened in the near 
future. 

96. INFCE was a tangible sign of enlightened international co-operation. Egypt had 
participated actively in the various INFCE working groups as well as in the 
Technical Co-ordinating Committee meetings and noted with satisfaction that the 
technical and administrative discussion showed many areas of common agreement. 
Topics under discussion in the INFCE meetings such as fuel assurances, spent fuel 
storage, reprocessing, breeder reactors, improved efficiency of thermal reactors, 
advanced converter reactors and alternative fuel cycles were of great importance 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 27 


to developing and developed countries, to nuclear-weapon States and to 

non-nuclear-weapon States 'alike. Egypt would continue to participate actively in 

INFCE and to contribute to it in a constructive manner in order to achieve the 

dual objective of technology transfer and meeting energy needs on the one hand 

and nuclear non-proliferation on the other. 

97. Egypt was dedicated to the prevention of proliferation and believed that the 
efforts made in that area had produced notable accomplishments, although many 
important developments lay ahead. HPT had been a milestone in efforts to prevent 
nuclear proliferation, and Egypt had participated actively in the negotiation of HPT 
and in the Geneva Disarmament Conference. As an expression of its strong support 
for the Treaty, his country had co-sponsored the General Assembly resolution 
commending MPT and asking for it to be open for signature to all States; Egypt had 
in fact been among the first to sign. Although his Government had not yet 
ratified the Treaty, that did not mean that it no longer supported it. Egypt 
was prepared to ratify HPT, provided that all countries in the same region did so. 
In the meantime, Egypt's support for non-proliferation had been demonstrated by 
its co—sponsorship of United Nations General Assembly resolutions on the 
denuclearization of Africa and on the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the 
Middle East. 
98. More than a year earlier a proposal for the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute had been submitted to the Board of Governors by Members from the areas 
of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia in order to increase the number 
of elected seats on the Board. Egypt's views regarding the under-representation 
of those two areas and the necessity for the amendment of Article VI had been 
presented during the discussion of item 9 of the Conference's agenda. He hoped 
that the General Conference would arrive at a consensus that would rectify the 
injustice done to those two areas. 
99. Egypt was continuing to promote its national programmes for the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear technology to further its economic and social development. 
In addition to the activities of the Egyptian Atomic Energy Establishment, of 
the Authority for Nuclear Power and of the Authority for Huclear Materials, the 
National Centre for Radiation had started operation at the end of 1977. The 
facilities at the centre would provide means for sterilizing medical ecjuipment 
and other material and would also be used for research and development in connection 
with food preservation and for pilot agricultural and industrial experiments. 

GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 28 

100. His delegation believed that the funds, allocated to the promotional activities 
of the Agency were insufficient, and he noted that the target for voluntary contributions 
for technical assistance still remained far below the needs and expectations 
of the developing countries. Since the same problem occurred every year, the 
Agency might consider the establishment of criteria which could be used as a 
basis for establishing the target so that it need not be established on an ad hoc 
basis. Such criteria should take due account of inflation, increases in the costs 
of experts and equipment, and fluctuations in rates of exchange. The Agency 
should seek ways of achieving increases in the target for technical assistance; 
if the system of voluntary contributions proved inappropriate, some additional 
means could be sought. Egypt considered technical assistance to be one of the 
most important functions of the Agency where developing countries were concerned 
and had decided to maintain its voluntary contribution to the General Fund for 1979 
at the same level as its contribution for 1978. 
101. Mr. MEDDAH (Tunisia) said that Tunisia, which had acceded to MPT, 
attached great importance to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, A number of 
nuclear projects had been -undertaken in Tunisia in the agricultural sphere; one 
was aimed at suppressing the Mediterranean fruit fly using the sterile-male 
technique, and a cobalt bomb had been acquired for that purpose. In the field of 
public health, a national radiation protection service was already in operation 
and a number of hospitals were using radioactive sources for certain types of 
medical treatment. In the industrial sector, Tunisia's Central Laboratory had a 
team specializing in non-destructive testing for the checking of welds and 
concrete structures. The work of the Central Laboratory would be extended to the 
testing of foodstuffs and various other industrial checking procedures. Radioactive 
sources were also being used by two oil companies for determining hydrocarbon 
ratings. 
102. Tunisia also had a special interest in substitute forms of energy. Following 
research conducted by the College of Engineering and the establishment of a 
company for the fabrication and installation of solar-electric water heating plants, 
the use of solar energy for heating domestic water was beginning to gain ground. 
At the same time, Tunisia, which was elaborating an energy programme up to the 
year 2000, was studying the desirability of constructing nuclear power stations. 
GC(mi)/OR.205 
page 29 

103, His delegation wished to express its gratitude to the Agency for the technical 
assistance it had provided to Tunisia, including the secondment of an expert to 
the Central Laboratory and the supply of equipment for the application of isotopes 
in industry. Another Agency expert had recently concluded an assignment in Tunisia, 
assisting the National Office of Mines with the preparation of a uranium prospec+ing 
project. 

104, His delegation welcomed the eloquent plea made by the Director Ceneral in his 

address to the Conference that developing countries should have free access to 
nuclear technology. It also noted with satisfaction the accent which the 
Director General had placed on technical assistance, which he had described as a 

fundamental part of the Agency's programme, 

105, Regrettably, an ever-increasing imbalance was to be observed between the 
regulatory and promotional activities of the Agency, as a result of which technical 
assistance was tending to become merely an adjunct to the Agency's programme and 
budget, 

106, Tunisia considered it of vital importance to ensure that technical assistance 
in the nuclear field was used solely for peaceful purposes. The application of 
safeguards was of course one of the two principal objectives of the Agency under 
its Statute, the other being to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. However, the 
runaway development of the safeguards system, which was reflected by an exorbitant 
increase in the Regular Budget of the Agency, should not be supported at the 
expense of technical assistance, Hor should safeguards be used to satisfy the 
desires of those who wished to restrict the access of developing countries to 
nuclear technology. Moreover, why could technical assistance not be financed 
from the Regular Budget rather than by voluntary contributions? 

107, It was sad to note that, as distinct from all the other organizations in the 
United Nations system, the Agency continued to ignore the basic principle of the 
sovereign equality of States, The distribution of seats on the Board of Governors 
was a glaring illustration of that. It was with the aim of redressing the 
injustice to which they were subject that the Member States from the area of 
Africa and the area of the Middle East and South Asia were inviting the General 
Conference to recognize their right to equitable representation on the Board of 
Governors, Their objective was not in any way to upset the balance that was 

claimed to exist at present, but to provide countries in the two under-privileged 
regions with the opportunity of making a fuller contribution to the life and work 
of the Agency, 


GC(xni)/OR.205 
page 30 


108. It was the desire and intention of his country, like that of all those 
belonging to the Group of 77, to work with other Members of the Agency towards 
peace and prosperity for mankind. In that spirit, the non-aligned countries, 
of which Tunisia was one, had reaffirmed their support at the meeting held 
recently at foreign minister level in Belgrade for the convening of an international 
conference on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in accordance with 
Resolution 32/50 of the United Nations General Assembly. 
109. Mr. ALLOTEY (Ghana) agreed with the Director General that developing 
countries could not make do with windmills or content themselves with "appropriate", 
"soft" or "intermediate" technologies, and that to turn the wheels of industrialization, 
which appeared to be the only hope for raising the standard of living in 
the developing countries, the best solution lay in the acquisition of nuclear 
technology. Ghana therefore on the whole supported the programme trends 
envisaged by the Agency for the period 1979-84. In the area of technical 
assistance, in particular, he was happy to note that the Agency planned to take 
measures aimed at increasing the Agency's ability to respond more effectively to 
technical assistance requests from developing countries. Agency intentions to 
place emphasis on maximizing the developmental impact of technical assistance 
projects in Member States was a step in the right direction. However, he wished 
to stress the very close correlation between the Agency's capacity to respond 
more effectively to technical assistance requests and the funds available to the 
Agency. As long as funds for technical assistance continued to be tied to voluntary 
contributions, the Agency could hardly meet technical assistance requests adequately. 
Serious consideration should be given by the Agency to changing the budgetary 
arrangements. 
110. The esoalatory trend that had characterized the Agency's budget over the 
past few years had still not ended. It was true that some of the factors that 
had influenced the increases for 1979 were beyond the control of the Agency, but 
if a wholesome relationship was not kept between expansion in the Agency,s 
regulatory and promotional activities there would be a danger of frustrating the 
noble objective of the Agency with respect to the developing countries, which was 
to promote the transfer of skill and knowledge relating to the use of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes in order to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of 
atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 31 

111. His delegation regretted that, in spite of the commendable efforts on the 
part of the delegates of the areas concerned to achieve an agreeable compromise 
on the proposed amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute, no consensus had 
emerged in the Board of Governors, The request of Member States in the two areas 
was legitimate because the proposed increase would make for equitable geographical 
representation. 
112. Ghana was continuing work on applications of nuclear energy and techniques 
to food and agriculture and to medicine. The programme on food and agriculture, 
which was actively supported by Ghana's Ministry of Agriculture, covered selected 
local vegetables and food crops, including grains and legumes, and involved 
studies aimed at establishing optimum conditions for their preservation by means 
of gamma-rays, including preservation from microbial spoilage, fungal attack and 
insect infestation. Those studies had reached an advanced stage. In addition 
to food preservation studies, some work was being done on plant breeding, pest 
control and soil plant nutrition. In the area of medical applications, the current 
programme had so far been mainly in the field of diagnosis because of limitations 
as regards facilities for therapeutic applications. 
113. Mrs. ESPAHA de MERIPA (Guatemala) said that hers was a small country 
which was still struggling to overcome the disastrous effect of the 1976 earthquake. 
It was looking to atomic energy to help raise the level .of health of its 
population, to eradicate agricultural pests, to improve crops and to benefit 
industry and science. Guatemala had initiated a modest nuclear programme, which 
from the beginning had received assistance from the Agency. An effort was being 
made to extend the programme by training personnel at the university level. 
Although adequate local energy sources were-available, recourse to nuclear power 
would eventually be necessary, and Guatemala wished to keep in close contact with 
progress in that field so that it could make a reasoned choice among the various 
options at the appropriate time. 
114. With regard to the draft budget for 1979, it was understandable that there 
should be a considerable increase in the sums needed to meet the growing demands 
for technical assistance, but there was a lack of proportion between the sums 
provided for that aspect of the Agency's activities and-those allocated to 
safeguards. As a signatory of KPT and the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear 
Weapons in Latin America (the Tlatelolco Treaty)-^, Guatemala was not opposed 
2/ Reproduced in IAEA Legal Series Mo. 9 (STl/PUB/387). 


GC(XXn)/OR.205 

page 32 

t•o the Agency taking all possible steps to carry out its inspection duties 
efficiently, but it recognized a possible injustice in the fact that technical 
assistance funds had not increased in the same proportion. When general inflation, 
rises in the costs of equipment and in salaries, and the constant fall in the 
purchasing power of the dollar were taken into account, it was clear that the 
target of US $8.5 million set for voluntary contributions would at best enable 
the technical assistance programme only to be maintained at the level of previous 
years. The industrialized countries should make a substantial increase in their 
contribution. 

115. The Guatemalan delegation believed that there should be early approval of 
the principles governing the provision of technical assistance. The Director 
General ought to have the power to approve urgent requests for assistance which 
were submitted late; the funds involved would represent only a small proportion 
of the total available for technical assistance. 
116. The Director General was to be congratulated on the work carried out during 1977, 
as detailed in documents GC(XXH)/lHP/l77 and GC(XKtl)/597. In the Introduction of 
the latter document it was noted that 206 nuclear plants had been in operation 
"without a single radiation-induced fatality or even a serious radiation-induced 
accident", but "This outstanding safety record continues to receive little or no 
publicity in the popular press, although the most insignificant leakage or mishap 
is certain to give rise to headlines around the world." The Agency ought to use 
the services of an international publicity agent to make known what high safety 
standards had actually been achieved in the field of nuclear technology. 
117. INFCE was to be welcomed since it could lead to measures which would assist 
non-proliferation. Guatemala supported the conclusion of an international 
convention for the physical protection of nuclear materials and considered it 
important that an agreement should be reached to cover all nuclear materials 
whatever their final destination. 
118. Mr. SODMOH (Mongolia) welcomed the delegation of the Socialist Republic 
of Viet Bam, which was attending a session of the General Conference for the first 
time. 
119. The present session of the General Conference was notable for the fact that 
it had been preceded by a special session of the General Assembly of the United 
Nations devoted to questions of disarmament. One of the main results of that 
0C(XXII)/OR.205 
page 33 

special session was that all participants - with just one exception - had agreed 
that disarmament was a problem of universal import and that the combined efforts 
of all countries without exception would be required if a radical solution was to 
be found. The adoption of practical and effective measures to halt the arms race 
and achieve disarmament would be the most reliable guarantee of political dltente, 
strengthening as it was bound to do the foundations of peace and international 
security. In that connection his delegation fully supported the ideas and 
suggestions concerning practical ways of halting the arms race and strengthening 
peace and international security which had been put forward by the Soviet Union. 

120. A few days before, the Soviet Government had come forward with a new initiative 
aimed at further consolidating peace - namely, a proposal to all countries of the 
world that they should conclude a convention designed to strengthen guarantees for 
the safety of non-nuclear-weapon States. His delegation supported that proposal, 
for it believed that a convention of the kind envisaged by the Soviet Union would 
help to ward off a nuclear catastrophe. All nuclear powers would, under the 
proposed scheme, undertake not to use nuclear weapons against States which renounced 
the production and procurement of such weapons and did not possess them on their 
territory. That would also enhance the universal character of HPT and strengthen 
the Agency's safeguards system. A good deal of progress had been made in the past 
decade, since the conclusion of HPT, but much remained to be done and fresh efforts 
were required. 
121. Enhancement of the effectiveness of Agency safeguards occupied a particularly 
important place among measures capable of strengthening the non-proliferation regime, 
and the Agency was in fact making very considerable efforts in that direction. 
Even so, much still had to be done if the world was to have reliable guarantees that 
no nuclear materials would be diverted for military use. Thus, the present situation 
regarding the application of Agency safeguards in the non-nuclear-weapon member 
States of the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) could not but give rise to 
concern. The subsidiary arrangements and facility attachments required in connection 
with the safeguards agreement concluded between the Agency, EURATOM and those 
countries'™ should be speedily completed; that would enhance the authority of KPT 
and strengthen the non-proliferation regime. 
122. One could not help observing that the regime established to prevent the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons was continually being challenged, both by certain 
States and by the military-industrial complex of the West. The Peking leaders 
3/ Reproduced in document INFCrRC/lSl. 


GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 34 


were vehement opponents of non-proliferation, as everyone knew. Disquiet was felt 
also at the nuclear preparations being carried out in countries like South Africa 
and Israel. The peace-loving States of the world should not allow such plans to 
come to fruition. 

123. The Government of Mongolia shared the concern felt by many countries at the 
danger of a further proliferation of nuclear weapons which would threaten the 
security of all. The safeguards system developed "by the .Agency was beyond any 
doubt one of the most important elements for realizing the aims of 33PT, and, that 
being so, his delegation supported the Agency's safeguards activities and its 
future plans in relation to safeguards. 
124. The Mongolian delegation had carefully studied the Director General's report, 
in which the various activities and plans of the Agency were outlined, and was 
pleased to note the significant achievements of the Agency. Mongolia supported 
the programme for 1979-84, and in particular the plans relevant to technical 
assistance, for the Agency's technical assistance to developing countries was 
highly important at the present. juncture. It enabled the achievements of nuclear 
science and technology to be passed on to the developing countries. Mongolia 
had itself received technical assistance from the Agency in the training of 
specialists and in various other spheres of nuclear science, for which it wished 
to express its gratitude. 
125. As far as voluntary contributions were concerned, his delegation welcomed the 
decision to raise the target to US $8.5 million. Mongolia would be making its 
contribution to the General Fund, 
126. The documents before the Conference gave evidence of the Agency's successful 
work during the past year and revealed, in general, a good, well-thought-out 
programme. In that connection he wished to give due recognition to the capable 
leadership provided by the Agency's Director General, Dr. Sigvard Eklund, as well 
as to the productive work of the whole Secretariat. 
127. In conclusion, the Mongolian delegation was confident that the present 
session of the General Conference would make a valuable contribution to international 
collaboration in the utilization of nuclear energy for the good of the whole world. 
128. Mr. KABBAHI (Saudi Arabia) supported the endeavours of the Director 
General to have statements by delegates regarding work and achievements of a 
national character presented to the Conference in the form of documents. The 
GC(XXII)/OR.205 
page 35 

limited time available for the general debate should be used for comments on the 
Annual Report and the financial situation in general. It emerged from the 
Annual Report for 1977 that the Agency was moving away from meeting the urgent 
needs of developing countries. The advanced Member States were exerting pressure 
to transfoim the Agency into a tool for the implementation of their own policies 
alone. Indeed, certain restrictions and limitations were being agreed upon outside 
the Agency and communicated to it, instead of being formulated within the Agency; 
examples of that were the recent meeting of the "London Club" and the communications 
which the Agency had been requested to reproduce (see document IirPCIRC/254). 

129. One reason for such developments lay in the composition of the Board of 
Governors, which explained why Saudi Arabia had supported and would continue to 
support the amendment of Article VI of the Statute. 
130. The proposal submitted by his country jointly with Iran and Pakistan (see 
Annex II of document GC(xXIl)/602) did not totally remove the injustice done to 
Member States in the area of Africa. However, Saudi Arabia supported any amendment 
which would improve the representation of developing countries. 
131. Turning to the financial situation, he said that in 1978 Saudi Arabia had 
pledged as its voluntary contribution to the General Bund an amount three times 
that corresponding to its base rate of assessment, and it hoped to do the same 
in 1979. However, large annual increases in budgets were making it increasingly 
difficult for many developing countries to meet their financial obligations 
towards international organizations. For many less fortunate developing countries, 
participation in some of those organizations had long been subject to a law of 
diminishing returns, as the organizations in question believed that large staffs 
and budgets enhanced their prestige irrespective of the type, quality and amount 
of assistance they rendered to Member States. His delegation was, however, 
prepared to accept the budget for 1979 in view of the untiring efforts of the 
Director General to effect maximum savings. 
132. In conclusion, he said that technical assistance needed to be more effective. 
It constituted one of the main functions of the Agency and it was the activity 
that most benefited the majority of Member States. It should therefore be financed 
in the same way as, for example, the move to the Donaupark, Article VI of the 
Statute had been amended twice and - He hoped - would be amended again, and if there 
was good will on the part of all concerned it should also be possible to amend 
Article XIV with regard to the financing of technical assistance. 
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m. 


GC(XXII)/OR.206 
April 1979* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER I978 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Thursday, 21 September 1978, at 3.10 p.m. 


President; Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the Paragraphs 
agenda** 


General debate and . annual report for 1977 
(continued) 1 -75 


Statements by-the dele Jgations of: 


Uruguay 1 — 7 
Turkey 8 -16 
Cuba 17 — 25 
Liechtenstein 26 — 29 
Ghile 30 — 36 
Zambia 37 — 45 
Peru 46 — 55 
Morocco 56 — 61 
Sudan 62 — 66 
Austria 67 -75 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 6~ October 1978. 
**/ GC(XXII)/605. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXII)/INF/l79/Rev.2 


78-12110 



GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 2 


GHJERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1977 (continued) 

1. Mr. BERGER (Uruguay) said that his country was carrying out a number 
of programmes in the nuclear field, related to nuclear medicine, the application 
of radioisotopes to agriculture, veterinary medicine and the irradiation of foodstuffs; 
industry was also beginning to use nuclear techniques. In each of those 
areas, Uruguay had first-class technicians who had already worked as Agency 
experts. Uruguay would in the near future have to deal with energy problems and 
find new energy sources to replace oil, natural gas and coal. 
2. Various steps were being taken to that end, including a study by the National 
Electricity Company into the possibilities of the hydroelectric network, an investi 
gation into a number of energy conservation measures applicable in particular to 
the industrial sector but also to domestic consumption and transport, an increase 
in the amount of wo-.k being done on the evaluation of uranium resources and 
finally the development and implementation of a research reactor programme which 
would lead to the setting up of nuclear power plants. During the previous year, 
the uranium prospecting programme had been speeded up and a 10-kW research 
reactor had been installed. 
3. An Agency expert was collaborating in a long-term technical assistance programme. 
Under his direction, and with the support of the Agency and the cooperation 
of friendly countries, a group was being set up to deal with the 
purchase and operation of nuclear power plants. 
4. Uruguay had been among the first countries to sign the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NFT)—' and had been a member of the Organization 
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (OPANAL) since its 
inception, which clearly showed that it had no intention of manufacturing nuclear 
weapons and constituted a form of reassurance for the countries which were 
providing it with nuclear technology and fuel, 
5. Other countries were, like Uruguay, turning to nuclear energy and so the 
need for safeguards and technical' assistance could only increase. Uruguay 
noted with satisfaction the efforts the Agency was making to improve its technical 
assistance despite the difficulties created by the growth in its programmes 
at a time when funds were limited and the dollar was undergoing a crisis. 
Uruguay was happy to have been chosen to benefit from a planning mission. 
GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 3 

6. As he had already stated at the 1977 session of the General Conference, 
Uruguay supported the move to carry out multi-year projects within the Agency's 
regular programme. It urged that technical assistance be financed from the 
Regular Budget and be independent of voluntary contributions, which could be used 
as supplementary funds. The experts who provided assistance should be chosen 
from among the most highly qualified personnel available. 
7. Uruguay reiterated its confidence in the Agency and would make a voluntary 
contribution in line with the target proposed for the next financial year. 
8. Mr. INHAN (Turkey) said that the Turkish nuclear energy programme, 
which was geared to the economic development and welfare of the people, was 
progressing in a satisfactory manner. The demand for electrical energy in 
Turkey had grown at an average rate of 11$ during the previous 12 years. That 
rapid increase seemed certain to continue and the 1978 figure of 4500 MW for 
the generation of electricity was expected to rise to 35 000 MM in the 1990s. 
An extra 10 000 MW would probably be needed to meet Turkey's energy demands by 
the year 2000. Nuclear power generation would therefore be playing an important 
role towards the end of the century. 
9. Several countries, including Turkey, considered nuclear energy to be the 
only possible replacement for oil, as had been reaffirmed at the Tenth Session 
of the World Energy Conference in Istanbul in 1977. 
10. Most countries, and especially the developing ones, were interested in 
nuclear power generation and the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE). 
The Turkish Government hoped that the IN5CB working groups would help to establish 
guidelines which would be generally acceptable and would take into account 
the special needs of developing countries. 
11. Despite certain delays, the Turkish nuclear programme was under way. Authorization 
for the construction of the first nuclear power plant (at Akkuyu, and 
with a capacity of 600 MW) had been issued to the Turkish Electricity Authority 
in 1976 and the reactor would probably be put into operation about 1985. A 
preliminary siting study for a second nuclear plant (of 1000 MW) had just been 
started. 
12. Turkey was grateful to the Agency for the aid it had provided. Nine Agency 
experts had visited Turkey during the current year and had participated actively 
in the task of evaluating tenders, carrying out safety analyses and studying 
l / Reproduced in document INFCIHC/140. 


GC(XXn)/OR.206 , 
page 4 

fuel management problems. The Turkish Government was basing its work on the 
Agency's codes of practice and safety guides. It would still need Agency experts 
to take part in studies on the safety of nuclear plants. 

13. Turkey attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme and would continue to support the Agency's activities related to the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy in Member States. In that connection, it had 
already pledged for 1979 a voluntary contribution to the General Fund in line 
with its base rate of assessment. Moreover, Turkey would soon ratify HPT, which 
it had signed in 1969. 
14. The Turkish Atomic Energy Commission had recently decided to raise the 
power of the TR-1 research reactor from 1 MW to 5 MW in order to increase the 
production of radioisotopes for use in nuclear medicine, agriculture and research 
Work on the construction of the TR-2 research reactor was continuing. 
15. In 1975, the Agency had assisted in setting up a Nuclear Research Institute 
for the application of radioisotopes in veterinary medicine and agriculture. 
The buildings for the Institute, whose estimated cost was Iff 15 million, were 
under construction. 
16. A TRIGA Mark II research reactor was being installed on the new campus of 
the Nuclear Energy Institute of the Technical University of Istanbul. It would 
be used for training technical personnel and promoting research into nuclear 
energy. 
17. Mr. CARDEKAS VALUES (Cuba) welcomed the delegation of the Socialist 
Republic of Viet Nam, which was present for the first time in the history of 
the General Conference. 
18. The development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy raised political and 
economic problems whose solution, Cuba was convinced, depended on international 
co-operation. If the threat of a third world war - which was aggravated by the 
existence of nuclear weapons - was to be averted, the entire international 
community must strive for the abolition of nuclear weapons; in that connection, 
the nuclear-weapon States bore a particular responsibility. 
19. Recalling the words of the Vice-President of the Cuban Council of State and 
Council of Ministers at the special session of the United Nations General 
Assembly, he endorsed the developing countries' concern about obstacles to 
nuclear development and the resultant risk of restrictions on the international 
GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 5 

transfer of technology. Concern about non-proliferation must not stifle development. 
The Agency was the organization most eminently suitable as a forum for 
dealing with those problems. 

20. Cuba was convinced of the important role that nuclear energy could play in 
development and was installing its first nuclear power plant with assistance 
from the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. Work was also in hand for 
the establishment of a centre for nuclear research and the application of nuclear 
technology to various sectors of the economy. 
21. Cuba had made initial contact with the Agency on the question of a safeguards 
agreement. 
22. Technical assistance provided by the Agency was highly important to Cuba, 
which hoped to begin carrying out a UNDP nuclear project in 1978. 
23. He noted with regret that the Agency's provision of technical assistance 
was still subject to considerable delays. The situation had to be remedied; 
meanwhile, however, Cuba would continue to contribute to the General Fund. 
24. Co-operation as exemplified by the important agreement the Agency had concluded 
with the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) must be fostered. 
25. Peaceful uses of nuclear energy could contribute to the well-being of 
future generations, although the threat which it represented to peace must be 
averted. 
26. Mr. AUWitRTER (Liechtenstein) said his Government hoped that the work 
of the current session would help to dispel the current confusion of public 
opinion concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The language of the 
physicist and the technician in that field was often hard for the layman to 
grasp; as a result, it inevitably led to misunderstandings. Scientists should 
try to make clear, in simple and convincing terms, to those unfamiliar with the 
undoubtedly intricate subject that the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes 
was a compelling requirement. Tables, graphs, and comparative safety 
studies were of little real help in that respect. For instance, talk of the 
"small probability of an accident" would lead many laymen to believe that something 
was being concealed behind the notion; arguments based on such beliefs 
were often advanced by opponents of the use of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 6 

27. Present-day society should be made aware of its selfishness and made to 
think about what the consequences of its carelessness would be for future generations. 
The world was living in an age of synthetic materials whose production, 
being derived from fossil raw materials, was still inexpensive. But the question 
had to be asked whether such materials would still be available 50 years hence 
and, if the answer was no, how they could be economized at present. The only 
answer was the use of electrical energy. 
28. A further example was the reduction, because of growing pollution, in the 
renewal of oxygen. The highly-industrialized countries in Europe already showed 
a negative balance in that respect because of the large-scale consumption of 
oxygen for combustion purposes. Problems of that sort were independent of 
national frontiers, and they affected large and small countries alike. 
29. With regard to the situation in Liechtenstein, the availability of sufficient 
energy sources was essential to maintaining and promoting the country's 
economy. Only a link with Switzerland in energy matters would enable energy 
requirements to be satisfied. Agreements involving Liechenstein's financial 
participation had therefore been concluded with Swiss companies. His country's 
technological contribution to the development and use of nuclear energy for 
peaceful purposes was through the investment, by national industrial enterprises, 
of considerable funds for the development and manufacture of instruments and 
machinery for theoretical and applied nuclear research. Liechtenstein, being 
fully aware of the risks inherent in any abuse of nuclear energy, accepted 
the obligations arising from its agreement with the Agency' for the application 
of safeguards pursuant to NFT. It would continue to support the Agency in 
carrying out its tasks. 
30. Mr. RODRIGUEZ VELIS (Chile) said that his country was highly satisfied 
with the efforts being made by the Agency in one of its basic activities, 
namely technical assistance, through which nuclear energy in its peaceful 
applications was being placed at the service of mankind's development. 
31. His delegation could report with satisfaction and pride on the progress 
made in Chile in connection with a variety of non-military applications of 
nuclear energy. It would, however, limit itself to commenting on the most 
important among them. 
GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 7 

32. The Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission had designed and built a pilot plant 
for the production of uranium concentrates as a by-product of copper. Chilean 
engineers had been entirely responsible for executing the work, drawing on the 
country's own technology, and the facility was giving satisfactory results; Chile 
was therefore now considering moving to the industrial production stage. The 
success of the enterprise, which was acknowledged by the Agency, had enabled 
Chile to put its facilities at the disposal of interested countries of the region. 
33. The first nuclear power station in Chile was due to enter into service in 
1988; work was proceeding satisfactorily with the help of the Agency and also 
with substantial support from UNDP. 
34. Work had just been completed on the building and fitting out of a multipurpose 
irradiation facility with help from the Agency and the Spanish Junta 
de Energia Nuclear. 
35« A seminar on "International Dimensions of Nuclear Policy" was to be held 

in Santiago starting in a few days' time; many international organizations, 

including the Agency, would be participating. 

36. In conclusion, he expressed his country's gratitude for the valuable 
technical assistance it had received from the Agency, as also its thanks to 
such countries as Spain and Argentina which had given Chile the benefit of their 
own experience. 
37. Mr. ZIMBA (Zambia) said that his Government wished to reaffirm its 
support for the two main functions of the Agency, namely the provision of technical 
assistance and the implementation of safeguards. 
38. Zambia had continued to receive technical assistance from the Agency at a 
modest level in 1977. Two projects in particular had benefited, one on radioactive 
raw materials prospection and the other on the strengthening of the 
nuclear physics programme at the University of Zambia. The first had already 
been carried out and the second would, it was hoped, soon be undertaken. 
39» Further, the Agency had helped organize an advisory meeting on the uranium 
deposits of Africa in November 1977, which Zambia had been privileged to host. 
The main objectives of the meeting had been to discuss the geology of uranium 
ore deposits in Africa, to outline problems requiring further study, to stimulate 
research and to make recommendations on ways and means for instituting co-operation 
among African countries on uranium geology problems. Geologists coming 


GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 8 

from Africa, Europe and Worth America had presented papers on the results of 
recent research and stimulating discussions had taken place on unconformity- and 
sandstone-type deposits and the possibilities of finding such deposits in the 
African continent. Attention had been focused upon the uranium potential of 
the phosphate deposits in northern and western parts of Africa, definition of 
metallogenic epochs in ore deposits, exploration techniques and the effect of 
different climatic, morphological and vegetational conditions on their potential 
usefulness and, lastly, sophisticated laboratory procedures involved in the 
study of fluid inclusions. Case histories had been presented by a number of 
the participants relating, inter alia, to the Gabon deposits, the mineralization 
in the Katanga metasediments and the sandstone of Zambia, uranothorite 
in Madagascar and pitchblende in Togo, together with accounts of exploration 
activities in Zaire, Sudan, Nigeria, Morocco, Algeria, Ethiopia and Libya. 
The meeting had been of great importance for several African States which, like 
Zambia, were planning to start soon on exploring for and exploiting uranium 
deposits. Zambia hoped that assistance of the same kind and also in other forms 
would continue to be rendered by the Agency, in order to help exploit the vast 
resources of energy in the African continent. 

40. It was Zambia's considered opinion, however, that it was not enough to 
give help only in the exploitation of raw materials; it would like to see an 
equally ready responsiveness by the Agency extended to Zambia's other requests 
for technical assistance intended to develop its capacity to exploit atomic 
energy in its peaceful applications in various fields. 
41. VJhile appreciating the effort made by the Secretariat to establish an 
effective technical assistance programme for the coming five years, his delegation 
nevertheless saw no guarantee of effective execution in the way in which 
the programme would be funded. The programme would continue to be financed 
mostly from voluntary contributions and little or no heed seemed to have been 
taken of the pleas made by the majority of the Agency's Members to have the 
technical assistance programme funded more than was now the case from the 
Regular Budget. His delegation hoped that the somewhat hardened attitude of 
those opposing such a move would change, so that the technical assistance programme 
might have a real developmental impact in the developing Member States 
which, despite their rich potentialities, had as yet benefited little from 
nuclear energy. 
GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 9 

42. Zambia also hoped that a common ground, paying due regard to the needs 
of the majority, would soon be found with respect to the draft Guiding Principles 
and General Operating Rules to 
Govern the Provision of Technical Assistance 
by the Agency. It took the view that the conditional requirement relating to 
KPT was discriminatory and would not by itself solve the problem of nuclear 
weapons proliferation; other factors had a larger bearing on the matter. 

43. His country welcomed the Agency's planned promotional activities in other 
areas and believed that the Agency should play a significant role in the development 
of new nuclear energy applications likely to be of benefit to the developing 
countries in the short as well as the long term, including, in particular, 
the technology of controlled nuclear fusion as a relatively cheap source of 
energy for the future. The Agency's participation in such work should, however, 
be on the understanding that any such new technologies developed should be 
applied for the benefit of all countries and not merely the industrialized ones. 
44. Referring once again to the presence of vast uranium resources in the 
African continent, he pointed out that, in a few years' time, the African 
Member States as a whole would become significant suppliers of uranium, most 
of which would be destined for power reactors abroad. Indeed, Africa's uranium 
resources had already been put to use in industrialized countries. His delegation 
accordingly believed that the African Member States should have a say 
commensurate with their importance in atomic energy matters and should certainly 
be able to determine the fate of their own natural resources. The African region, 
however, was under-represented in the Board of Governors. His country therefore 
supported the moves that had been made towards remedying the situation, by 
ensuring equitable representation which took due account of the region's importance 
as a supplier of a significant energy source. His delegation did not 
believe that the proposed increase in Board seats allocated to Africa and to 
the Middle East and South Asia would be detrimental to the Board's efficiency. 
In any case, even if that were to be true, why should the maintenance of efficiency 
be at the expense of the two regions in question? 
45. His Government, he recalled, had taken a consistent stand against apartheid. 
The Agency's assistance to South Africa benefited only a minority of its 
population, which was absolutely unjustifiable. Until there was a return to 
respect for human values, all collaboration between the Agency and South Africa 
should be discontinued. The Agency, rather than merely refusing to support that 

GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 10 

system, should play its part in bringing about the end of apartheid. His 
delegation would like to know how many of the South Africans employed in the 
Agency were drawn from the indigenous majority of the population. If none, as 
was highly likely, his delegation would request the Secretariat to institute 
immediate measures to ensure that further recruitment from South Africa should 
represent all the ethnic groups among the population. 

46. Mr. BARHEDA DELGADO (Peru) recalled that his country had signed and 
ratified NFT and the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America—/(the Tlatelolco Treaty) and said he wanted to refer to some of his 
country's achievements in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
47. The objective of the first stage in the Peruvian nuclear development plan 
was to provide the country with the equipment that would enable it to benefit 
from peaceful nuclear technology. To that end, the Peruvian Nuclear Energy 
Institute had negotiated directly with the Argentine National Atomic Energy 
Commission a contract relating to the design, construction and commissioning of 
a nuclear research centre in Peru. The negotiations had been carriedout in a 
spirit of brotherly co-operation and had been marked by the desire to strengthen 
the bonds of friendship between the two countries. The contract, signed in 
November 1977, would go down in the history of the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy in South America since it was the first case of the transfer of 
nuclear technology between two countries in that area. Bearing in mind the 
necessity of training staff, the two signatory organizations had first constructed 
a training reactor, which had been officially put into service in July 1978 at 
the Institute's headquarters. 
48. During the first stage, the supply of enriched uranium had necessitated 
the signing of a quadripartite instrument between Peru, Argentina, the United 
States of America and the Agency, and had involved the conclusion, between the 
Government of Peru and the Agency, of agreements (under the general agreement 
on safeguards and technical assistance) in line with the spirit of the Tlatelolco 
Treaty. 
2/ Reproduced in IAEA Legal Series No. 9 (STl/PUB/387). 

GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 11 

49. Construction of the nuclear research centre had started in October 1978 
and should be completed in 1982. The centre would enable Peru to gain the 
experience in nuclear matters which it needed to place nuclear energy at the 
service of national development. On the basis of principles laid down by the 
Agency, the Government of Peru was drawing up regulations to govern the utilization 
and application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Peru had undertaken 
a study on uranium prospecting in close collaboration with UNDP. 
50. A nuclear power planning study had been carried out under the auspices of 
the Agency and the Peruvian authorities concerned were now considering the 
preliminary report. For the long term, Peru had set itself the following 
objectives: to develop the scientific and technical infrastructure needed for 
placing nuclear energy at the service of national development; to ensure the 
transfer of nuclear technology to different socio-economic sectors; to train 
the scientific and technical staff needed to provide the country with a nuclear 
power capability; to encourage teaching and research in nuclear subjects; to 
promote the development of nuclear medicine with the possible participation of 
other Latin American countries; to ensure protection of the population and the 
environment; to co-ordinate the participation of all sectors of the national 
economy in the peaceful application of nuclear energy. 
51. The achievement of those objectives would be especially facilitated by the 
active support of the Agency and UNDP and by collaboration with friendly countries 
which were more developed and to which Peru wanted to express its sincere 
gratitude. 
52. Speaking in his capacity of President of the Inter-American Nuclear Energy 
Commission, he then said that, in accordance with decisions taken at the tenth 
meeting of that Commission, the necessary steps had been undertaken to obtain 
the approval of the Permanent Council of the Organization of American States (OAS) 
for a new statute which would transform the Commission into a dynamic, permanent 
and non-political technical organization capable of systematically planning its 
medium-term activities. 
53. In that context, it was planned to organize in Lima, in December 1978, with 
the Agency's co-operation, a seminar on uranium geology in Latin America. The 
aim was to provide a basis for an exchange of experience between Latin America 
countries and to lay the foundations for a medium-term plan of action. He invited 
interested countries to contact the Agency's Section of Nuclear Materials and 
the Fuel Cycle in order to obtain full information regarding that seminar. 

GC(XXn)/OR.206 
page 12 

54. The Commission's technical committee was to meet in January 1979 in order 
to draft the medium-term plan of activities, which would then be submitted to 
the eleventh meeting of the Commission for its examination. 
55. In conclusion, as a Latin American country and as a member of the Group 
of 77) Peru appealed to the delegates to ensure that technical assistance, 
instead of being regarded as a forced concession, be assigned the position 
accorded to it by the Director General, who had referred to it as a cornerstone 
of the Agency's very existence. A majority of countries in the world would be 
incapable of reaching oertain development objectives if the nuclear technology 
assistance requested by them were meted out so grudgingly. 
56. Mr. SKALLI (Morocco) recalled that the Agency had been associated 
since I96I with his country's projects for the peaceful application of nuclear 
techniques, especially in agriculture, health, geology and nuclear power production. 
As far as agriculture was concerned, Morocco had set up isotope 
research laboratories and had already obtained useful results as regards soil 
fertilization and the mineral nutrition of citrus fruits. In medicine it had 
carried out programmes on diagnostic and therapeutic applications, and in 
geology it had been prospecting for radioactive materials since 1946. It had 
benefited from the Agency's technical assistance for the first time in 1970; 
thanks to that assistance it had been able to estimate its reserves of radioactive 
materials. However, due to lack of funds, the Agency had not been able 
to participate in the financing of a regional exploration project drawn up 
jointly by Moroccan technicians and Agency experts; Morocco had therefore begun 
to carry out prospecting work alone. The first results were very promsing and 
the search was being intensified. Morocco believed that uranium extraction 
techniques based on the use of phosphoric acid were very promising. 
57. At present the electricity supply of the country came from hydroelectric 
and thermal power stations connected to a grid with a very high voltage. 
However, the energy demand was increasing by 10$ per year and the present production 
level for the various types of fuel was fairly low. Morocco had therefore 
decided to proceed immediately with the construction of a nuclear power 
station. Preliminary studies had already begun and assistance from the Agency 
was to be provided in the drafting of regulations relating to nuclear installations 
and fuel and in the organization of training for the necessary staff. 
Morocco was also considering the installation of an experimental nuclear reactor 
which would stimulate research and training. 
GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 13 

58. Having described the peaceful application of nuclear energy in Morocco, 
he said he wished to discuss the question of proliferation. His country, which 
had deposited its instrument of ratification of NPT in 1970, considered that, 
in order to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, it was necessary 
first to ensure the complete security of non-nuclear-weapon States party to 
the Treaty, secondly to provide such States as quickly as possible with genuine 
assistance in the peaceful application of nuclear energy, thirdly to ensure 
that there was no vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons and fourthly to 
prevent horizontal proliferation by making HPT a universal instrument. 
59. As an African country, Morocco believed that the achievement of those 
objectives could be furthered by setting up nuclear-weapon-free zones whose 
status would have to be respected by nuclear-weapon States and by increasing 
co-operation in order to enable non-nuclear-weapon States party to the Treaty 
to benefit as much as possible from the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy; such action was in line with the objectives of the safeguards agreements 
concluded with the Agency in the context of UPT. 
60. Africa was going to become an increasingly important supplier of nuclear 
materials; it would certainly not be content merely to export its materials 
but, lacking the necessary technology, it would encounter difficulties in 
building nuclear power stations. At the most recent Lusaka symposium on prospecting 
for radioactive materials it had been proposed that the African States 
develop the technology for producing nuclear fuel from natural uranium with 
the help of the Agency. That proposal fitted in with the idea of the establishment 
of regional centres for the reprocessing of nuclear fuel and for the 
management of plutonium by the Agency. It should be pointed out further that 
developing countries experienced difficulties in embarking on nuclear power 
programmes not only because they did not possess the technology required but 
also because of difficulties they encountered with the introduction of nuclear 
power stations; those difficulties related to the types of nuclear power plant 
currently on the market and to the installed capacities of their power grids. 
61. In conclusion, he recalled that the Agency played a role of primary 
importance in developing the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, a 
role that would certainly become even more important. 

GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 14 

62. Mr. ABBAS HAMAD (Sudan) said he would like to assure the Conference 
of his country's full support fo the Agency's activities, which it regarded 
as of great importance for the developing countries in particular. By contributing 
toward the raising of living standards in those countries, the 
Agency could help to bring into being the new and more equitable international 
economic order proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly at its sixth 
and seventh special sessions. 
63. His Government supported the Agency's programme for 1978-84 as also the 
budget for 1979. Admittedly, it had been necessary to increase the budget as 
compared with the 1978 budget, but it was to be hoped that further restraint 
could be exercised without curtailing the effectiveness of the Agency'-s programmes, 
particularly in technical assistance. His Government had noted that 
allocations under technical assistance fell short of the funds assigned for 
other programmes. Technical assistance was, nevertheless, of vital importance 
for developing countries and it was to be regretted that those activities should 
continue to be financed out of voluntary contributions. In common with other 
countries, Sudan held that technical assistance should be financed under the 
Regular Budget and that the funds allocated for that work should be increased 
in real terms. In that regard, it was hardly necessary to emphasize the 
imperative need for maintaining a fair balance as between the Agency's promotional 
and safeguards activities. 
64. His country had a need, in particular, for technical assistance from the 
Agency in order to develop its agricultural sector. Ambitious plans had been 
set afoot which could not be carried out speedily save by recourse to nuclear 
techniques. For that reason, the establishment of a nuclear research centre 
with important responsibilities in agricultural matters was under consideration 
and it was hoped that the Agency would assist the national efforts in that 
enterprise. 
65. The special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament, 
held in 1977, had adopted a programme of action which would decisively strengthen 
the international efforts to prevent proliferation. In that area, it was also 
relevant to recall the recommendations which had been made by the meeting of 
the foreign ministers of the non-aligned countries held in Belgrade in July 1978. 
The second NPT Review Conference would be meeting in 1980 and, as suggested by 
the United Nations General Assembly, a second conference on nuclear energy and 
its fuel cycle was being planned for 1981 and 1982. His country hoped that the 
outcome of those meetings would further enhance the Agency's effectiveness. 
GC(XXII)/OR.206 

page 15 

66. His delegation fully supported the proposals put forward for amendment of 
Article VI.A. 2 of the Statute. More equitable representation in the Board of 
Governors for two important regions, Africa and the Middle East and South Asia, 
was bound to be reflected in more effective work on the Board's part, and the 
General Conference should reach a decision by consensus in the matter at the 
present session. 
67. Mr. MANZ (Austria) congratulated the President on his election to office; 
his delegation had every confidence that, under his able leadership, the session 
would produce successful results. He thanked the Director General for his opening 
statement, summing up the present situation in the nuclear power industry and 
expressing in clear terms the principles underlying the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, together with an account of the arguments being put forward today by 
supporters and opponents of nuclear energy. 
68. Austria would continue to give full support to the Agency. Nevertheless, 
it was with a certain apprehension that it had observed a growing tendency over 
the past few years to abandon the well-established practice of seeking a consensus 
of all Member States on matters of importance for the Agency. 
69. In his delegation's opinion, a fair and equitable balance should be 
maintained between the two most important functions of the Agency, i.e. 
non-proliferation and technical assistance. 
70. Austria had always given the strongest support to the Agency's safeguards 
activities and it had learned with satisfaction that the nunber of countries 
acceding to NPT had risen to 104 and that several new safeguards agreements had 
been concluded during 1977. Safeguards procedures applicable to nuclear facilities 
in Austria had been further improved during the past year. His delegation was 
pleased to note the continued efforts the Agency was making to develop and expand 
the international safeguards system and to assist Member States in establishing 
and strengthening national systems through training seminars or direct consultative 
contacts. 
71. On the other hand, Austria had always firmly supported the work of the Agency 
in technical assistance and would continue to do so. He had been authorized to 
announce Austria's pledge — subject to parliamentary approval — to make a voluntary 
contribution to the General Fund for 1979 in the amount of US $57 800. In addition, 
it would make available - again subject to parliamentary approval - the sum of 
170 000 Austrian schillings for Type II fellowships. 

GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 16 


72. Austria's first industrial nuclear power plant at Zwentendorf had 'been 
completed. An information campaign, initiated three years before 'by the Austrian 
Federal Government, had given ample opportunity for both supporters and opponents 
of nuclear power to make known their views, the material thus assembled had 
formed the background for the Government report on the matter that had been 
submitted to the Austrian Parliament. After thorough and lengthy discussions 
in a sub-committee established for the purpose, it had become apparent that a 
reconciliation of the widely divergent views held by the different parties represented 
in Parliament could not be achieved. (The Government report had been 
approved and a law authorizing the starting of operations at the Zwentendorf nuclear 
power plant had been passed by the Austrian Parliament by majority vote of the 
Government party, without prejudice to existing laws and statutes. It was 
stipulated in one provision that the law could be put into effect only after the 
holding of a referendum on the issue. But even should the outcome of the referendum 
prove to be positive, all the problems connected with the fuel cycle would still 
have to be resolved, at least to a reasonable degree, prior to the start of 
operations .at Zwentendorf. In Austria, as in many other countries, the problem 
of the back end of the fuel cycle had been one of the most important aspects 
coming up in the discussions, and Austria would strongly welcome any steps 
towards international co-operation designed to find practical solutions in that 
area. 


73. It was therefore supporting the important work that was being done in 
connection with INFCE and wished to thank the United States of America for taking 
the initiative in proposing the evaluation in question. Austrian participants 
in the work were of the opinion that special consideration should be given to 
the needs of industrialized countries with nuclear activities on a relatively small 
scale, as they were in the same position of dependence as the developing countries, 
in relation at least to some parts of the fuel cycle. 
74. As for physical protection of nuclear material, his delegation had noted with 
satisfaction the efforts being made by the Agency to establish guidelines and draw 
up recommendations designed to help Member States in developing national physical 
protection systems. It welcomed the initiative taken by the United States 
regarding the convening of a conference to prepare a draft international convention 
on physical protection of nuclear material. 
GC(XXII)/OR.206 
page 17 

75. With reference to the Agency's programme for 1979-84 and the budget for 
1979» as set out in document GC(XXII)/600, he commended the Director General 
and the Secretariat on the efforts made in the matter of the budget; despite 
the necessaiy restrictions, the budget would, he thought, fully support the 
useful statutory activities undertaken by the Agency. The transfer of the 
Agency's Headquarters to the Donaupark was due to take place in August 1979» 
as foreseen, and the Austrian Government was convinced that all staff members 
would find the most favourable working conditions there. The Federal Ministry 
for Foreign Affairs and the Municipality of Vienna would continue to give 
particular attention to infrastructure matters, especially as regards traffic 
and transport to and from the Donaupark complex. 
The meeting rose at 4.40 P.m. 


GC(XXII)/OR.207 
May 1979* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 
ENGLISH 


TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER 1978 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 22 September 1978, at 10.10 a.m. 

President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 

CONTENTS, 

Item of the 

Paragraphs 

agenda** 

4 General debate and annual report for 1977 1-2 9 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea 1-7 
Ecuador 8-12 
Jamaica 13-19 
Nigeria 20-29 

10 Examination of delegates' credentials 30 - 31 

12 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension 32 - 33 
Committee 

13 Voluntary contributions to the General Fund 34 - 36 
for 1979 

11 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 37 - 43 

_*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 2 October 1978. 

'**/ GC(XXII)/605. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXII)IiNF/17 9/Rev.2. 

78-12114 


GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 2 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1977 (GC(XXII)/597) (continued) 

1. Mr» CHONG JONG-OYU (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that 
his delegation had carefully studied the documents submitted for consideration 
by the General Conference. Over the past year there had been progress in the 
Agency's activities; it had stepped up various aspects of its work on the 
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes on a broader basis and was 
promoting the application of radiation and radioisotopes in industry, agriculture 
and other areas. There had also been advances in the sphere of safeguards and 
technical assistance. In particular, there had been a major development in 
co-operation between his country and the Agency in the form of a safeguards 
agreement relating to a research reactor, and also closer ties between them 
in the field of technical assistance. 
2. His delegation was satisfied as a whole with the Agency's programmes, but 
the substantial increases in the budget for 1979 were an indication that it 
was essential to make more effective use of the allocated funds. Over the 
past few years the appropriations for technical assistance had been out of 
all proportion to the funds assigned to safeguards. Hence, it was up to the 
Agency to strive for a more equitable balance between its promotional and 
regulatory functions. As far as safeguards were concerned, he believed there 
should be more effective inspection and control in areas of high nuclear 
potential and concentration of nuclear material. 
3. A short while before the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had 
celebrated its 30th anniversary. Over the 30 years that had passed since 
the founding of the country, the people had achieved major victories in the 
sphere of politics, economics and culture. To mark the occasion,the people 
of his country had launched an active campaign to complete the national 
economic plan for the current year ahead of schedule, along with the first 
year of the new seven-year plan. Considerable progress had also been made 
in the field of atomic energy, and at the present time radiation and 
radioisotopes were being introduced into industry, agriculture and other 
branches of the national economy on a large scale. In order to broaden the 
scope of the country's activities in the nuclear field, great attention was 
being given to the training of qualified personnel. 
GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 3 

4. He wished to point out that, despite his Government's efforts to reduce 
tension in Korea and bring about the peaceful unificatien of a divided 
country, the situation still existing in the Korean peninsula was a serious 
one and ran counter to the basic principles of the Agency governing the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. 
5. Two years before, the United States of America had promised to withdraw 
all its armed forces and their nuclear weapons from South Korea, but so far 
such had not been the case; just the reverse, the American armed forces were 
being increased and a large quantity of modern weapons of mass destruction, 
including the nuclear type, were being brought into South Korea. More than 
a thousand units representing different types of nuclear weapons were now 
deployed in South Korea. Such action on the part of the United States could 
only increase the tension in the Korean peninsula and constituted a threat to 
peace in Korea, Asia and the whole world. 
6. To reduce the tension, maintain peace in the Korean peninsula and bring 
about the independent and peaceful unification of Korea, it was essential to 
withdraw all American forces, together with their nuclear weapons, from 
South Korea, put an end to foreign intervention in Korea's internal affairs 
and replace the truce agreement in Korea by a peace treaty. 
7. In conclusion, he availed himself of the opportunity to wish the Agency 
continued success in its varied activities. 
8. Mr. SAMANIBGO (Ecuador) said that his Government had approved the 
atomic energy development plan for Ecuador. A nuclear research centre was 
to be set up with a 1-3 MH research reactor and the laboratories and staff 
needed to produce medium- and short-lived radioisotopes for neutron activation 
analysis. Some friendly countries had offered to support the programme, and 
Ecuador had signed co-operation agreements with Argentina and Spain. The 
Agency had co-operated throughout with the national Government, inter alia 
sending an internationally recognized expert in radiocheraistry. 
9. The hospitals of Ecuador had received assistance for their nuclear medicine 
and health physics activities, and the Agency had provided valuable help in the 

GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 4 


drawing up of Ecuador's radiological safety regulations. The Government of 
the United States of America had also supported that effort. 


10. The site for the nuclear research centre had already been identified with 
the assistance of the Spanish Junta de Energia Nuclear, and the specifications 
for the siting studies had been drawn up. The necessary financing had been 
provided by the National Anticipatory Financing Fund (FQNAPRE), which had unsuccessfully 
requested a loan from international finance organizations. 
11. The co-operation with Spain had begun with an invitation to send an 
Ecuadorian group to visit the Spanish Junta de Energfa Nuclear, which had 
helped with the preparation of a first set of specifications for the engineering 
details and the construction of the nuclear research centre. Some Agency experts 
had visited Ecuador in June to review plans and give advice on how to achieve 
the proposed aims. 
12. The example of Ecuador showed clearly that the Agency was assisting the 
developing countries in introducing atomic energy as the motor of their 
economic future, and that the developed and developing countries should join 
forces to ensure that the Agency could fulfil its fundamental duty, which was 
the provision of technical assistance. 
13. Mr. McGILCHRIST (Jamaica), referring to the Agency's budget for 1979, 
expressed concern at-the disproportionate appropriation of funds to safeguards, 
which reflected an imbalance between the regulatory and promotional activities 
of the Agency, more particularly in the provision of technical assistance. 
Although Jamaica recognized the major importance of safeguards to all countries 
concerned, as evidenced by the recent conclusion of a safeguards agreement 
between Jamaica and the Agency, there still had to be a careful balance between 
safeguards and technical assistance appropriations. One of the best ways to 
ensure a more balanced development of those activities would be, in his 
country's opinion, to finance technical assistance from the Agency's Hegular 
Budget. It had to be remembered, in that context, that technical assistance 
was of paramount importance to developing countries and was often a deciding 
factor in their decision to become members of international organizations, 
including the Agency; furthermore, technical assistance was not just a matter 
GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 5 


of charity from industrially more advanced countries, but the rightful claim 
of developing countries in their struggle to improve their national economies 
in the modern world. 


14. Should it prove impossible, however, to finance the Agency's technical 
assistance programmes for the coming year from the Regular Budget for 1979r 
it would be advisable to set a target for voluntary contributions of at least 
$10 million. At the present time, technical assistance appeared not to be 
receiving the priority it deserved, especially when one considered the fact 
that more than 70$ of the Member States of the Agency were developing countries, 
15. With regard to the provision of technical assistance by the Agency in the 
field of food and agriculture, there appeared to have been a decrease in real 
terms. As many developing countries had not yet reached the stage where they 
could introduce nuclear power, it was very important for them that Agency 
activities relating to the food and agriculture sector should be given greater 
stress as a key element in their economic progress. 
16. With reference to the difficulties that had been caused in recent years 
by fluctuations in currency exchange rates, one possible approach would be to 
draw up a larger part of the Agency's budget in Austrian schillings. If, 
however, the present system was to continue, it should definitely be based on 
a fixed and realistic rate of exchange for the Austrian schilling in order to 
eliminate the need for programme cuts and supplementary budgets, which the 
developing countries could so ill afford. 
17. In the field of nuclear non-proliferation it was heartening to see that 
104 States, including Jamaica, were now party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)-' . At the same time, those countries with 
extensive nuclear activities that had not yet acceded to NPT should be urged 
to do so immediately. 
18. As a non-aligned State and a participant in the recent conference of 
foreign ministers of non-aligned States that had been held in Belgrade, Jamaica 
fully supported the declaration of the conference, which stressed the importance 
of international co-operation between non-aligned countries in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy and the unhindered transfer of technology. His country 
also supported the proposal made at that meeting for a conference on the 
l/ Reproduced in document INFCIRC/140. 



GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 6 


peaceful uses of atomic energy in accordance with Resolution 32/50 of 'the 
United Nations General Assembly although it was felt by his Government that 
the word "energy** should he de-emphasized in favour of the word "technology", 

since Jamaica's interests lay more in the application of nuclear science and 
technology in such sectors as agriculture, mining and nutrition. 


19. In conclusion, he welcomed the invitation extended by the Government of 
India to hold the twenty-third regular session of the General Conference in 
Hew Delhi and took the opportunity to announce that the Government of Jamaica 
had agreed to host the advisory group meeting to review the technical and 
scientific aspects of the selection, management and surveillance of ocean sites 
used for dumping solid low-level radioactive waste, which was to take place in 
December of the current year. 
20. Mr. JIMETA (Nigeria) said that over the past few years the Agency had 
made a substantial contribution to the development and peaceful use of nuclear 
technology and to the improvement of economic conditions in a number of developing 
countries, including his own. An example was the agreement concluded 
between the Agency, the Pood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(PAO) and Nigeria on a large-scale project for tsetse fly eradication and 
control by the sterile-male technique, which would have a lasting effect in 
eliminating a pest that caused so much damage to livestock and public health. 
The Federal Republic of Germany had already made a substantial contribution to 
the project; also, the support being given by Belgium and the United Kingdom 
was greatly appreciated, 
21. With regard'to Nigeria's future needs, the application of nuclear techniques 
was considered to be the most efficient way of providing medical care, improving 
public health and exploiting natural resources; hence, it was hoped that the 
Agency would be able to provide increased assistance for various future development 
projects and research programmes. 
22. Nigeria had an annual energy consumption growth rate of l8-25?&> compared 
with 7-9$ in some developed countries. The demand for energy was the outcome 
of the economic development programme now being implemented in different parts 
of the country under the Third National Development Plan for 1975-80. Most 
of the projects, which related to the establishment of an iron and steel complex, 
a petrochemical industry and agro-allied industries, were high consumers of 
energy. In addition, there were plans for a rural electrification programme 
G0(XXII)/OR.207 
page 7 


to improve the quality of life of local communities and promote viable cottage 
industries. Consequently, failure to meet the demand for electricity could 
pose a major energy problem for the country in the foreseeable future. It 
had been calculated that, although by the turn of the century all of the 
country's hydroelectric power potential would have been developed, Nigeria 
would still face an acute energy shortage. His country had therefore embarked 
upon a comprehensive national nuclear programme aimed at developing the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy as the only new and reliable energy source. 


23. Many delegations had mentioned the need to ensure that the benefits of 
nuclear technology were not limited to a few industrialized countries. That 
view was in keeping with the Agency's objective of accelerating and promoting 
the contribution of nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity. However, if 
it was accepted by all, the technologically advanced countries should show 
greater interest in making the Agency a more universal organization than had 
so far been the case. 


24. The provision of technical assistance continued to be of major concern to 
the developing countries. The present situation was not satisfactory, but 
there would clearly have to be much more discussion before an acceptable solution 
to the problem was found. The financing of technical assistance from the Agency's 
Regular Budget would provide a surer base for the programming of activities. 
25. Although the importance of safeguards could never be underestimated, there 
was at the present time a tendency to overdramatize the risks created by nuclear 
facilities; furthermore, the high cost of ensuring safety gave rise to distrust. 
There was consequently a need for greater effort in informing the public about 
the standard of safety that had already been achieved and for more medical research 
into the treatment of radiation exposure. 
26. Nigeria had been among the countries co-sponsoring an amendment to the 
Statute aimed at a more equitable representation for two under-represented regions 
on the Agency's Board of Governors. In the 21 years of the Agency's existence, 
major changes in the Statute had twice been necessary, and it was not difficult to 
gain the impression either that the original drafters of the Agency's Statute had 
seriously underestimated the universal acceptance of the Agency or that the Agency 
had never been intended for the international community as a whole. It had to 
be borne in mind that the present membership of the Agency was roughly double 
the original figure. 



GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 8 

27. The Director General, in his statement, had referred to the risk of 
nuclear proliferation in spite of the measures adopted to control the uses of 
the fuel cycle. In Africa that threat was becoming an ever greater reality 
as the outcome of collaboration in the field of nuclear technology between 
the apartheid regime in South Africa and its supporters in Western Europe, 
Until decisive action had put an end to that regime, his country 
would not support South Africa's continuing membership of the Agency and 
would not approve any co-operation between the Agency and that country. 
28. In his statement the Director General had explained at length the large 
increases provided for in the Agency's budget for 1979. While accepting the 
need for such increases, his delegation believed that it would be advisable 
in future to fix a ceiling for the budget, which could be worked out during 
the coming months. It was hoped in the meantime that the needs of the 
developing countries would be given close attention so that all Member States 
could derive the full benefit from the peaceful use of atomic energy. 
29- In conclusion, he wished to stress that the assertion that the Agency 
was not a specialized agenqjr of the United Nations, which had been made the 
day before in the Committee of the Whole, had originated with certain delegations 
who were fully conversant with the strong bonds between the Agency and the United 
Nations. Any attempt to dissociate the Agency from the goals of the United 
Nations would be a regrettable and unacceptable error. 

EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXII)/607) 

30. The PRESIDENT drew the General Conference's attention to document 
GC(XXII)/607, containing the report of the General Gommittee on examination 
of delegates' credentials. The report indicated that, pursuant to Rule 28 of 
the Rules of Procedure, the Committee had met on Thursday, 21 September, as 
a Credentials Committee. An account of the manner in which the Committee had 
approached its task and of the opinions expressed in the discussion was given 
in paragraph 4 of the document. The last paragraph contained a draft 
resolution recommended for adoption by the Conference. 
31. The draft resolution contained in paragraph 6 of document GC(XXII)/607 
was adopted. 
GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 9 

ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 

32. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Staff Pension Committee included 
two members and two alternates elected by and representing the General 
Conference. The members serving since the last session of the General 
Conference had been Mr. Jenkins (United Kingdom) and Mr. Modranszky (Hungary), 
and the alternates Mr. Sastradidjaja (Indonesia) and Mr. McCaskill (Canada). 
Mr. Jenkins and Mr. McCaskill had intimated that they would no longer be 
available to serve on the Committee. He proposed, therefore, that the 
General Conference should now elect Mr. Sastradidjaja (Indonesia) and 
Mr. Estrada Oyuela (Argentina) as members and Mr. Modranszky (Hungary) and 
Mr. Scheller (Federal Republic of Germany) as alternates. 
33. It was so decided. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FOND FOR 1979 (GC(XXII)/604/Rev.3) 


34. The PRESIDENT referred the Conference to the memorandum by the 
Director General in document GC(XXII)/604/Rev.3, which showed that, as of 
5 p.m. on 21 September 1978, pledges of voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund for 1979 had been made by 54 Members of the Agency, to a total 
amount of $4 463 874. Since that time, five additional Members had informed 
the Director General of pledges which brought the total to $4 506 324. 


35. Admittedly, a few Members had indicated in their statements before 
the Conference that, because of their national budget schedules, their 
pledges would be forthcoming only at a later date. Even so, he felt deeply 
disappointed about the low level at which the pledges of voluntary contributions 
now stood. The amount represented only about 50$ of the target for 1979 and 
was significantly smaller, as a percentage of the target, than the levels 
attained at other recent sessions of the General Conferences. 
36. He therefore felt bound to appeal strongly to all Member States that 
had not yet announced their pledges, and in particular to those that had made 
no voluntary contributions during the past two years, to support the Agency's 
technical assistance programme by pledging themselves to make voluntary 
contributions. Without the requisite pledges in hand, the planning and 
implementation of a vigorous technical assistance programme, accelerated as 

GC(XXII)/OR.2O7 
page 10 

consistently urged by the Board of Governors, would be much more difficult 
for the Secretariat to achieve. Finally, he stressed that every Member State 
had a duty and an obligation to support the Agency's technical assistance 
programme. That was particularly true of those Members fortunate enough to 
enjoy such affluence that they could easily afford at least their base rate 
share in such a modest target. 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXII)/606) 


37. The PRESIDENT drew attention to his memorandum on the election of 
Members to the Board of Governors, contained in document GC(XXII)/606; in 
paragraph 2 of that document he notified the Conference, in accordance with 
Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure, that 11 Members had to be elected to the 
Board, and specified the geographical areas in respect of which elections 
were required, as also the number of Members to be elected from each area. 
38. Mr. SOTOLQKGO CODUJA (Cuba), speaking on a point of order, drew 
attention to the fact that there had been circulated an unofficial document 
whose origin was unknown to his delegation and which incorrectly represented 
the situation with regard to candidatures to represent the Latin American 
region in the Board of Governors. A document distributed by the United States 
delegation correctly represented the situation; moreover, it should be noted 
that a correct analysis of the situation was clearly set out in the document 
transmitted by the Chairman of the Latin American group to the Chairmen of all 
the other regional groups for their information. And in order to remove any 
possible misunderstanding, he wished to confirm that Cuba's candidature for 
one of the vacant seats in question was being maintained. 
39. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the Agency's Statute made no provision 
for the submitting of nominations for vacant seats in the Board. Accordingly, 
any unofficial document issued in that sense had no validity. 
40. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Austrian delegation 
and a member of the Czechoslovak delegation acted as tellers. 
41. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members of the Board of 
Governors. 
GC(XXII)/OR.207 
page 11 


42. The PRESIDENT, noting that the ballot papers had now been delivered 
to the tellers, proposed that the meeting be adjourned until the afternoon, 
in order to give the tellers the time needed for the counting of the votes. 
43. 
It was so agreed. 
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m. 

GC(XXII)/OR.208 
February 1979* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-SECOND REGULAR SESSION: 18-22 SEPTEMBER 1978 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Neue Hofburg, Vienna, 
on Friday, 22 September 1978, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


11 
Election of Members to the Board 
of Governors 1-21 


— 
Report on the work of the Committee of 
the Whole 23 
5 The Agency's accounts for 1977 24 
6 The Agency's budget for 1978 25 
7 The Agency's programme for 1979-84 
and budget for 1979 26 
8 
Scale of assessment of Members* contributions 
for 1979 


27 
9 Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute 28 
-Closing of the session 29 - 40 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 6 October 1978. 
** GC(XXII)/605. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXII)/INF/179/Rev.2. 


78-12118 



GC(XXII)/OR.2O8 
page 2 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXII)/6o6) (continued) 

1. The PRESIDENT informed "the General Conference of the result of the 
voting. 
2. The result of the election of three Members from the area of Latin America 
was as follows; 
Abstentions; 18 
Valid votes: 246 
Required majority: 42 
Votes obtained: 


Venezuela 


85 
Brazil 


84 
Guatemala 41 
Cuba 36 


3. Having obtained the required majority, Venezuela and Brazil were elected 
to the Board. 
4. The other Latin American countries receiving votes not having obtained the 
majority required for election, a second ballot would have to be taken. 
5. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 4 
Valid votes: 172 
Required ma.iority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


Finland 87 
Greece 85 


6. Having obtained the required ma.iority, Finland and Greece were elected to 
the Board. 
7. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Eastern Europe 
was as follows: 
GC(XXII)/oR.208 
page 3 

Abstentions: 


4 
Valid votes: 


84 
Required majority: 43 
Votes obtained: 


Hungary 84 


8. Having obtained the required ma.iority. Hungary was elected to the Board. 
9« The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was as 
follows: 


Abstentions: 9 
Valid votes: I67 
Required ma.iority: 42 
Votes obtained: 


Morocco 85 
Tanzania 81 
Ivory Coast 1 


10. Having obtained the required majority, Morocco and Tanzania were elected 
to the Board. 
11. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 8 
Valid votes: 80 
Required ma.iority: 41 
Votes obtained: 


Saudi Arabia 80 


12. Having obtained the required majority, Saudi Arabia was elected to the Board. 
13. The result of the election of one Member from the area of South East Asia 
and the Pacific was as follows: 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 86 
Required ma.iority: 44 
Votes obtained: 


Indonesia 86 



0C(XXII)/OR.208 
page 4 

14. Having obtained the required majority, Indonesia was elected to the Board. 
15. The result of the election of one Member from the area of Africa or of the 
Middle East and South Asia or of South East Asia and the Pacific was as follows; 
Abstentions; 4 
Valid votes; 84 
Required majority; 43 
Votes obtained; 


Thailand 84 

16. Having obtained the required majority, Thailand was elected to the Board. 
17. In accordance with Bale 84(b) of the Rales of Procedure of the General 
Conference, a 3econd ballot was taken to fill the one remaining elective place 
for a Member from the area of Latin America, the voting being restricted to the 
two candidates who had obtained the largest number of votes in the first ballot 
after the two Members elected in that ballot. 
18. The result of the second ballot was as follows; 
Abstentions; 7 
Votes obtained; 


Guatemala 36 
Cuba 35 


19. Having obtained the larger number of votes. Guatemala was elected to the 
Board. 
20. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, recalled 
that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from the end of 
the current session until the end of the twenty-fourth regolar session of the 
General Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
21. He thanked the delegations of Austria and Czechoslovakia which had provided 
tellers, the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 
GC(XXII)/OR.208 
page 5 

REPORT OK THE WORK OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

23» Mr. GILLOK (Belgium), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, reported 
on his Committee's consideration of the agenda items that had been referred to 
it: item 5 - the Agency's accounts for 1977, item 6 - the Agency's budget for 
1978, item7- the Agency's programme for 1979-84 and budget for 1979, item 8 scale 
of assessment of Members' contributions for 1979 and item 9 - amendment 
of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute. 

THE AGENCY'S ACCOUNTS FOR 1977 (GC(XXII)/598) 

24. The draft resolution in document GO(XXII)/598 on the Agency's aocounts for 
1977 was adopted. 

THE AGENCY'S BUDGET FOR 1978 (GC(XXII)/599) 

25. The draft resolution in document GC(XXII)/599 on the Agency's budget for 
1978 was adopted. 
THE AGESCY'S PROGRAMME FOR 1979-84 AND BUDGET FOR 1979 (GC(XXII)/600) 

26. Draft resolution A (Regular Budget appropriations for 1979). draft 
resolution B (Operational Budget allocations for 1979) and draft resolution C 
(The Working Capital Fund in 1979) set forth in document GC(XXII)/600. Annex VII. 
were adopted. 
SCALE OF ASSESSMEST OF MEMBERS' CONTRIBUTIONS FOR 1979 (GC(XXII)/601) 

27. The draft resolution in document GC(XXII)/601 on the Bcale of assessment of 
Members' contributions for 1979 was adopted. 
AMENDMENT OF ARTICLE VI.A.2 OF THE STATUTE (GC(XXII)/608) 

28. The draft resolution in document GC(XXII)/608 and Corr.l op the amendment of 
Article VI.A.2 of the Statute was adopted. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

29. Mr. OOLDSCHMIDT (France), speaking on behalf of the countries of 
Western Europe, congratulated the President on the exemplary way in which he had 
guided the proceedings of the Conference's present session, which had thus completed 
its work on time. He thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for the 
excellent preparation of the Conference. 
30. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic), speaking on behalf of the 
Eastern European countries, warmly thanked the President and all the participants 
in the twenty-second regular session of the General Conference. The success of 

GC(XXII)/0H.208 
page 6 

the latter had -also been due to the splendid setting provided by the city of 
Vienna, and he expressed his profound gratitude to the Austrian Government for 
its generous hospitality. 

31. Mr. SAMAMBSO (Ecuador), speaking on behalf of the Latin American 
States, congratulated the President on the wisdom with which he had guided the 
discussions. He also thanked the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, the 
Director General and all those who had contributed to the success of the twentysecond 
regular session. He greatly appreciated the Austrian Government's 
hospitality, and he hoped that all participants would meet again in 1979, in the 
host country for the General Conference's nert session. 
32. Mr. DIOUF (Senegal), speaking on behalf of the African countries, said 
that they had been honoured by the President's election. The President had guided 
the work in a distinguished manner commensurate with the eminence of the office 
entrusted to him. He (Mr. Diouf) also thanked the Director General, the 
Secretariat and all those who had helped to ensure the success of the current 
session. 
33. Mr. KATORI (Japan) congratulated the President, on behalf of the countries 
of the Par East area, for having so directed the discussions that the General 
Conference had been able to consider all the many important topics before it . 
He also thanked the Director General and the Agency's Secretariat. 
34. Mr. SMALL (New Zealand), speaking on behalf of the States of the area of 
South East Asia and the Pacific, thanked the President and the Secretariat for the 
way in which they had contributed to the success of the current session. He also 
expressed his gratitude to the host country for its traditional hospitality. 
35. Mr. AL-KLTAL (Iraq), speaking on behalf of the countries of the Middle 
East and South Asia, thanked the President for the outstanding way in which he 
had conducted the proceedings, and expressed his particular appreciation of the host 
country's hospitality. 
36. Mr. CARTER (Canada), speaking on behalf of the North American countries, 
paid a tribute to the skill with which the President had guided the discussions. 
He also thanked the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, all the other 
participants and the Austrian Government. 
GC(XXII)/OR.208 
page 7 

37* The FRESIDETO thanked the speakers for their kind and warm words. He 
deemed it a great honour to have presided over the twenty-second regular session 
of the General Conference. He expressed his gratitude to the participants, 
to the host Government and to the city of Vienna, and thanked all who had helped 
to make the current session a success. 

38. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the delegates 
to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
39. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
40. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-second regular session of the 
General Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 5.40 P.m. 


