GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
August 1980* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND NINTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi 
on Tuesday, 4 December 1979, at 10.50 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. MALU wa KALENGA (Zaire) 
President: Mr. SETHNA (India) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
Opening of the session 1 5 
Election of the President 6 17 
Election of officers and appointment 
of the General Committee 18 22 
Inaugural addresshost country 
on behalf of the 
23 31 
3 Message from the Secretary—General 
of the United Nations 32 36 
4 Statement by the Director General 37 98 
Statement by the Minister of StateCommunications of the Government of 
for 
India 99 100 


*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 21 January 1980. 
**/ GC(XXIII)/609. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 

80-2815 


GC(XXni)/OR,209 
paga 2 


OPEHISG OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the twenty-third regular session of 
the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Bale 48 of the Rules of Procedure he invited the delegates 
to c'baenre one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT said that he wished first in the name of 
evei'^oce present to thank the Government of India for inviting the General 
Conference to New Delhi. All had been impressed by the efforts that had been 
Essie over the past few months to prepare the Vigyan Bhavan Conference Centre. 
They had been received with all the warmth and generosity characteristic of 
Sh•e ancient hospitality of India, and he wanted to express his gratitude to 
she Government of India, the city of flew Delhi, all those who had contributed 
to the construction of the conference building and those who had done so much 
to help organize the meeting. 

4. He extended a welcome to the delegates of Member States and the members of 
their delegations, to the observers, to the representatives of the United Nations 
aJJd. its specialized agencies, and to all representatives of other intergovernmental 
and non-governmental organizations. 
5. Finally, he wished to thank the members of the Indian Government and the 
diplomatic corps who had honoured the Conference by their presence. 
ELECTION OF THE PRESIDENT 

6. The TEMPORARY PRESIDEHT invited nominations for the office of 
"''resident of the Conference. 
7. Mr. PANABOKKE (Sri Lanka) said it gave him great pleasure to propose 
Mr. H.N. Sethna, the delegate of India, as President of the twenty-third regular 
session of the General Conference. It was scarcely necessary to detail 
£fe> Sethna's suitability for the office; his academic qualifications and 
experience in atomic energy eminently justified his selection. He was Secretary 
to the Government of,India's Department of Atomic Energy and Chairman of the 
Indian Atomic Energy Commission, and it was a great pleasure to nominate him 
for the office. 
GC( XXIII)/OR.209 
page 3 

8. Mr. OMOLODUN (Nigeria) said he was pleased to support the nomination, 
since Mr. Sethna's qualities as a diplomat and as a campaigner for human 
dignity meant he was highly suited to act as President, 
9. Mr. de CARVALHO (Brazil), speaking on behalf of the Latin American 
countries, also supported the nomination of Mr. Sethna. The development of 
atomic energy in India owed very much to three men - Bhabha and Sarabhai and 
now Sethna. Mr. Sethna's very distinguished academic and professional career 
was familiar to all; he was a man of great knowledge ani wisdom, able in 
governmental and international affairs and endowed with the courage to serve 
his family, his country and mankind. 
10. Mr. HDESS (Austria) expressed his support and that of the western 
European countries for the nomination of Mr. Sethna. 
11. Mr. Sethna (India) was elected President of the General Conference for its 
twenty-third regular session by acclamation. 
Mr. Sethna (India) took the Chair. 


12. The PRESIDENT expressed his sincere appreciation to the delegate of 
Sri Lanka for his kind words and to the delegates of Nigeria, Brazil and Austria 
for extending their support. 
13« He was conscious, in accepting the presidency of the Conference, that the 
honour carried with it a duty of responsibility towards the delegates. He 
would endeavour, with their understanding and assistance, to carry out that 
duty to the best of his ability. 


14. In giving him the privilege of presiding over their deliberations, the 
delegates had also honoured India, which was acting as host to the twenty-third 
regular session of the General Conference. India had been actively associated 
with the Agency since its formative years and had always extended the fullest 
co-operation to its activities, especially to the promotional work designed 
to "accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity throughout the world". The importance of rededication 
to the principle of international 00—operation in the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, with special reference to the needs of developing countries, could not 
be overstressed. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
Page 4 

15. India was happy to act as host to the General Conference, and he hoped 
that everyone would have the opportunity of seeing some of the scientific 
establishments and also some of the cultural heritage of the country. India 
had one of the world's oldest civilizations, hut at the same time it was a 
young developing nation striving against tremendous odds not only to improve 
the quality of life, but to provide the basic needs of millions through the 
benefits of science and technology. 
16. In accepting the office of President, he was conscious of the high 
standards set by his predecessor and wanted to pay a personal tribute to 
Hr. Main wa Kalenga, who had presided over the General Conference at its 
previous session with dignity, unfailing tact and fairness. 
17. He expressed his sincere appreciation to the Director General, 
Mr. Sigvard Eklund, and his staff for their dedicated and valuable services 
to the Agency and welcomed the representative of the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations and other representatives of organizations belonging to the 
United Nations family. 
ELECTION OF OFPICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

18. The PRESIDENT invited the delegates to turn to the first item on the 
provisional agenda, the election of officers and appointment of the General 
Committee. Under Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference now 
had to elect, on proposals made by the President, eight Vice-Presidents, the 
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and five additional members of the 
General Committee. 
19- He proposed that the delegates of the following States be elected as the 
Vice-Presidents of the General Conference: Ecuador, Prance, Japan, Malaysia, 
Nigeria, Qatar, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the United States of 
America. 

20. He proposed Mr. Costa Alonso, delegate of Mexico, as Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole, and the delegates of the following States as members of 
the General Committee: Canada, Czechoslovakia, Federal Republic of Germany, 
Tunisia, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 
21. The General Conference accepted the President's proposals. 
22. The General Committee was thus duly appointed. 
GC(XXni)/OR.209 
Page 5 

INAUGURAL ADDRESS ON BEHALF OF THE HOST COUNTRY 

23. The PRESIDENT said that Mr. Charan Singh, the Prime Minister of 
India, had graciously consented to address the Conference. 
24. Mr. CHARAN SINGH (Prime Minister of India) said that the Government 
and people of India considered it a great privilege and honour to act as host 
to the General Conference at its twenty-third regular session and welcomed all 
the participants in the Conference to their country. It was particularly 
gratifying to see among those present the distinguished Director General of 
the Agency, Mr. Sigvard Eklund, during whose long and able stewardship the 
activities of the Agency had prospered in many areas, and it was, moreover, a 
source of pride and happiness for India that Mr. Sethna should have been chosen 
to guide the business of the Conference as its President. 
25. A cross-roads had been reached in the development of atomic energy which 
made the deliberations of the present session particularly important. Mankind 
was confronted with an unprecedented threat of self-extinction, arising from 
the accumulation of the most destructive weapons ever produced. The existing 
arsenals of nuclear weapons were more than sufficient to destroy all life on 
earth many times over. Yet the nuclear arms race continued unabated. Events 
such as the Three Mile Island accident had aroused public feelings against 
any form of nuclear energy. On the other hand, most of the world was facing 
an energy crisis; for at least several decades unclear power would continue 
to constitute a major component of the energy resources of many countries, 
and others which as yet had no nuclear programmes would be forced to turn to 
that source of energy. The International Atomic Energy Agency had the 
statutory objective of accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. It was to be 
hoped that in performing that important task, the Agency would act in strict 
conformity with the letter and spirit of its Statute. The Agency had been 
established primarily to promote international co-operation in the transfer 
and utilization of nuclear energy for economic and social development, especially 
in the developing countries. While it was true that the Agency also had 
regulatory functions, it was incontestable that such functions could only be 
ancillary to the main, promotional role of the Agency. Unfortunately, increasing 
stress was of late being placed on the regulatory rather than the promotional 
functions. Safeguards had come to be given more importance than technical 
assistance, and what technical assistance continued to be provided by the 


OC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 6 

Agency was being made subject to restrictive and preferential conditions. That 
trend should be reversed in order to avoid erosion of the Agency's credibility 
as a great organization which had in the past made very significant contributions 
to the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for the 
benefit of mankind, 

26. During the past decade, much had been said and written about the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons. India had always believed in the concept 
of genuine and comprehensive non-proliferation, and had consistently held that 
non-proliferation measures, in order to be truly effective, must be applied 
uniformly and universally to all nuclear activities in all States. It was not 
merely of historical interest that the concept of "non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons" had been introduced by India in 1964, when it had asked the United 
Nations to depart from the earlier principle of considering how to avoid only 
the further spread or dissemination of nuclear weapons. That initiative had 
been in line with India's proposal in 1954 for a complete cessation of all 
nuclear weapons tests, a proposal which had been based on the valid premise 
that both horizontal and vertical proliferation were integral parts of the 
same problem and had to be dealt with simultaneously if the problem of the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons was to be solved. In 1965 the United Nations 
had urged the early conclusion of a non-proliferation treaty which "should 
embody an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the 
nuclear and non-nuclear powers". And yet the treaty, when it had finally 
emerged, had been almost totally silent on the problem of vertical proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. The goal of nuclear non-proliferation, as the Final 
Document of the 1978 United Nations special session on disarmament clearly stated, 
was "on the one hand to prevent the emergence of any additional nuclear-weapon 
States besides the exisxing five nuclear-weapon States and on the other 
progressively to reduce and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons altogether". 
The Final Document went on to say that that involved obligations and responsibilities 
on the part of both nuclear-^weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon 
States, the former undertaking to stop the nuclear arms race and to achieve 
nuclear disarmament and all States undertaking to prevent the spread of nuclear 
weapons. Although various measures had been initiated to check the possible 
spread of nuclear weapons, not a single significant step had been taken even 
to slow down, let alone to stop or reverse, the far more dangerous and irrational 
nuclear arms race. No progress could be expected in the one without corresponding 
GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 7 

progress in the other. It was even more distressing that many of those who 
preached the virtues of horizontal non-proliferation claimed in the same breath 
the right - rooted in the theory of nuclear deterrence - not only to possess, 
but even to use, nuclear weapons to safeguard national security. 

27. Non-proliferation was a much-abused word. In its name, efforts continued 
to be made to obstruct developing countries trying to develop indigenous 
facilities for the peaceful utilization of atomic energy, smaller nations were 
forced to accept restraints and restrictions which the nuclear-weapon Powers 
were not prepared to accept for themselves, and there were even moves towards 
institutional measures aimed at limiting certain nuclear fuel cycle activities 
to a few so-called safe and secure locations, thereby introducing a regime 
under which the vast majority of countries would be placed at a permanent 
economic and technological disadvantage. Such efforts ran counter to the 
letter and spirit of the unanimously adopted Final Document of the United 
Nations special session on disarmament. 
28. One of the major functions of the Agency had in recent years been the 
strengthening of international safeguards on national nuclear installations. 
It was generally agreed that safeguards should be non-discriminatory, but at 
the same time it was held that safeguards were relevant only in the case of 
horizontal proliferation, that the jurisdiction of the IAEA covered only the 
peaceful applications of atomic energy, and could not be extended to noncivilian 
nuclear establishments. The Agency should carefully consider that 
problem, in particular since the only reported cases of large-scale diversion 
of weapons-grade nuclear material, which was precisely what safeguards were 
meant to prevent, had occurred in the sanctuaries of nuclear-weapon States. 
29. The international community had declared that the use of nuclear weapons 
was a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and a crime against 
humanity. The Geneva Protocol of 1925 had proved invaluable in the efforts 
to abolish chemical and biological weapons. A similar treaty or convention 
prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons might prove a precursor to nuclear 
disarmament, besides being useful in itself. 
30. India had been active in the field of nuclear energy for over three 
decades. At the end of the Second World War, when most nations had regarded 
atomic energy as a force of destruction, India had already been thinking in 
terms of exploiting atomic energy solely for economic development. The largely 

ac(xxrn)/OR.ao9 
page 8 

independent development of nuclear science in India from the laboratory stage 
to the industrial stage showed that developing countries need not follow the 
path taken by advanced countries in the application of science to society; 
certain stages of technological development could he omitted through the planned 
utilization of advanced science and technology. The Indian atomic energy 
programme had brought immense benefits: the knowledge and skills imparted to 
Indian industry had enhanced technological capability, quality consciousness 
and self-confidence and atomic energy had contributed to the growth of a 
national scientific culture. At the same time, India had never wavered from 
its commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

31. In conclusion, he hoped that the IAEA would succeed in formulating and 
implementing a long-term plan that would enable the developing countries to 
reap the benefits of atomic energy in their national development. International 
co-operation in such a plan would call for wisdom and isaturity coupled with a 
high degree of mutual trust and understanding. 
MESSAGE PROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

32. The PRESIDENT welcomed the representative of the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations, Mr. M.D. Sytenko, and invited him to take the floor. 
33. Mr« SYTBNKO (Under Secretary-General for Political and Security 
Council Affairs) said that he wished to convey a message to the General Conference 
from the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. The present session of the 
Conference was being held, Mr. Waldheim noted, at a time when the world energy 
situation had reached a critical stage. A principal issue in the world energy 
economy was the measures that needed to be taken to complement or perhaps even 
replace predominantly petroleum-based systems by more renewable sources of 
energy. However, confidence in the use of nuclear power had recently been 
undermined by diverse teohnical, economic and safety factors. The concerted 
efforts of scientists, engineers, technologists, policy-makers and planners 
would be required to meet the challenge facing the nuclear industry, particularly 
in relation to reactor safety and radioactive waste disposal problems. 
34. Added to those issues were the differing viewpoints between countries which 
lacked energy resources and were therefore seeking access to technology and 
equipment for independent and peaceful nuclear programmes, and those countries 
which feared that the spread of such know-how and equipment would increase the 
GC(mil)/OR.2D9 
Page 9 


risk of nuclear proliferation. The International Atomic Energy Agency had the 
important task of finding ways of widening the benefits of the peaceful application 
of nuclear energy. With its combined promotional and regulatory 
functions, the Agency was in a unique position to help devise schemes which 
would reflect a reasonable balance between the rights and obligations of the 
States involved and rest on a genuine consensus between suppliers and recipients. 


35. The Agency's safeguards were an essential condition for international 
nuclear co-operation. It was a cause for deep concern that the number of States 
with unsafeguarded nuclear facilities might be on the increase. Such a trend 
needed to be reversed if confidence between States was not to be undermined 
and international relations adversely affected. 
36. Given that background, it was clear that the Conference was meeting at a 
time when deep reflection and a thorough perusal of all the issues involved in 
nuclear power were called for. Mr. Waldheim hoped with some confidence that 
the Conference would contribute to the search for answers to the urgent and 
difficult questions confronting the international community. 
STATEMENT EST THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 


37. The PRESIDENT invited the Director General of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, Mr. Sigvard Eklund, to take the floor. 
38. The DIRECTOR GENERAL, after congratulating the President on his election 
and commenting on his knowledge and wide experience, said he was certain that 
he was expressing the sentiments of all concerned in thanking the Prime Minister 
and members of his Government for honouring the Conference with their presence 
at its opening. He also wished to thank the Government of India for its 
generous hospitality in inviting the Conference to New Delhi. Under the leadership 
of three men of exceptional vision and ability - the late Drs Bhabha and 
Sarabhai and, now, Dr. Sethna - India had shown how a developing country 
could reach a position in the front rank of nuclear power and the applications 
of nuclear techniques in various areas of the national economy. 
39. It seemed to him appropriate to start his address by saying a few words 
about the energy situation in the world, as the future role of nuclear energy 
depended fundamentally on the need for energy in general in the years to come. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 10 


40. In the developed countries, there seemed to be a school of thought that 
believed in the need for more energy in the future (although less than the 
annual increase of 5% which had prevailed for a long time), and another school 
which thought that in a decade or so it would he possible to limit the annual 
growth to 0.5-l$t or even reach zero growth by means of careful energy 
conservation programmes. 
AX, His own comments on the subject could be summarized as follows: the world 
population would increase from the present 4200 million to 64OO million people 
by the year 2000. The primary task of any government would be to provide those 
people with food. That could only be achieved by cultivating all areas which 
could possibly yield crops and by using the most intensive agricultural methods. 
Future intensive agriculture would require the use of fertilizers, for the 
production of which energy and hydrocarbons were needed. So there would be 
an automatic increase in the need for energy already resulting from the population 
increase. 

42. A decrease in the contribution of the present non-renewable sources of 
energy to the increasing total energy needs would only be possible if new 
sources of energy became available on a drastically enlarged scale within the 
nert 20 years. Realistic estimates did not envisage such a development on the 
scale required. It went without saying that the new energy sources now being 
proposed- - solar, wind, geothermal and tidal energy - should be developed 
because all energy sources with any real potential would be needed in future. 
However, considerable time would elapse before they could make a substantial 
contribution to the energy balance. 
43. Estimates made in 1977 by the most competent body existing - the World 
Energy Conference - showed without doubt that, in a few more decades, with 
the present consumption rate the world would have exhausted its existing 
petroleum resources, the formation of which had taken hundreds of millions of 
years. 
44. Reserves of coal existed, but were very unevenly distributed. They also 
presented difficulties associated with mining and environmental pollution. 
45. That led to the conclusion that there was only nuclear power which was 
immediately available to be used for saving at least part of the hydrocarbon 
resources for coming generations. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 11 


46. The situation in the developing countries was less ambiguous, there being no 
question that they required more energy to meet their needs. As the first 
Chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission, the late Br. Homi Bhabha had 
said at the first United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses 
of Atomic Energy in 1955: "There is no energy so expensive as no energy". 
47* In that situation it must seem strange to an objective observer that there 
existed a heated debate in a number of developed countries as to whether or 
not use should be made of nuclear power. The arguments related usually either 
to the impact of nuclear energy on the environment (the risks of release of 
radioactivity or the safe storage of nuclear waste) or to the assumed risks of 
proliferation of nuclear weapons from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It 
would undoubtedly be an interesting task for future historians to try to understand 
how and why a question almost wholly technical should have become an allencompassing 
political theme. The matter had acquired enough political 
importance to topple governments, and had made parliamentarians and holders 
of elected office fear for their prospects of being re-elected. 


A&* There were countries - an example was his own, Sweden - where the question 
whether or not to use nuclear power had become the fundamental issue of the 
day, commanding the attention of the electorate far more than others such as 
social benefits or taxation which had traditionally kept political interest 
alive. Politicians in those countries had become so wary of the issue that 
they no longer dared to rely on the expertise available to their Governments 
for solving problems of a technical nature. The Governments concerned seemed 
to wish to relieve themselves of their immediate responsibilities by referring 
decisions to the electorate in the form of a referendum. 

49« People were informed or misinformed by the information media as to some 
of the basic principles involved in energy production, and were exposed to 
the wisdom which •Jjhe different political groups found it convenient to bestow 
upon their electorate. Having thus been educated, they were invited to go to 
the urns to express their preference. One wondered whether the electorate would 
ever learn any of the more relevant facts through such a process: for instance, 
that at the beginning of 1979 a total of 224 nuclear power reactors had been 
in operation, representing some 1800 reactor years of experience, and that in 
not one case had any person ever been fatally or seriously injured by radiation 
from a civilian nuclear power plant; or that the world population was continuously 
exposed to radiation, of which 68% came from the natural background, 


GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 12 


31$ from medical irradiation, 0.6$ from fall-out due to nuclear tests, and only 
0.15$ from the nuclear power industry. On the basis of the 1977 report of 
the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation 
(UKSCEAR), it had been calculated that the radiation emitted by all nuclear 
plants at present operating in the world might cause some 60 deaths from cancer 
each year; that was a figure to be compared with the 7000 cancer deaths 
resulting from the medical use of X-rays and radiations, out of an estimated 
total of 50 million cancer deaths each year from all causes. The figure of 
60 deaths represented a mathematical speculation, whereas the other figures 
were based on statistical evidence. 


50. Bearing those facts in mind, one might find it difficult to understand 
how Governments dared to take decisions without referenda which would permit 
dams to be built that might collapse; which would allow huge aircraft to 
fly over densely populated areas where an accident could cause (and sometimes did) 
hundreds of deaths; and which permitted the transport by road and rail of 
highly toiic substances of the type which recently had led to the largest 
evacuation in the history of mankind, involving a quarter of a million people 
in the vicinity of Toronto. 
51. Psychologists and sociologists explained the situation in terms of different 
attitudes towards known and unknown risks, as well as a difference in attitudes 
towards risks that were imposed and those that were taken voluntarily. That 
might be true; in his opinion, however, there were deeper reasons for the 
ground gained by the anti-nuclear groups. In that context it was interesting 
to note that there was little debate on the nuclear issue in the developing 
countries and in those countries which had centrally planned economies. The 
debate flourished almost exclusively in countries with affluent economies, 
irrespective of whether or not there was access to alternative energy sources. 
52. In those countries there were citizens* groups who were not interested 
in further economic growth or technological development. They advocated new 
life styles, and a tacit assumption was that their own standard of living would 
be maintained and the quality of the environment preserved. It was not clear 
how less fortunate human beings, either in their immediate surroundings or 
in the developing countries, were to be able to improve their living conditions 
in such a "no growth" economy. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 13 


53. Any comments on the nuclear controversy would be incomplete without 
reference to the Three Mile Island accident in the United States of America 
during the early spring of 1979» Two weeks after the event a Presidential 
Commission had been established under the chairmanship of John G. Kemeny to 
conduct a comprehensive study and investigation of the accident. The Commission 
had concluded its work by 30 October and its report was remarkable in its 
clear description of the events and in the objectivity with which it recommended 
steps that could be taken in order to prevent a repetition. Several other 
investigations were under way in the United States, initiated by the Senate, 
the Baclear Regulatory Commission and the Electric Power Research Institute. To 
those must be added studies by specially appointed commissions in a number of 
countries with substantial nuclear programmes. 


54. The Kemeny Commission's most important conclusions were that the equipment 
had worked better than expected but that the operators had not: in the 
Commission's own words it had become clear that the fundamental problems were 
"people-related" problems. The main factor which had turned minor events into 
a potentially major event had been human error and not mechanical failure. 
55» As delegates knew, the Board of Governors in June had approved a 
significant expansion in the Agency's nuclear safety programme, although not 
appropriating any funds for it but asking for voluntary contributions. That 
included a widening of the scope of the Nuclear Safety Standards (HUSS) programme, 
and the sending of missions on request to Member States to advise them on 
safety matters and help them use the HUSS programme products. At the invitation of 
the Swedish Government, a major international conference on nuclear safety 
would be convened in Stockholm in October 1980. 


56. The Agency might also play a useful role in assembling, comparing and 
possibly later co-ordinating the competence requirements which should be met 
by power reactor operational staff. Preparations for the establishment of 
what could be termed an international nuclear fire brigade would also be 
considered. A programme would be initiated to collect and systematically 
analyse data on abnormal nuclear power plant operating experience. 
57. Finally, on that topic, he wished to draw attention to a booklet entitled 
"Radiation, a Fact of Life" which had recently been published by the Agency 
in English and which would shortly appear in French, Russian and Spanish also. 

GC(XXm)/OR.209 
page 14 

58. He had told the United Nations General Assembly when it had discussed 
the Agency's Annual Report on 2 November that year that, if black-outs were to 
be avoided, factories kept going and homes heated and illuminated in the late 
1980s and 1990s, it was imperative for Governments to take the necessary 
decisions on new capacities in electricity production without delay and overcome 
the paralysis that had unfortunately undermined the energy programmes of many 
leading industrial countries. 
59. What was the reality behind the public's apprehensions about nuclear 
power? At the end of 1978 the world's installed capacity of nuclear power 
had amounted to 110 000 MW(e), or 6% of the world's generating capacity. By 
I985, on the basis of plants currently being built, the proportion of nuclear 
power would increase to about 16$ of the electricity actually produced. In 
1985, it would represent the equivalent of more than 400 million tons of oil 
a year. By way of comparison he observed that the previous year Saudi Arabia 
had produced 420 million tons of oil. Obviously, the contribution of nuclear 
energy was indispensable. That had also been emphasized at the summit meeting 
in June that year in Tokyo, where in the final communique1 it had been stated: 
"We need to expand alternate sources of energy, especially those 
which will help to prevent further pollution, particularly increases 
of carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide in the atmosphere. Without 
the expansion of nuclear power generating capacity in the coming 
decades, economic growth and higher employment will be hard to 
achieve. This must be done under conditions guaranteeing our 
people's safety. We will co-operate to this end. The International 
Atomic Energy Agency can play a key role in this regard." 

60. Although a large number of nuclear plants were at various stages of 
construction (including around 90 plants in the United States alone) and even 
considering that a week previously Switzerland had put the GSsgen power reactor 
into operation, thereby establishing a new world record of producing 30$ 
of its electric power by nuclear means, one could not honestly express full 
satisfaction at the increasing use of nuclear power as long as it met with 
resistance from large groups of society. 
61. The care with which nuclear energy had been introduced had also initiated 
a trend to observe the same care with regard to safety, waste disposal and 
pollution in traditional polluting industries such as the chemical and steel 
industries. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 15 

62. Recently, Member States of the Economic Commission for Europe had signed 
a convention on long-range transboundary air pollution. A suggestion had been 
made that pollution from nuclear power stations be included in such an agreement. 
In his opinion, the essential thing was to consider on a world-wide basis 
the transboundary effects of all pollutants of different origins. That could 
probably be done within the framework of the United Nations and specifically 
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). In that way, various 
pollutants could be put into proper perspective and the most urgent problems 
tackled, first. 
63. In that context, he wished to refer to the study undertaken by UNEP on 
the environmental consequences of the production and use of different energy 
sources. Two parts of that study, namely the one on coal and oil and the 
one on nuclear power, had already been completed. The third part would 
cover renewable sources of energy and the fourth was expected to consist of a 
comparative analysis of all results obtained. 
64. The Agency had supported the idea of a comparative study by UNEP and 
had contributed to the part on nuclear power. 
65. During recent visits to a number of developing countries it had been possible 
to observe that the Agency's role in the field of technical assistance, both 
in promoting the application of nuclear techniques and in respect of nuclear 
power, particularly in uranium prospecting and mining, was highly appreciated. 
66. In a situation where the demand for technical assistance greatly exceeded 
available resources, every effort had to be made to utilize the latter in such 
a way as to obtain maximum impact. With that in mind, several measures designed 
to improve co-ordination with recipient Governments and establish well-planned 
and well-integrated country projects, together with the first multi-year projects, 
were now being implemented. 
67. Although resources for technical assistance had been growing steadily, 
the gap between the assistance required by the developing countries and the 
resources available was widening. Hence Member States were urged to make 
voluntary contributions at the highest possible level to the General Fund for 
technical assistance, especially those States which had not found it possible 
so far to contribute to the target in the same proportion as to the Regular 
Budget. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 16 

68. Moreover, the developing countries, -to a far greater extent than the 
industrialized countries, were facing severe economic problems as a result of 
the energy supply crisis. For example, the cost of imported oil for India 
(now itself an oil producer) represented 26$ of the total import bill, while 
for Brazil the figure was 31$, compared with about 13$ of the import bill for 
the Common Market countries. Those were the percentages for 1978. At the 
present time the OPEC price was $24 per barrel and on the spot market the price 
was $40. 
69. In such circumstances, all countries, especially the developed countries, 
had to heed the recommendations of OPEC itself and seek to reduce their 
dependence on oil, above all imported oil, in ways least likely to affect 
economic and industrial growth. 
70. There were now about a dozen developing countries, including India, whose 
demand for electricity was large enough to justify the introduction of nuclear 
power. The number would increase as the electrical grids of other developing 
countries were expanded and as the price of alternative fuels continued to rise. 
By 1985, the 25 nuclear power plants already in operation or under construction 
in developing countries would account for about 4$ of their total electricity 
production and, by the turn of the century, the figure would have risen to 
10$ or more. 
71. Such projections might sound encouraging, but they were subject to several 
qualifications. First, even in the case of the best estimates, nuclear power 
would continue in the present century to play a much smaller role in electricity 
generation in the developing countries than in the industrialized countries. 
Second, the expansion of nuclear power in most of the developing countries 
continued to depend on the state of health of the nuclear industry in the 
developed countries. Third, future prospects for nuclear power in the developing 
countries were equally as sensitive to the evolution of non-proliferation 
policies as those for nuclear power in the developed countries. 
72. There was also a direct relationship between nuclear power expansion in 
the developed countries and increased energy use in the developing countries. 
The less the nuclear power generated by the industrial countries, the more 
oil they consumed, the higher the price would rise and the less oil 
available to the developing world. The same was true of coal. So it was in 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2O9 
page 17 

the direct interest of the developing countries that nuclear power should 
rapidly expand in the industrial countries and relieve the pressure on oil 
supply and prices. 

73. Asia had provided the first example of regional nuclear research co-operation 
in the developing world, and the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology, known as 
the RCA, was now in its seventh year, the number of countries taking part being 
ten. 
74- The EGA would welcome more support from the industrial Member States of 
the Agency, and could also be commended to other regions of the developing 
world as an example of co-operative research in the nuclear field. 

75. As far as safeguards, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
(NPT) and related matters were concerned, it was encouraging to note that five 
developing countries had acceded to NPT during the past year, namely Bangladesh, 
Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Tuvalu and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. 
The process of accession was also advancing in Turkey and the Treaty now 
covered 111 countries. 
76. Nevertheless, the task of creating a world-wide non-proliferation regime 
was by no means finished. Of all regions, Latin America, thanks mainly to the 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Tlatelolco 
Treaty), was the furthest advanced and on the way to becoming the first area of 
the world in which all nuclear activities, except those of a specifically peaceful 
nature, would be prohibited by international law and verified by IAEA safeguards. 
In xhat connection the Conference would be happy to hear of the decision by 
Argentina to ratify the Tlatelolco Treaty and of its initiation, in the summer of 
1979» of negotiations for a full-scope safeguards agreement pursuant to that Treaty. 
77. It was to be fervently hoped that the trend, initiated by NPT in 1970, of bringing 
all civilian activities throughout the world under IAEA safeguards would not be 
reversed. Retreating from the course which had been followed during the preceding 
nine years vjould involve the grave risk of leading the world into a new spiral of the 
nuclear arms race with the waste of valuable resources and manpower which that 
implied, not to speak of the danger to peace. For that reason, the reports about 
the spread of unsafeguarded enrichment technology could not but be a matter of 

GC(XXIII)/OR.209 

page 18 

great concern. It must be borne in mind that where MPT and IAEA safeguards 

ended, the danger of proliferation began. 

78. An important exercise which had engaged the attention of senior nuclear 
experts and diplomats from 66 Member States during the preceding two years the 
International Muclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) - was approaching its 
end. The INFCE final Plenary Conference would be held in Vienna in February 1980 
Commending the achievements of IHFCE in narrowing the gap in views which had 
appeared two years earlier about certain crucial activities of the nuclear fuel 
cycle, he wished to pay a tribute to its temporary chairman at the TCC meetings, 
Professor Chayes. IHFCE had reaffirmed the validity of the nuclear choice 
which most countries had made in the 1950s. Two concrete projects had emerged 
from IMFCE, namely, consultations intended to develop a system of international 
Plutonium storage under the auspices of the Agency in implementation of 
Article XII.A. 5 of the Statute and a study on international spent fuel management 
79« There were, however, still problems requirirg- attention, especially the 
problem of reconstructing an internationally acceptable framework of assured 

supplies of nuclear fuel and equipment under adequate safeguards. The Board 
of Governors might wish to establish a committee comprising the whole membership 
of the Agency with the task of developing a set of guidelines which would 
provide adequate assurance of continued supply of nuclear material and also 
ensure the willingness of the recipient States to accept the IAEA safeguards 
regime and to adhere strictly to a non-proliferation policy. 

80. It was legitimate for a country - in particular a developing country which 
invested resources of the order of a thousand million dollars in a 
nuclear power plant and was prepared to accept MPT or comparable safeguards 
to expect an uninterrupted supply of fuel during the lifetime of the plant. 
81. Considering the instability prevailing at present in the overall energy 
market in many areas of the world, it was certainly an ambitious task to 
attempt to secure the long-term provision of nueLear fuel and fuel-cycle 
services. Nevertheless the long lead time required to increase capacity and 
the very high investment costs for nuclear power made such an endeavour 
desirable. Success in achieving international agreement in that area- would be 
another example of the progressive role of nuclear energy in shaping international 
relations in the domain of technology. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 19 

82. The first principle which should govern any subsequent activities after 
IMFCE was that the basis of all non-proliferation efforts must be, and must 
remain, the Bon-Proliferation Treaty, and that the continuing credibility of 
Articles IV and VI of that Treaty as well as its first three Articles must be 
ensured. Otherwise there was a great danger that support for the Treaty would 
be eroded. 
83. A second principle was that the appropriate organization for developing 
and executing international policies in the nuclear field was the International 
Atomic Energy Agency, which bad been created specifically for that purpose, 
and that the appropriate organ within the Agency was its Board of Governors. 
84. In August 1980, the Parties to MPT would be reviewing for the second time 
the operation of the Treaty "with a view to assuring that the purposes of 
the Preamble and the provisions of the Treaty are being realized", as was 
called for in Article VIII. 3. The deliberations which had taken place at the 
IMFCE meetings should provide a useful basis for arriving at the same assurances 
with regard to Article IV as in the case of the first three Articles. 
85. In that context, it was worth mentioning the resolution adopted on 
29 November by the United Mations General Assembly, deciding in principle to 
convene by 1983 an international conference on the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy under the auspices of the United Nations, with the IAEA fulfilling its 
appropriate role. 
86. He would appreciate Member States* assistance in improving the cost 
effectiveness of Agency safeguards, and their co-operation in the matter to 
which he had referred at the 539th meeting of the Board, viz. the non-acceptance 
by Member States of certain safeguards inspectors. 
87. With regard to the Agency's budget for 1980, the Conference had before it 
the Board's recommendations for a budget modification which required an 
assessment of almost US S4 million. That modification was essential if the 
Agency was to carry out the programme which the Board had approved. The 
additional assessment was due entirely to the decline in the value of the 
United States dollar, or, in other words, the rise in costs in Austrian 
schillings. That assessment, which would place an additional burden on 
Member States, especially those whose currencies had retained near parity 
with the dollar, imposed on the Agency the responsibility to continue and 
intensify its policies of strict economy and financial stringency. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.209 
page 20 


88. If the Agency was to meet its statutory responsibilities regarding 
technical assistance, as well as those relating to safeguards and nuclear 
safety, some expansion would clearly be needed in 1981. With a view to 
offsetting, as far as possible, the cost of such expansion, additional economy 
measures would have to be examined. 
89. At the Agency's request, the Austrian authorities were looking into the 
question of the exchange rate used in Austria for calculating air fares so that 
more rational arrangements could be arrived at for the Agency and the delegations 
accredited to it. 
90. There were some other important matters which he wished to mention briefly. 
In October negotiations for a Convention on the Physical Protection of Huclear 
Material had been successfully concluded under the chairmanship of Ambassador Siazon 
of the Philippines. The Convention marked an important international consensus 
on the measures to be taken to protect nuclear material in international transport. 
Its conclusion should help to promote nuclear trade and should provide an 
assurance to those who feared that the international development of nuclear 
energy necessarily involved a high risk of nuclear material falling into the 
wrong hands. 
91. Significant developments were taking place in thermonuclear fusion. On 
the initiative of the Soviet Onion, the Agency had held a number of workshops 
to study the construction of an international fusion reactor intended to 
demonstrate the technical feasibility of using fusion for producing electricity, 
a project which was being jointly carried out by Japan, the Soviet Union, the 
United States of America and the European Atomic Energy Community (BURATOM). 
92. The inauguration of the Vienna International Centre had taken place on 
23 August, and the Secretariat had now completed the transfer to its 
Permanent Headquarters. He was sure that the General Conference would join 
him in expressing sincere appreciation to the Federal Government of Austria 
and the municipality of Vienna for the new premises. He also wished to thank 
the Holy See and the Governments of Finland, the Federal Republic of Germany, 
Hungary and the Soviet Union, who had offered valuable gifts to the Agency's 
Headquarters; it was to be hoped that their example would be followed by others. 
93. The General Conference would doubtless be happy to join in congratulating 
Professor Abdus Salam of Pakistan on his being awarded the Nobel Prize for 
Physics. As Director of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in 
GC(XXEII)/OR.209 
page 21 


Trieste, he had consistently exercised dynamic and successful leadership and 
had now gained the highest scientific recognition. 


94. He had started his address by referring to the inconsistencies in many 
countries where the nuclear option was under debate and by noting that, 
internationally, there had been a loss of confidence through what might be 
called proliferation phobia. The nuclear industry and trade were now suffering 
from those developments. How could the situation be improved? There had 
probably been too lax an attitude in relations with the media, and on the 
national level much more activity was needed to counter the innumerable 
incorrect or unbalanced statements being made and distributed by news agencies. 
It was also essential when energy questions were discussed to arrange for the 
participation of opponents of nuclear power. They should have the opportunity 
to talk with power experts so as to learn of alternatives, and of their 
possibilities and shortcomings. Those who were interested in the consequences 
of a maximum credible accident should have an opportunity to learn of the 
extraordinary precautions taken and what the actual probability of a maximum 
credible accident was. They might in the end agree with Mark Twain, who had 
said once, when old, that he had been frightened of many things in life, most 
of which had never happened. 
95. Attention should also be given to the consequences of not using nuclear 
energy - in particular the political tensions which would develop as a result 
of increased competition for oil and the difficulties which countries would 
face as they tried to maintain employment and an adequate standard of living. 
96. In respect of non-proliferation, the most important task was to convince 
countries still outside the $PT regime to accede to the Treaty; but that 
could be done only if existing imbalances were rectified. For instance, there 
should be a complete ban on tests of nuclear explosives or weapons, of which 
to date roughly 1000 had been carried out underground. Furthermore, signatories 
of HPT who had relinquished part of their sovereignty by permitting international 
inspection should not be penalized by having other, additional conditions 
imposed upon them. That was why it was so important to find a formula whereby 
irrevocable safeguards also meant an irrevocable supply of fuel. 
97. In conclusion, he felt it must be admitted that the present situation in 
the nuclear energy field was characterized by a number of contradictions. Manyspoke 
of intolerable risks from civilian nuclear plants at which to date no 

GC(XXHI)/OR.209 
page 22 

fatal radiation accident had occurred, but advocated their replacement by 
coal plants where, in the whole process from beginning to end, many people 
were killed each year. Frequent reference was made to the heritage that 
might be left to coming generations in the form of long-lived radioactive 
wastes, but nothing was said about the systematic efforts being made to 
deprive those same generations of the limited quantities of petroleum left. 

It was said that the industrialized nations wanted to improve the fortunes of 
the developing countries, yet they competed with them in the oil market, to 
which many of the developing countries particularly needed access if they 
were to be able to build up an electric infrastructure. People seemed to 
accept the existence of tens of thousands of nuclear weapons stored in many 
different places; they tolerated a growing number of ships propelled by 
nuclear engines; yet they fretted about land-based nuclear power reactors 

and talked about proliferation risks even from research reactors. 

98. Far from being at the end of industrialization, the world was just at 
the beginning. One had to acknowledge how far the world had progressed since 
the Second World War in making the lives of human beings easier, healthier 
and more productive through continuing scientific and technological developments. 
The present nuclear debate did not constitute the most important 
question mankind had ever faced. There were many other, more important issues 
such as how to maintain world peace and how to help the hundreds of millions 
who were starving. Yet, to feed those people and to better their lot, 
industrialization was needed, and that in turn required a supply of cheap, 
reliable energy. That was where nuclear energy could make a substantial 
contribution. 
STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR COMMUNICATIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT 

OF INDIA 

99. The PRESIDENT thanked the Director General and gave the floor to the 
Minister of State for Communications of the Government of India. 
100. The MINISTER OF STATE FOR COMMUNICATIONS commended the Agency on its 
efforts to assist developing countries by promoting the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, and announced the issue of a special postage stamp by the Government of 
India to commemorate the occasion of the General Conference's session in 
New Delhi. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
July 1980* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 
RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi, 
on Tuesday, 4 December 1979, at 3 p.m. 
President; Mr. SETHNA (India) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
Statement by the delegate of Nigeria 
Voluntary contributionsfor 1980 
to the General Fund 
Arrangements for the General Conference 
General debate and annual report for 1978 
Statements by the delegates of: 
United States of America 
Brazil 
Ireland 
Federal Republic of Germany 
Yugoslavia 

Paragraphs 


1-2 


3-4 


5 -6 


7 - 63 


7 21 
22 32 
33 40 
41 55 
56 63 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 29 January 1980. 
**/ GC(XXIII)/609. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 


80-2819 



GC(XXni)/OR.210 
page 2 

STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATE OF NIGERIA 

1. Mr. OMOLODUN (Nigeria), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Group of 77, Questioned the validity of the credentials presented by the 
South African delegation and requested the President to bring the matter up 
for consideration. 
2. The PRESIDENT said that since a point of order had been raised by the 
representative of Nigeria it was incumbent upon him to rule on it immediately 
in accordance with Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure. Applying the terms of 
Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure, the President stated that the delegate of 
South Africa would be seated provisionally with the same rights as other delegates 
until the General Committee, meeting as a credentials committee, had considered 
the matter raised by the delegate of Nigeria and had reported thereon to the 
General Conference for a decision. 
VOUINTART CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE GENERAL FUND FOR 1980 

3. The PRESIDENT recalled that the Board of Governors had recommended 
a sum of $10.5 million as the target for voluntary contributions for 1980. 
Although that figure represented a considerable increase over 1979, i^ was still 
modest in face of the needs of the developing countries. 
4. He therefore appealed to all countries, especially the industrialized 
nations and other affluent countries, to make an additional effort and to pledge, 
before the closing of the present session, contributions representing fractions 
of the target equal to or if possible greater than their shares of the assessed 
budget. By doing so they would re-emphasize the importance attached to technical 
assistance and enable the Secretariat to make an immediate start on implementing 
the Agency's technical assistance programme for 1980. 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE GENERAL CONFERENCE 

5. The PRESIDENT recalled that the agenda could not be adopted by the 
General Conference until after the meeting of the General Committee, which was 
to be held the next day. Since, however, it was laid down in Article V.E.4 of 
the Statute that "The General Conference shall: Consider the annual report of 
the Board", he suggested waiving the provisions of Article 42(a) of the Rules 
of Procedure, under which the General Committee should consider the provisional 
agenda at the beginning of each session of the General Conference, and going 
straight on to the general debate. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
page 3 

6. It was so decided. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 197 8 


7. Mr. SMITH (United States of America) read out the following message 
from the President of the United States of America. 


"On behalf of the American people, I would like to send my best 
wishes to the participants in the IAEA's twenty-third General Conference. 


"Nuclear power can be critical in the urgent efforts we must 
make - individually and jointly - to reduce our dependence on dwindling 
and sometimes insecure fossil fuel supplies. Our extensive cooperative 
and supply relationships with other countries are major elements 
in expanding the utilization of nuclear power. 


"Our ability to derive its full benefits will depend upon greater 
public confidence that this important energy source is being developed 
and managed in a safe and effective manner. Misuse of the technology 
will gravely affect the security of all nations and it is vital that 
we intensify our joint efforts to halt the spread of nuclear explosives. 


"Difficult challenges often provide great opportunities. By 
working together I believe we can fulfil the promise of the atom for 
a better and more peaceful world. 


"The United States recognizes the central role that the IAEA is 
playing in these endeavours. We intend to continue providing strong 
support for the programmes of the Agency. 


"It is my hope and the hope of the America1! people that as we 
enter the 1980s we can renew our efforts to pursue nuclear development 
in a harmonious and rewarding fashion." 


8. The United States recognized the need for nuclear power and would meet 
its commitments in relation to peaceful nuclear co-operation. At the same time, 


there would be need for renewed efforts to meet the challenges facing tha nuclear 


power industry, including public concern about safety, waste disposal, proliferation 


and assurance of supply. 


9. Committed to improving reactor safety, his country recognized that reactor 
operators should be more highly trained, that regulatory agencies should be 


properly organized and that there was need for more effective response to emer


gencies. Although the Three Mile Island incident had brought to light certain 


shortcomings, it should not be seen as putting nuclear energy beyond the pale 


but rather as an encouragement to greater vigilance. His country would continue 


to share with the Agency and its Member States the results of the investigation 


still under way. 



GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
page 4 

10. Radioactive waste disposal presented considerable social problems and joint 
efforts in that respect would have to be stepped up in order to convince the 
public of the feasibility of waste disposal in geological formations. With 
regard to the disposal of spent fuel, the work of the International Nuclear Fuel 
Cycle Evaluation (IHPCE), in particular, should make for greater confidence. 
In that connection there was growing awareness that reprocessing was not 
essential and that other options existed. 
11. There was growing apprehension that additional countries might acquire 
nuclear explosives and it was vital to ensure that that did not happen, in view 
of the serious impact on nuclear commerce as well as on international security 
and stability. 
12. His country realized how important it was to maintain confidence in nuclear 
supply agreements concluded with countries meeting non-proliferation conditions. 
The issue of export licences and the exercise of national controls should be 
subject to a stricter approach. To that end the United States was ready to 
work closely with other countries and to apply its laws along those lines. 
Consumer states also had responsibilities in that connection, since the way they 
used their technology could have an important effect on the actions of suppliers. 
His country was prepared to help other countries to prospect for and develop 
their natural uranium resources, and it was encouraging to see that according 
to one of IHFCE's conclusions enrichment capacity would be sufficient to meet 
likely demand at least until the end of the century. 

13. In view of the possibility of improving fuel utilization in thermal reactors, 
Plutonium recycling appeared unnecessary, only marginally economic and imprudent 
for the time being from the standpoint of non-proliferation. 
14. Although some countries were proceeding with breeder reactor research and 
development (for which reprocessing was required), he believed that there were 
reasons, from both the economic and non-proliferation points of view, for limiting 
the number of reprocessing plants to a few large-scale facilities and gearing 
reprocessing capacity to the short-term plutonium demand for research and 
development on advanced reactors; and it would become extremely important to 
ensure that the resultant plutonium was subject to rigorous international 
control. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
page 5 

15. In the United States it was thought that breeder reactors were likely to be 
economically viable only in those countries which had an advanced infrastructure 
and a distribution grid of suitable size. That did not mean that the use of 
breeders must be limited to certain countries at the expense of others, but 
there would be time, before selecting an advanced technology, to look at the 
various options and modernize the international non-proliferation arrangements. 
16. The Agency would play an important part in meeting the challenges described. 
Accordingly, his Government strongly supported the Director General's proposal 
for an intensification of the Agency's efforts in nuclear safety and would 
continue to support the safeguards programme. The United States had contributed 
S5»l million to that programme in the current year and called upon other 
countries to increase their contributions too. Furthermore, States should 
design their nuclear facilities with the effective application of safeguards 
in mind. 
17. Since the number of parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) had increased, it was hoped that the application of full-scope safeguards 
would become the norm for the international nuclear trade. 
18. The Agency was to be congratulated on its role in the conclusion of the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, which should 
help to discourage diversion by terrorists or other sub-national groups. 
19. Subject to approval by Congress, the United States would increase its 
voluntary contribution to the Agency's technical assistance activities in 1980, 
and was also planning to implement its special technical assistance programme 
which had been outlined at the recent session of the United Nations Conference 
on Disarmament. His country considered that its co-operation under Article IV 
of HPT had been satisfactory, and it would continue to seek ways of meeting even 
more responsively the needs of the developing countries. It endorsed the Agency's 
study on spent fuel and was taking an active part in examining the question 
whether an international plutonium regime could reinforce existing nonproliferation 
measures. 
20. The United States welcomed the Secretariat's contribution to ensuring the 
usefulness of INPCE and believed that the Agency would have an important part 
to play in the post-INFCE work. Since that activity did .not foreshadow any 
major technical hitches, institutional measures providing sounder assurance in 

GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
page 6 

respect of both supply and non-proliferation should be promptly adopted; the 
United States planned to follow that course in fact, in its legislation and in 
its policy. 

21. With the conclusion of the work of IHFCE, the remaining problem was to resolve 
residual differences and to move towards an even more effective non-proliferation 
regime, within the context of international co-operation, so that nuclear energy 
could fulfil the essential role destined for it in meeting the needs of many 
countries. 
22. Mr. de CARYALB3 (Brazil), having congratulated the President on his 
election and thanked the Indian Government for its hospitality, stressed the 
impact that the present energy crisis could have on the pursuit of economic 
development and improvement in the quality of life, more especially in the less 
affluent countries. It was only by means of research that alternative energy 
sources to replace oil could be found. The results already obtained by the 
industrialized countries were such as to make possible an immediate transfer of 
technology for the benefit of developing countries. 
23. Countries now at the initial stage of economic development had need of far 
more energy than the industrialized countries. According to forecasts by the 
World Energy Conference, 2000 hexajoules would be required annually by the 
year 2020. By that time all hydroelectric resources would have been harnessed, 
oil production would have sharply declined and gas production would also have 
dropped off. Hence coal, nuclear energy and solar energy would have to meet 
two thirds of the world's requirements. 
24. Since the construction of new facilities and the change in energy consumption 
patterns would require time, it was essential to draw up long-term programmes 
right away, especially in the nuclear sector. Indeed, nuclear reactors, 
particularly fast breeders and controlled fusion reactors, could provide a 
virtually inexhaustible source of energy. 
25. However, there were at the present time a number of obstacles in the way 
of the development of nuclear energy. In the troubled climate created by the 
rapid evolution of society and technology, public opinion, swayed by the vertical 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, failed to grasp the difference between the peaceful 
and military applications of nuclear energy and tended to oppose them both. 
GC(mil)/OR.210 
page 7 


Because of that opinion Governments were subjected to pressures and the utilities 
were forced to discontinue their nuclear programmes, which meant that the 
tremendous effort already made would have been wasted. The energy supply would 
therefore decline and social problems would thereby be made still worse. 


26. Hence it was essential in all countries to keep the public informed and to 
explain to them in every possible way what nuclear energy really meant. The 
Agency could render very valuable assistance in that respect by organizing 
meetings and seminars, and would be well advised to launch an ambitious information 
campaign on the subject, to which it should accord just as much importance as 
to non-proliferation. 
27. The Agency also had a vital part to play in technical assistance, where it 
could help the developing countries to make up for lost time. The funds available 
to it for that purpose were unfortunately too scant - they did not even amount 
to the cost of one power reactor. That fact indicated once again that there 
was an imbalance between the activities relating to technical assistance and 
safeguards, with the industrialized countries constantly assigning to safeguards 
an importance that was out of all proportion. The developing countries expected 
the Agency to help them to gain independence in the field of technology so 
that they need not rely any more on the industrialized countries. In order to 
do so the Agency would, among other things, have to expand its training programme, 
to which his Government attached great value. 
28. Countries which decided to launch a nuclear power programme should take 
a number of factors into consideration when selecting the most appropriate 
fuel cycle, among them the comparative cost of different cycles, their balance 
of payments, capital and manpower resources, and their industrial infrastructure. 
Since the implementation of such programmes covered a number of years, those 
countries must also make long-term predictions. First and foremost, they should 
make an exact assessment of their uranium resources and, if necessary, gauge 
their degree of dependence on other countries. States requesting the Agency to 
help them with such evaluations or to assist them in exploiting their uranium 
reserves were steadily increasing in number. Hence the Agency had an important 
part to play in that field and was, furthermore, administering to an ever 
greater extent the funds allocated by the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP) to uranium prospecting and production projects. 

GC(XXHI)/OR.210 
page 8 


29. Brazil possessed extensive energy resources. For the time being it still 
relied heavily on imported oil, but its hydro resources were immense and it was 
hoped that the country would shortly have an installed capacity of more than 
200 000 MW. At the present time a 12 600 MW hydroelectric power plant was being 
constructed jointly with Paraguay at Itaipu. Brazil's uranium resources were 
likewise considerable, both because of the size of the national territory and the 
wide variety of uranium-bearing rocks. Brazil had therefore been carrying out 
prospecting on a vast scale since 1971, as a result of which 87 5°0 tons of 
assured reserves and 106 300 tons of probable reserves had been evaluated. Since 
the finds were multiplying rapidly, his country could henceforth be considered 
a uranium and thorium supplier. 


30. As soon as countries had evaluated their resources, they could draw up 
plans for future power plants. The Agency had done a very good job in publishing 
codes of practice compiled by expert groups; they were readily usable by all 
Member States and would promote the transfer of technology. It was Brazil, in 
fact, which had urged the Agency to put out such guides and had taken part 
financially in the venture. 
31. In 1978, a number of new nuclear power plants had been built, especially in 
Japan and Prance. The Soviet Union and other socialist countries had announced 
an expansion of their nuclear power programmes and the Republic of Korea had 
placed an order for two plants. That "trend had not been followed, however, 
by the countries of North America and Europe as a whole. Brazil had increased 
its electricity production, which now stood at 122 000 million kWh. If the 
present trend was maintained, by the beginning of the next century the country 
would possess an installed capacity of more than 200 000 MW, although, for 
geographical and economic reasons, it would have to rely increasingly heavily on 
nuclear power. The first nuclear power plant, at Angra dos Reis, would shortly 
be put into service. The first unit was undergoing tests and two more units were 
being built. 

32. He concluded by thanking the Secretariat for the fine work it had done in 
1979» and expressed special appreciation to Mr. Bittencourt. The Agency would 
undoubtedly continue to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to combat 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
page 9 


33. Mr. 0*SULLIVAN (Ireland), congratulating the President on his election 
and thanking the Indian Government for its hospitality, expressed satisfaction at 
the steady progress made by the Agency in its activities aimed at promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and guarding against the danger of proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, as reflected in the annual report for 1978. Ireland, which 
had been the first country to ratify the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) , in July 1968, was gratified to note that the number of States which 
had acceded to the Treaty continued to grow, although it was concerned at the 
increase in the number of States operating facilities which were not subject to the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
34. The annual report indicated a substantial rise in the volume of technical 
assistance provided by the Agency to developing countries, and he was pleased to 
announce that his country would make a voluntary contribution of US $16 800 to the 
General Fund in 1980. 
35« The report and the Director General's statement had rightly drawn attention to 
the problems facing the nuclear industry, which were undoubtedly due in large 
measure to the growth of public misgivings about the safety of nuclear power plants. 
Although ensuring nuclear safety was essentially the responsibility of national 
authorities, the Agency could play an important part in that regard by preparing 


codes of practice and safety guides and through its training, advisory, research 
and information programmes. 


36. The problem of the disposal of radioactive waste was causing increasing concern 
all over the world and Ireland was especially anxious about disposal in the 
marine environment. It welcomed the Agency's activities in that important area 
and, in particular, the preparation of definitions and recommendations relating to 
dumping in the sea under the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by 
Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (the London Convention)-' . 
37- His delegation commended the progress of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
Evaluation (INFCE), which had set an example in international co-operation and to 


which the Agency's Secretariat had made a valuable contribution. The final report 


of INFCE would undoubtedly be very useful to the NPT Review Conference to be held 


in 1980. 


38. The Irish delegation had noted with satisfaction the successful conclusion of 
negotiations for the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, 
which should facilitate international co-operation in dealing with problems which 
might arise from hazardous nuclear materials. 
1/ The text of the Convention is reproduced in document INFCIRC/205



GC(XXUI)/OR.210 
page 10 


39. Ireland, which imported more than 80$ of the energy it required, recognized 
the need to diversify its sources of energy and had in 1973 approved in principle 
the construction of a 600-MW nuclear power station, although a final decision 
was yet to he taken. The Irish Government intended to establish a special 
tribunal which would hold a public enquiry on all aspects of the proposal. 
40. Since becoming a Member of the .Agency in 1970 Ireland had benefited greatly 
from the .Agency's services, especially as it was interested in the applications 
of nuclear techniques in industry, agriculture, health and other areas. In 
order that Ireland, for its part, might better contribute to the Agency's work, 
it had decided to be a candidate for membership of the Board of Governors. 
41. Mr. RASJBSCiilLD (Federal Republic of Germany) extended his congratulations 
to the President on his election and expressed his gratitude to the latter as 
well as to the Indian Government for their generous hospitality in Hew Delhi. 
He observed that without further expansion of nuclear power in the decades to 
come, it would be difficult to ensure economic growth and a higher employment 
rate. Stringent measures to save energy and the development of other energy 
sources could not replace the contribution which nuclear power offered in the 
context of the growing demand for energy. 
42. nevertheless, nuclear programmes had continued to decrease in the past few 
years because the nuclear safety issue had become the subject of a public debate, 
and it was for Governments and the international organizations to re-establish, 
by way of frank and complete information, national and international confidence 
in nuclear energy, without which the vast potential of nuclear power could not 
be fully realized. 
43. In the Federal Republic the nuclear debate had become more objective thanks 
to a review of safety measures in nuclear power stations, which had shown no 
need for immediate corrective action, and to the report on a comprehensive risk 
assessment undertaken at the request of the Federal Government, which had arrived 
at similar conclusions for conditions in the Federal Republic of Germany as the 
Rasmussen study had arrived at. As to the end phase of the fuel cycle, thorough 
discussions between the Federal Government and the State Governments had resolved 
certain differences of opinion between the former and the State Government 
responsible for licensing the proposed fuel cycle centre, reconfirming the integrated 
concept comprising the reprocessing of spent fuel and the conditioning and 
disposal of waste. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
page 11 


44. During the preceding year the Agency had demonstrated its ability to adjust 
itself to new demands as, for example, the need for intensified discussion of 
reactor safety. The Three Mile Island incident had had repercussions in the 
Agency; reactions of Member States and discussions in the Board of Governors had 
shown that activities in the field of nuclear safety should be accorded a higher 
priority. In letters to the Director General and to the Heads of Government of all 
Member States represented on the Board of Governors, his Government had emphasized 
that the Agency, as a world body, should play a basic role in the international coordination 
of all matters relating to the safety of nuclear power plants and had 
called upon the Agency to enlarge the scope of its activities in that area considerably. 
The Federal Republic welcomed the Agency's plans to expand the nuclear 
safety standards (NOSS) programme to a substantial extent, to make intensified use 
of safety missions, to hold international meetings on the subject and to prepare a 
roster of safety experts. Like other Governments, the Federal Republic was willing 
to provide additional financial support so that a larger nuclear safety programme 
could be included in the Regular Budget. It was also willing to make experts available 
for implementing that programme as speedily as possible. 
45. Referring to the conclusions of the United Nations Conference on Science and 
Technology for Development, which had pointed out the need for improvements in technology 
transfer to developing countries, he emphasized that with its long experience 
in providing technical assistance, the Agency set an excellent example of how technology 
transfer could be organized and promoted through specific projects. His 
country also noted with satisfaction that the Regular Budget included many programmes 
of interest to the developing countries. The Agency had in that respect gained a 
good reputation within the United Nations system, as was evident from the fact that 
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) had channelled considerable funds 
through the Agency. The Federal Republic welcomed the increase in the total amount 
earmarked for technical assistance activities and would make a voluntary contribution 
corresponding to its base rate of assessment, as well as other contributions in the 
form of fellowships, services of experts, training courses and scientific conferences 
and programmes of particular interest to developing countries. Its total voluntary 
contribution in 1980 would amount to about US $2 million. 
46. The Agency's activities aimed at ensuring the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear 
energy had developed remarkably in recent years. Apart from safeguards, which 
remained the centre-piece of the Agency's work in that area, it had developed new 
activities which strengthened its role as a forum for international debate on a wide 
range of questions concerning nuclear energy. In that context, the conclusion of the 
discussions on a Convention for the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material was to be 
commended. 

GC(XXni)/OR.210 
page 12 

47. The Safeguards Implementation Report for 1978, which marked a noticeable 
improvement both in presentation and in content, gave a clear exposition of the 
Agency's activities relating to the practical application of safeguards. He 
also noted with satisfaction that the Agency had intensified its studies on the 
particular problems posed by the application of safeguards to sensitive facilities 
such as reprocessing plants, mixed-oxide fuel fabrication plants and enrichment 
facilities. Many aspects such as a proper relationship between accountancy 
methods on the one hand and containment and surveillance on the other still 
needed to be studied in detail. The Government of the Federal Republic had 
agreed with the Agency on a safeguards support programme which was making satisfactory 
progress. 
48. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Huclear Weapons (HPT) formed the 
principal basis for the Agency's work in the area of safeguards. Although MPT 
was not universal, 108 non-nuclear-^weapon States and three nuclear-weapon States 
had become parties to it and the list of States acceding to the Treaty was 
growing steadily. Efforts should be made to create the political conditions which 
would make adherence to the Treaty or to its major principles both possible and 
attractive. The second NPT Review Conference, to be held in 198O, should provide 
an occasion for establishing among the parties a solid common basis of understanding 
on the major elements of the Treaty in order to motivate other States to 
join and to avoid impairing the consensus reached in the late 1960s. 
49» The Federal Republic attached great importance to the fact that three 
nuclear—weapon States - the United States, the United Kingdom and France - had 
taken steps to subject their non-military uses of nuclear energy to the Agency's 
safeguards. It called upon the Soviet Union, one of the depositaries of the 
Treaty, to follow their example. Inspections in those States would provide 
valuable experience for Agency inspectors and would increase international 
confidence} also, they would reduce the impression of discrimination in peaceful 
nuclear activities - discrimination that was not inherent in the principles of 
non-proliferation. 

50. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) was to be completed 
in a few months, and he wished to make a few preliminary observations on its outcome. 
The Evaluation, involving some 60 States and five international organizations 
as participants, had contributed to improving mutual understanding among 
States with different political, economic and social structures and to making the 
international debate more objective and less ideological than before. Many 
C!C(XXIII)/OR.210page 
13 

of the developing countries, and in particular those which had already embarked 
on a nuclear programme, had actively participated in the dialogue. Among the 
many results achieved by INFCE two could be singled out, namely that the nuclear 
option was essential to meet the world's growing energy needs and that there was 
no uniform criterion which could be applied in deciding for or against a particular 
fuel cycle in a given State or region. 

51. He observed, as he had done at the preceding session of the Conference, 
that it would be desirable to determine a set of co-ordinated measures enjoying 
a wide consensus which could be submitted at the end of the Evaluation to 
Governments for their decision. A new world-wide consensus on nuclear energy 
and non-proliferation could be achieved in a "modular" way on the basis of the 
INFCE results. In that regard a variety of practical measures were already under 
discussion: further development of Agency safeguards, which had been discussed 
intensively at INFCE meetings and was being pursued vigorously by the Agency; 
international storage of excess plutonium, which was under study by an Agency 
expert group; and international co-operation in spent fuel management, which was 
being investigated by another group under the auspices of the Agency. There 
were other areas identified by INFCE where it now seemed to be necessary to move 
from the stage of study to that of technical development and demonstration, for 
example the use of low-enriched fuel for research reactors and modifications 
of reprocessing technologies. In discussing new technical solutions which would 
make it possible to use nuclear energy to satisfy demand while minimizing 
proliferation risks, one had not only to satisfy oneself that those solutions 
were technically feasible but also to demonstrate to users that they conformed 
to their needs. 

52. Lastly, he wished to underline the importance of assured fuel supplies for 
industrialized and developing countries alike. In that respect, INFCE had 
evolved the interesting concept of back-up arrangements in the event of interruptions 
in fuel supply. That concept, and also the proposal to establish a 
technological centre to promote technology transfer to developing countries, 
deserved to be studied. 
53. The Federal Republic considered that, as soon as INFCE finished its work, 
its results should be studied in a systematic manner. Because of its experience, 
its mandate and its universality, the Agency was well equipped to tackle that 
task in co-operation with national programmes and international and regional 

GC(XXIII)/OR.21O 
page 14 

organizations. However, the Agency alone could bring together all countries 
interested in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and provide a platform where 
all views could be expressed. 

54. An early discussion of those issues could also help in the preparation of 
the second NPT Review Conference and widen the scope of the next major Salzburgtype 
conference of the Agency. 
55. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Director General and his staff for 
the excellent work they had done in the preceding year and assured them of his 
country's continued support. 
56. Mr. PRIBICEVIC (Yugoslavia), congratulating the President on his election, 
said that Mr. Sethna, who represented a non-aligned country and the host Government, 
would undoubtedly contribute to the success of the present session of the 
General Conference. 
57. International political and economic relations were going through a difficult 
phase. The economic situation of the developing countries was worsening. The 
energy crisis seemed to show that nuclear power alone could satisfy the demand 
of an increasing number of countries whose economic and social development was 
at stake. 
58. Vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons was causing great concern. Under 
the pretext of wishing to stress the proliferation of nuclear weapons, certain 
countries were imposing restrictions on the transfer of nuclear technology, 
especially to a number of developing countries which simply could not do without 
nuclear power. Such restrictions on technology transfer were contrary to the 
Statute and to NFT. 
59. The non-aligned countries had stressed, particularly at the Havana Conference, 
the importance of nuclear power and denounced those restrictions, declaring that 
all countries had the right to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
They had condemned the monopolistic attitude of some countries which were attempting 
to solve nuclear problems in a closed circle, ignoring the world community, 
and had urged that an international conference be held within the United Nations 
system to promote international co-operation in the nuclear field. 
60. The Yugoslav Government firmly believed that the problems of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and those of safeguards could be solved only by political 
means. Conferences like those held at Persepolis and Salzburg were useful, and 
GC(XXIII)/OR.210 
Page 15 

it was satisfying to know that when the next international conference on nuclear 
energy was convened it would be held under the auspices of the United Nations an 
arrangement that would make it possible to take account of the aspirations of 
the developing countries and strengthen international confidence. 

61. During the preceding year the Agency had successfully carried out its 
tasks in spite of difficult circumstances; it had even strengthened its role. 
His Government wished to express its gratitude for the assistance it had received 
in connection with the construction of the first nuclear power station in 
Yugoslavia. He hoped that the Agency would continue to provide assistance. 
Yugoslavia had launched an extensive nuclear programme which could be implemented 
only in a stable internatioi.il climate with reliable supplies of fuel and equipment 
. 
62. There were several problems which required to be solved at the present 
session. First, the lack of balance between promotional and safeguards activities 
could not satisfy the developing countries and would prevent the Agency from 
fulfilling its role. Technical assistance should be based on long-term planning 
and should be financed fully from the Regular Budget; and no distinction should 
be made between countries which had signed and countries which had not signed 
NPT. Second, Yugoslavia attached great importance to the amendment of Article VI 
of the Statute with a view to adapting it to present needs. Third, his country 
urged that in seeking a solution to the problem of plutonium and spent fuel 
storage, the Agency should take into account the right of States to assured 
supplies of fuel and equipment; in that regard it supported the Director General's *. 
proposal. Fourth, the Yugoslav Government would like the Agency to be involved 
actively in the NPT Review Conference in order to ensure a free transfer of 
technology, which was being threatened by certain countries who identified 
nuclear power development with proliferation. 
63. In conclusion, he expressed satisfaction at the collaboration between his 
country and the Agency and hoped that Yugoslavia would be accorded membership 
of the Board. 
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m. 


GC(XXIII)/OR.211 
August 1980* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND ELEVENTH 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi, 
on Wednesday, 5 December 1979, at 11.25 a.m. 


President: Mr. SETHNA (India) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 
provisional 
agenda** 
Paragraphs 
5 Arrangements for the Conference 
(a) Adoption of the agenda and 
allocation of items for 
initial discussion 1 - 34 

*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 10 January 1980. 
**/ GC(XXIII)/609. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/188/Rev.5. 

80-2823 


GC(XXIII)/OR.211 
page 2 


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 


(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL DISCUSSION 
(GC(XXIII)/609, 617) 
1. The PRESIDENT informed the Conference that the General Committee, at 
its meeting earlier that day, had authorized him to report on the results of its 
consideration of the agenda and the allocation of items for initial discussion. 
The General Committee recommended, first, that the agenda should consist of all 
the items contained in the provisional agenda, as set out in document 
GC(XXIII)/609, and an additional item proposed by the Board of Governors in 
document GC(XXIII)/6l7 which concerned the Agency's budget for 1979! secondly, 
that the items should be allocated for initial discussion as indicated in 
document GC(XXIII)/609, the additional item being allocated to the Committee of 
the Yfhole; and, thirdly, that the time limit referred to in Rule 15 of the 
Rules of Procedure should be waived for the purpose of discussion of the 
additional item. 
2. 
The General Committee's recommendations were accepted. 
3. The PRESIDENT further informed the Conference that the General Committee 
had that day also served as a Credentials Committee to discuss a point raised 
by the delegate of Nigeria concerning the credentials presented by the South 
African delegation. After an extensive debate, in which all members of the 
Committee had expressed their views, it had become clear that members differed 
as to the interpretation of Rules 51, 82 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure. 
Seven members (Nigeria, Qatar, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, India, 
Tunisia, Malaysia and Czechoslovakia) had supported the Nigerian proposal. Six 
members (the United States of America, the United Kingdom, Prance, the Federal 
Republic of Germany, Canada and Japan) had opposed the proposal. One member 
(Ecuador) had abstained on behalf of the Latin American countries. The Conference 
was therefore invited to discuss the point raised by the Nigerian delegate. 


4. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that he must, with reluctance, ask permission 
to say a few words of introduction, as he considered that his responsibilities, 
under the Statute of an Agency, the objectives of which were to promote the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy and to prevent the diversion of nuclear materials to 
military ends, compelled him to draw attention to certain facts. 
5. The first was that the IAEA was applying safeguards to the only operating 
reactor in South Africa and had been doing so since June 1965. The second 
was that under the trilateral agreement approved by the Board of Governors in 
September 1976 the IAEA would be applying safeguards to two nuclear power plants 
due to come into operation in 1981 and 1982. South Africa had further committed 
itself to report to the IAEA exports of nuclear materials to non-nuclearweapon 
States, There had also been preliminary discussions with the South 
GC(XXIII)/OR.211 
page 3 


African authorities about the conclusion of a safeguards agreement for the commercial 
enrichment plant which South Africa intended to construct. The discussions 
had not covered the pilot enrichment plant operating in South Africa, but 
the possibility should not be ruled out that South Africa might accede to the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and thereby place all 
nuclear materials and nuclear plant in that country under safeguards. Such a 
step would be of great importance for the creation of a denuclearized zone in 
Africa and would benefit all African countries; he had in fact twice visited 
South Africa with that objective in view. He hoped the General Conference would 
bear those things in mind when taking decisions which might affect the position 
of South Africa in the Agency. 


6. Mr. 0M0L0DUN (Nigeria) proposed that the General Conference should, on 
the recommendation of the General Committee, decide not to accept the credentials 
presented by the delegation of South Africa. 
7. Mr. SOT0LQN00 CODINA (Cuba) supported the proposal made by the delegate of 
Nigeria and pointed out that the position adopted by Ecuador during the General 
Committee's deliberations was not shared by all the countries of Latin America. 
8. Mr. OSMAN (Egypt) appealed to the Conference to understand the attitude 
of the African States and peoples towards the discriminatory policy of apartheid 
practised in South Africa. The Government of that country was not only not 
representative of the population, it also had the ambition to acquire nuclear 
weapons and was thus in conflict with the principles of the Agency's Statute. 
9. Mr. VELLODI (India) said that his country had always condemned the 
policy of apartheid and had been the first to raise the matter in the United 
Nations General Assembly. He agreed with the previous speaker that the South 
African Government was not representative of the people of South Africa, and 
therefore supported the proposal put forward by the delegate of Nigeria, adding 
that the proposal was not to expel South Africa from the Agency, but to reject 
the credentials presented by the delegation of that country. 
10. Mr. ONYANGO (Kenya) said that only peoples who had experienced racial 
discrimination could be fully aware of how obnoxious a practice it was. In view 
of the policy of apartheid applied in South Africa he strongly supported the 
proposal under discussion. 
11. Mr. SATTAR (Pakistan) said that the repugnance of the world community at 
the p'olicy of apartheid had been voiced in many international meetings, including 
those of the Board of Governors of the Agency. There was thus no reason why the 
same position should not be taken by the General Conference. Adopting a 
different policy in the case of the Agency so that South Africa would continue to 
be bound by its obligations as a Member State would be tantamount to acquiescence 
in blackmail. Since opposition to the apartheid policy of the South African 

CSC (XXIII)/OR. 211 
page 4 


Government was a matter of principle^ '±t' should be Voiced consistently in all 
international fora. He, therefore, fully supported the proposal made by the 


delegate of Nigeria. 


12. Mr. KOUTOUBI (Niger) shared the views of previous speakers, adding 
that his country might review its position with regard to South Africa if 
conditions changed in that country. 
13- Mr. ALLOTSY (Ghana) , Mr. CHALIKULIMA (Zambia), Mr. PRIBICEYIC 


(Yugoslavia), Mr. BBNNINI (Algeria), Mr. NEMBTS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic), Mr. NIMPUNp (Indonesia), Mr. KAYUMBO (United Republic of Tanzania), 
Mr. KOSTADINOV (Bulgaria), Mr. IE BA CAP (Viet Nam), Mr. THOMAS (German 
Democratic Republic), Mr. NGONGO KAMANDA (Zaire), Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary), 
Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. WICULESCU (Romania), Mr. MARAFI (Kuwait), 
Mr. MAHMOOD (Iraq), and Mr. CHOI HAK GUN (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) 
associated themselves with the views expressed by the previous speakers and 


supported the proposal put forward by the delegate of Nigeria. 


14. Mr. DE VILLIERS (South Africa) considered the General Committee's 
decision wholly illegal and without precedent in the annals of the Agency. The 
credentials of the South African delegation were strictly in conformity with the 
Agency's Statute and the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, as all 
past sessions of the General Conference had recognized. They had been issued 
by the same authorities which had issued the credentials of the South African 
delegations to the past 22 annual sessions of the General Conference. It could 
by no stretch of the imagination be argued that those credentials, at the 23rd 
session, were not in order. The proposal before the General Conference was a 
blatantly unconstitutional action, politically conceived, to prevent a Member of 
the Agency - a technical organization - from exercising its constitutional right 
to participate in the deliberations of the Conference. 
15. A precedent was being created which the IAEA would come to regret, and 
which contained the seeds of the Agency's own destruction. When South Africa 
had been expelled from the Board of Governors in 1977, his country's delegation 
had warned against that trend. It regretted that its fears should have been 
vindicated by the action now being taken by the General Conference. 
16. South Africa was a net contributor to the activities of the IAEA. The 
international community continually urged South Africa to co-operate with it 
in matters of nuclear technology and development, and of safeguards; but at the 
same time, South Africa might effectively be prevented from exercising such cooperation. 
That was a travesty, not only of justice, but of logic and common 
sense. He could only hope that the forces of reason would re-assert themselves 
in the Agency, that it might return to those important tasks which its Statute 
and the international community demanded of it, and that matters of political 
difference would be relegated to those fora in which they were appropriate. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.211 
page 5 


17. Mr. HABASHI (Sudan) replied that it might be true that the South 
African delegation's credentials had been issued by the same authorities as usual, 
but almost all previous sessions of the General Conference had condemned the 
policy of apartheid. South Africa had been removed from the Board of Governors 
in 1977 because it had taken sides against all of Africa and the opinion of the 
whole world and was therefore not fit to represent Africa permanently on the 
Board. He therefore supported the proposal made by the delegate of Nigeria. 
18. Mr. O'SULLIVAN (Ireland), speaking on behalf of the Member States of 
the European Community, took the view that the function of the General Committee 
and of the General Conference regarding the acceptance or otherwise of the 
credentials submitted by the Governments of the Agency's Member States was simply 
to determine whether those credentials complied with the provisions of Rule 27 of 
the Rules of Procedure. As there was no doubt that the credentials submitted by 
South Africa were valid according to those provisions there was no basis for the 
Conference declining to accept them. He did not wish to go into the matters 
touched upon in the wise words of the Director General, which all delegations 
should carefully ponder before reaching a decision on the matter. 
19. At the same time he wished to stress that the Governments of the Member 
States of the European Community were firmly opposed to the policy of apartheid; 
nevertheless, in their view such political considerations were not relevant to 
the question of the credentials of Member States of the Agency, which should be 
judged in the manner he had just indicated. Consequently, the Member States of 
the Community were firmly opposed to the proposal to disallow the credentials of 
the delegation of the Republic of South Africa. 
20. Mr. SMITH (United States of America) said that his country's total 
opposition to the racial policies of South Africa had been placed on.record on 
countless occasions. However, that attitude was not relevant to the question 
whether the South African delegation had presented valid credentials in accordance 
with Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure. The strength and integrity of 
the United Nations system depended on strict compliance with constitutional and 
and procedural requirements. His Government was opposed to rejecting the 
credentials of any Member State on political grounds. The introduction of 
divisive political issues into the deliberations of technical organizations like 
the IAEA could only hinder them in meeting their international responsibilities. 
The rejection of the South African delegation's credentials would undermine the 
objective of non-proliferation and the effort to gain acceptance of safeguards by 
all countries, including South Africa. 
21. The PRESIDENT, observing that there were no more speakers, said that 
the statements made by delegates would be duly reflected in the record of the 
meeting and asked whether he could take it that the Conference was ready to 

GC(XXIII)/OR.211 
page 6 


adopt the proposal made by the delegate of Nigeria that the credentials of the 
delegate of South Africa tie rejected and that the delegation of South Africa 
should not be allowed to participate in the Conference. 


22. Mr. BE VILUERS (South Africa) requested that a roll-call vote be taken 
on the proposal in accordance with Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure. 
23. The PRESIDENT accordingly invited the Conference to proceed to a rollcall 
vote. 
24. Guatemala, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 
25. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, 
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, 
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Romania, 
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, 
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, 
Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Gabon, German 
Democratic Republic, Ghana. 


Against; Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, 
Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, 
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, 
Denmark, Finland, Prance, Federal Republic of Germany. 


Abstaining: Holy See, Spain, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Brazil, 
Chile, Colombia, Greece. 


26. There were 49 votes in favour and 24 against, with 9 abstentions. The 
proposal was adopted. 
27 • Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), explaining why Canada had voted against the 
proposal, said that while Canada was unequivocally against South Africa's racist 
policies, it felt that there were more appropriate channels and occasions for 
dealing with that affront to the international community than during an examination 
of credentials. / 


28. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland) said his delegation had voted as it had done 
because it was opposed to the provisions concerning acceptance of the credentials 
of a Member State being used for purposes which had nothing to do with the Agency's 
declared aims and objectives. He wished to stress that the Swiss Government condemned 
South Africa's apartheid policy, which was contrary to the traditions and 
ideals of the Swiss people. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2H 
page 7 


29. Mr. KORHONEN (Finland) said that the Finnish Government likewise 
strongly condemned apartheid. However, rejecting the credentials of the 
South African delegation was tantamount to suspending the rights of membership 
of South Africa, and such a question could not be decided on the basis of Rule 
27 of the Rules of Procedure but only on the basis of Article XIX of the Statute. 
Therefore, Finland had voted against the proposal. 
30. Mr. KANAZAWA (Japan) said Japan had voted against the proposal because 
it considered that the task of the Credentials Committee was simply to examine 
whether the credentials of Member States complied with the provisions of the 
Statute. Japan was strongly opposed to apartheid but did not consider that an 
international organization like the IAEA with scientific objectives should 
become involved in political manoeuvres. 
31. Mr. BORMER (Liechtenstein) said his delegation had voted against the 
proposal for the same reasons as those already set forth by the delegate of 
Switzerland. 
32. Mr. HOESS (Austria) said that, while Austria was on record both within and 
outside the United Nations as being opposed to apartheid, it had not voted for the 
proposal, because the question of acceptance of credentials was a legal and not 
a political one. Austria had also been influenced by the considerations put 
forward by the Director General. 
33. Mr. GBOHGB (Australia), observing that Australia's policy of condemning 
apartheid was well known, said that Australia did not consider it appropriate to 
reject the credentials of South Africa but rather to maintain the restraints of 
participation and membership on South Africa. 
34. Mr. ONYANGO (Kenya) said it was strange to see delegates justifying 
their positions in that fashion and urged them to back up their words with action 
if they were really opposed to apartheid. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 



GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
July 1980* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 
ENGLISH 


TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND TWELFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi, 
on Wednesday, 5 December 1979, at 3.15 p»m. 

President; Mr. H.N. SETHNA (India) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


7 
General debate and annual report 1 -72 
for 1978 (resumed) 


Statements 
by the delegates of: 


Japan 1 -9 
German Democratic Republic 10 -19 
Indonesia 20 -27 
Prance 28 -35 
Republic of Korea 36 -42 
Pakistan 43 -51 
Norway 52 -57 
Belgium 58-64 
Niger 65 -72 


* A provisional version of this document was issued on 28 January 1980. 
**/ GC(XXIII)/620. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 

80-2827 


GG(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 2 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1978 (GC(XXIII)/6lO) (resumed) 

1. Mr. KAKAZAWA (Japan) congratulated the President on his election and 
expressed his appreciation to the Indian Government for its hospitality. 
2. He pointed out that as the availability of oil seemed certain to decrease 
considerably in the years ahead, peacefully applied atomic energy would constitute 
the most important alternative energy source for a long time to come. The 
Agency, which was the focal point of international co-operation in the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy, had already achieved substantial results in that respect 
and its role would undoubtedly become increasingly important. One of its main 
tasks would be to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy, while seeing to it 
that the proliferation of nuclear weapons was prevented and that peaceful 
activities were not subject to unnecessary control by virtue of the requirements 
of non-proliferation. At the same time, the accident that had recently occurred 
at a nuclear power plant in the United States of America had made people aware of 
the urgency of ensuring safety in nuclear power production. 
3. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INPCE), the final reports 
of which would shortly be available, was aimed at making technical and analytical 
studies that would help to reconcile the requirements of non-proliferation with 
those of the promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Countries of very 
different categories, for example nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear—weapon States, 
countries already advanced and others still developing in nuclear technology, and 
countries supplying and consuming nuclear materials, had taken part in the work 
and had jointly studied their common problems, thereby deepening their understanding 
of them. Once the work of INPCE was complete, it would be well to put 
into effect the various technical and institutional measures and arrangements 
proposed in the final reports, among them arrangements for the international 
storage of plutonium and several other measures on the subject of which discussions 
within the framework of the Agency had already been started. It was up to 
the Agency to play an active role in the post-HJPCE activities and in that respect 
his delegation was particularly struck by a proposal the Director General had made 
during his opening address, namely that the Board of Governors should set up a 
committee of the whole membership of the Agency to work out a set of guidelines 
which would make it possible to establish an internationally acceptable framework 
for guaranteeing supplies of nuclear fuel under adequate safeguards. His delegation 
also wholeheartedly endorsed the two basic principles which the Director 
General considered should govern activities following upon INflCEs first that the 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 3 

cornerstone of all non-proliferation efforts must remain the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and, secondly, that the Agency should 
play a key role in such international activities. 

4. Another recent event deserving mention was the successful conclusion of 
the negotiations for a convention on the physical protection of nuclear 
materials, which his country hoped would be signed and ratified by all the 
countries of the world. 
5. The Three Mile Island accident, although unfortunate, had served as a 
timely warning, and the Agency had subsequently sponsored a meeting of experts 
on nuclear reactor safety. It had also made great efforts, in addition to 
the Nuclear Safety Standards (NUSS) Programme, to evaluate the safety of the 
environment and to formulate new proposals for strengthening safety measures. 
His country was willing to take an active part in that work. The Agency 
should also take the lead in peaceful applications of nuclear energy other 
than power production, such as the use of isotopes and radiation, which 
could contribute to the welfare of mankind. It was hoped that the Agency 
would increase both the amount and effectiveness of its technical assistance 
to developing countries in that area. 
6. His country had always contributed its due share towards technical assistance, 
and additional contributions in various forms had often been made. 
Aware that it was important to further strengthen the Agency's activities in 
Asia and the Pacific, Japan had hosted, in 1979> a meeting of representatives 
from signatory States of the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA), which 
had studied, among other things, the establishment of an Asian regional centre 
for research and training. Japan had also hosted an international workshop 
on food irradiation, organized by the Japanese Government, and intended to 
continue its efforts in regional co-operation. His country, which was 
extremely poor in energy resources, was concentrating its efforts, in close 
collaboration with the Agency, on the development of its nuclear power 

GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 4 

industry. With the twenty reactors at present in service, its generating 
capacity had reached 13 780 000 kW. Japan ranked second in the world in 
nuclear power production, which now accounted for roughly 11.2$ of the electricity 
generated in the country. furthermore, aware of the limits on uranium 
resources, Japan was striving to make the best possible use of them and was 
working on an advanced thermal reactor and a fast breeder reactor. As far as 
nuclear fuel was concerned, a pilot enrichment plant had recently been put into 
partial operation and preparations were being made for the construction of a 
commercial reprocessing plant. All those activities were being conducted in 
full accord with the objective of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
all nuclear facilities in Japan were operated in accordance with the provisions 
of NPT and the safeguards agreement concluded with the Agency. 

7. The year 1980 would be an important one for KPT, since the second Review 
Conference of the Parties to KPT was to be held in the course of it. Under 
the present circumstances, further strengthening of the system designed 
to prevent further nuclear proliferation was essential, and to achieve that 
end NPT would have to be made a truly universal treaty. His delegation 
appealed to all States that had not yet acceded to the Non-Proliferation Treaty 
to do so immediately and also urged nuclear-weapon States to follow the example 
of the United States, the United Kingdom and France in taking positive steps to 
rectify the inequalities inherent in NPT. For its part, Japan hoped to take 
an active part in preparations for the coming NPT Review Conference and looked 
forward to a successful outcome of the meetings. 
8. More than ever before the Agency was having to face diverse and complex 
problems in the discharge of its functions and to live up to the trust reposed 
in it by the countries engaged in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. But 
both the human and financial resources of the Agency were limited, and it was 
to be hoped that the Secretariat would step up its efforts to ensure a wellbalanced 
distribution of the budgetary appropriations. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 5 

9. In conclusion he wished to express his appreciation to the Director 
General and his associates for the efforts they were making to enable the 
Agency to fulfil its mission in the difficult situation prevailing today. 
10. Mr. SITZLACK (German Democratic Republic) congratulated the 
President on his election and thanked the Government and people of India for 
their hospitality. It was a great pleasure that the General Conference was 
being held in a country where nuclear research and technology were so 
advanced. 
11. The prosperity and progress of mankind depended on the consolidation of 
world peace and it was with that in mind that the socialist countries had 
expressed their willingness to conclude the negotiations under way for the 
complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests and for the 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime so as to ensure access by all 
States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, without discrimination and 
under effective international control based on Agency standards. Only a few 
weeks before, in Berlin, on the occasion of the German Democratic Republic's 
thirtieth anniversary, Mr. Brezhnev, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme 
Soviet of the USSR, had put forward new proposals on arms limitation that deserved 
whole-hearted support. The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT II) concluded 
between the Soviet Union and the United States had shown that complex international 
problems could be solved by negotiation; one must hope that it would be ratified 
without delay since it would tighten the network of bilateral and multilateral 
agreements on arms limitation and pave the way for further progress in other 
negotiations and in the implementation of Article VI of KPT. 
12. At the signing of SALT II, both States had advocated further strengthening 
of the non-proliferation regime, and his country also felt that the second 
HPT Review Conference to be held in 1980 should serve that aim and contribute 
to progress in limiting the nuclear arms race. It continued to believe that the 
universality of KPT was an essential condition for its effectiveness and for 
full international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. All States 
that had not yet acceded to the Treaty were therefore urged to sign and ratify it. 

GC(XXni)/OR.212 
page 6 

13. It had recently become clear, once again, to what extent the utilization of 
nuclear energy was contingent on progress in the fields of nuclear safety, 
environmental protection and safeguards. In that connection the Agency's Nuclear 
Safety Standards (BOSS) Programme was a most valuable activity. The binding 
regulation of all matters concerning safety and protection was of vital importance 
for the peaceful use of nuclear energy; hence the drafting and amendment of 
regulations should be made a permanent task for governmental authorities in charge 
of radiation protection and nuclear safety. 
14. His country was systematically developing the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy within the framework of regulations of that kind. During the past year it 
had been decided to build two new training and research reactors, and also the 
fourth unit of the Greifswald nuclear power plant, which would boost the station's 
output to 1760 MW. The increase in the German Democratic Republic's electrical 
generating capacity would be accounted for in the future mainly by nuclear power 
plants constructed in close collaboration with the Soviet Union and the other 
socialist countries, particularly under the aegis of the Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance (CMEA). That organization was playing an important part in the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, and co-operation between its member States in the 
construction of nuclear power plants was to be intensified with a view to attaining 
an increase of more than one third in their electricity output. Activities 
relating to nuclear safety and radiation protection were co-ordinated by the 
CUBA Scientific and Technical Council for Radiation Protection. 

15. Both the Safeguards Implementation Report and the Annual Report indicated, on 
the basis of results yielded by Agency inspections, that all nuclear materials 
under Agency safeguards could be accounted for in the nuclear activities declared 
by those countries. That was a satisfactory finding conducive to improving mutual 
confidence and peaceful co-operation between countries as well as international 
security. It was disturbing, however, to see that the number of countries 
whose nuclear activities were still uncontrolled seemed to be on the increase. 
The trend was alarming inasmuch as the emergence of new nuclear-weapon States 
would considerably enhance the risk of a nuclear war, especially in areas beset 
by conflicts. International security demanded that commitments devolving from 
safeguards agreements should be strictly observed and that the Agency should be 
given maximum support in carrying out its inspections and developing its 
safeguards system, which still needed to be further improved. 
GC(XXIII)/CR.212 
page 7 

16. His country had taken an active part in the drafting of the Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and he was happy to see the recent 
conclusion of the negotiations. 
17. It was encouraging to note the Agency's activities in the discharge of its 
statutory responsibilities for the promotion of the exchange of information on 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy; the Agency had organized many excellent 
scientific and technical meetings and had continued to operate IBIS. The 
international character of IHIS could be further strengthened by implementing the 
INIS/AGRIS Direct Access Project. 
18. The Agency's technical assistance programme was an important activity in 
promoting the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes throughout the world. 
His country was therefore actively supporting the programme, to the best of its 
ability, and had organized four study tours and one training course during the 
past year. In 1980, it would be increasing its voluntary contribution to the 
General Bund for technical assistance to 265 O00 marks. 
19. With the advent of nuclear energy mankind had been faced with a choice either 
to use the atom to construct a new basis for life, or to misuse it and 
bring death and destruction to the whole world. It was therefore vital to replace 
the balance of terror by a balance of trust between States. The Strategic Arms 
Limitation Treaty (SALT II) was an important step in that direction and the 
Agency, for its part, was endeavouring not only to prevent the negative nuclear 
option but also to promote the positive one so that the benefits of nuclear energy 
could be fully enjoyed. All Member States should concert their efforts and help 
the Agency to tackle all the problems involved in the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy, since more than 20 years' experience had shown that, as a world-wide 
authority, the Agency was the one predestined to deal with them. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 8 

20. Mr. MMPUHO (Indonesia) said that the Agency had its own role to play in 
the achievement of the objectives fixed for the coming decade, namely increased 
prosparity, peace and stability for the whole of mankind. It was his delegation's 
hope that nuclear technology, as applied within that context, would help to speed 
up Indonesia's development, which was based on a three-point strategy aimed at 
co-ordinating and integrating the equitable distribution of development capability 
in all areas, accelerating national growth, and promoting political and social 
stability. His delegation hoped that a strategy of that kind would contribute 
to subregional, regional and international progress, and was convinced that the 
Agency would be able to achieve positive results by applying the same principles. 

21. Within that context the Indonesian delegation was gratified to see that 
Member States of the Agency were becoming increasingly aware of the need to find 
ways and means of promoting co-operation in the use of nuclear technology for 
peaceful purposes. The Agency should encourage the development of new energy 
sources that took into account the future needs of the developing countries, and 
accordingly, the following measures were to be recommended: first, research 
activities should be carefully scrutinized so as to determine where there were 
gaps that needed filling from the standpoint of the future requirements of 
developing countries; secondly, research and development efforts should be 
co-ordinated; and, thirdly, procedures should be devised to facilitate the 
exchange of information necessary for the interregional application of research 
results. 
22. It was encouraging to note, within that context, that the Agency had in fact 
helped to make headway in scientific and technical co-operation in the region of 
Asia. In particular, the programmes launched under the Regional Co-operation 
Agreement (RCA), the number of which had risen from six to eight, had yielded 
good results and, in his opinion, deserved further efforts on the part of those 
concerned as well as an increase in the Agency's own contribution. The programmes 
should not only have the benefit of participation by the developing countries, but 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 9 

by the technologically advanced countries as well, so that they could also serve 
the purpose of transferring technology. Mention should be made, for example, of 
the programmes for the industrial applications of isotopes and radiations, which 
would be of great value to HCA members, especially in the processing of latex, 
the preservation of fish by irradiation and the rearing of buffalo. All those 
projects would contribute either directly or indirectly to the prosperity of 
Member States. 

23. With regard to the transfer of nuclear power plant technology, it was 
essential that the implementation of nuclear power programmes in developing countries 
should be given high priority among Agency activities. In view of the 
numerous problems already encountered in that respect, his Government felt that 
countries advanced in nuclear technology should not make matters worse by 
stipulating various limits and restrictions that slowed down the efforts made by 
the developing countries to meet their energy needs through nuclear technology. 
Recognizing the need to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the 
Indonesian Government believed that a comprehensive nuclear test ban, Agency 
safeguards and the physical protection of nuclear materials were the best ways 
to achieve that end. In that connection, the Agency played an important part by 
facilitating the exchange of scientific and technical knowledge and employing 
it s safeguards system to prevent the use of nuclear energy for non-peaceful 
purposes. 
24. With regard to the implementation of technical assistance programmes, so 
vitally important for the developing countries, his delegation felt that there 
would have to be a proper balance between the funds allocated for such programmes 
and the appropriations for the safeguards programmef which had increased over the 
past year. The number of Member States starting out on nuclear programmes 
justified an increase in the funds available for technical assistance activities. 
In terms of the distribution of such funds, only two areas had shown a percentage 
increase in 1977, namely the general development of nuclear power and nuclear 
physics. That state of affairs was nevertheless acceptable, in his opinion, 
especially in the case of the former area, which had undergone marked expansion. 
Furthermore, it was heartening to see that unliquidated obligations had continued 
to decrease. 

<JC(XXttl)/OR.212 
page 10 

25. In the field of nuclear power, the measures adopted by the Agency to assist 
developing Member States to train qualified personnel were to be welcomed. In 
view of the interdependence prevailing in the world of today, an initiative of 
that kind was essential in furthering co-operation between the developed and 
developing countries. 
26. As far as the assignment of posts at all levels within the Agency was 
concerned, it had to be pointed out that the principle of equitable distribution 
between the advanced and developing countries was stil l not being applied. 
27. His delegation wished to reaffirm its continued support for the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics, which was of very great value to scientists from 
many developing countries. 
28. Mr, PECqjHJR (France) said that one could not fail to be struck by the 
almost universal slow-down in nuclear energy development at a time when the world 
energy situation made the need for it increasingly urgent. It was thus necessary to 
make all those concerned as fully aware as possible of the problem in order to stave 
off a recession in the world economy which could threaten world peace and stability. 
29. Energy was vital for all countries even if their consumption varied 
considerably. The energy question was both a technical and a political one, and 
could only be solved by establishing real co-operation between consumer and 
producer countries. Oil and coal were worrying problems from the technical, 
physical and political points of view. Energy conservation was essential, but 
only gradual and limited progress had been made in that direction. It was 
therefore necessary to turn to all new energy sources, and especially to nuclear 
energy, which could be meeting about 15$ of the world's energy needs by the 
year 2000. 
30. With respect to the dangers of proliferation, the IAEA was to be congratulated 
on its organizational work for INPCE, which had shown that no fuel cycle should be 
rejected on the grounds of proliferation risk alone if there were valid economic 
arguments in its favour. The political inferences of that international 
technical evaluation must now be drawn. Prance had made known the main thrust of 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 11 

its policy on that question in October 1976: on the one hand, all countries \ 
should be assured of a secure and economic supply of materials and services and, 
on the other, an uncontrolled spread which could lead to the proliferation of 
nuclear arms must be avoided. Prance had tried to find substitute solutions, 
particularly in the areas of enrichment and research reactors, and had paid 
special attention to the problems of the plutonium cycle and the international 
Plutonium storage scheme. The French delegation hoped that a consensus could be 
reached on specific proposals which would assure the development of nuclear 
energy throughout the world while at the same time allowing a meaningful reduction 
of proliferation risks. 

31. As far as risks to the health of people and the environment were concerned, 
it was clear that the nuclear sector produced less harmful effects than fossil 
fuels, and it was by no means certain that other new energy sources would give 
comparably good results. As for disasters, it should be pointed out that the 
Harrisburg accident had produced nothing more than psychological shocks, but, 
clearly, efforts to strengthen safety would not be relaxed. Where the long-term 
harmful effects of radiations were concerned, much work remained to be done in 
determining the interaction between radiation and living matter, but it should be 
remembered that radioactivity was a natural phenomenon to which man had been 
exposed for thousands of years. It should be possible gradually to solve the 
problem of public acceptance by improving communications with the public and 
through appropriate long-term management of State affairs. 
32. Present-day energy problems could not be solved without increased use of 
nuclear energy, and Prance believed that the development of fast breeders was 
essential, particularly in order to make the best use of world uranium reserves. 
33. Por its part, Prance had decided to increase at least tenfold its nuclear 
energy production between 1975 and 1985, by which date half of its electricity 
would be supplied by that source; the rate of installation needed for that 
purpose had virtually been achieved already with 5000 MW coming into service 
annually. Prance was also expanding its nuclear fuel cycle industry and had 
likewise stepped up its research and development effort, particularly in the 
fields of nuclear safety and reprocessing. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 12 

34. Wiile congratulating the IAEA on the conscientious manner in which it had 
carried out its numerous tasks, his delegation was nevertheless still concerned 
at the very steep rise in the Agency's budget, which had increased the 
assessed contribution of France from $950 000 in 1973 to approximately 
$4.5 million in 1980. Those increases were large by comparison with the growth 
rate of the budgets of Member States themselves, which was why Prance had been 
unable to approve the most i-ecent draft budget presented by the Board of Governors 
despite the high priority which it attributed to the Agency's activities. Prance 
hoped that general warning would be borne in mind when future budgets were being 
drawn up and that the Agency would continue to try to manage its finances in a 
spirit of strict economy. As for its voluntary contribution, the French 
Government, barring unforeseen circumstances, would be increasing it to $450 000 
in 1980; that marked a rise of 50$ over 1979, which showed the particular 
importance Prance attached to technical assistance activities. With respect to 
contributions in kind, France had supplied the services of experts, training 
facilities and laboratory equipment as well as hosting various symposia and other 
meetings. 
35. Bearing in mind the universal mission of the IAEA, the French delegation 
hoped that China would agree as soon as possible to take its proper place within 
the Agency. 
36. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) said that his country had become 
increasingly aware of the importance of nuclear energy because of its dependence 
on the Middle East cou3rtri.es for oil and the scarcity of indigenous resources. 
The Republic of Korea was in the process of expanding its energy production 
facilities and planned to generate 5° GW from nuclear power stations by the 
year 2000, 
37. Faced with tta.2.t formidable task, his country fully recognized the importance 
of long-term manpower training and was concerned about securing-an assured supply 
of nuclear fuel in view of existing international constraints. In that context 
his delegation was pleased to report that the first training course on the 
Technical Review of Nuclear Safety had been successfully completed in 
September 1979 with the assistance of the Secretariat, the United States Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission and the Argonne National Laboratoiy, to whom his delegation 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 13 

wished to express its sincere gratitude. His Government would be seeking the 
technical support of the Secretariat in 1980 with the aim of stepping up technical 
training in the field of nuclear safety. The courses organized in Korea could be 
developed in such a way as to constitute a Regional Co-operation Agreement 
training centre. 

38. Assurance of supply for the nuclear fuel cycle was of the greatest impor- • 
tance and could be dealt with under Article VI of HPT at the second Review 
Conference. 
39. The Republic of Korea commended the Secretariat on its efforts to apply 
effective safeguards, and his delegation wished to stress that the law on atomic 
energy in Korea stipulated that atomic energy must be used solely for peaceful 
purposes. His Government believed that the risk of proliferation could be more 
effectively countered by political than by technical means, and that in a spirit 
of reciprocity and mutual trust. A more comprehensive international regime should 
be established which would harmonize the requirements of supplier and recipient 
countries. 
40. His delegation hoped that the regime which followed upon INFCE would enable ' 
a stable supply of services and fuel to be assured. A new international order 
should also be set up for the transfer of technology, since the developing ' 
countries required technical assistance from the advanced countries in order to 
be able to use nuclear energy and in order to construct, operate and maintain 
large nuclear power stations. The second NPT Review Conference should provide means 
for transferring to the developing countries, without discrimination and under 
Article VI of the Treaty, the technology needed for the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy, 
41. His delegation felt that it was necessary to establish a multinational 
reprocessing centre which would serve the needs of the participant countries until 
national centres were one day created. It urged the Secretariat to continue its 
study of the establishment of such a centre, which would be of benefit to both 
the developing countries and the industrialized countries from the point of view 
of non-proliferation. 
42. The Republic of Korea increasingly recognized the importance of nuclear 
safety, especially since the Three Mile Island accident, and fully intended to 
devote additional efforts and resources to that area. It was pleased to note 
the initiative taken by the Secretariat in augmenting its nuclear safety activities. 

GC(mil)/OR.212 
page 14 

43. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan) congratulated the President on his election, which 
was a tribute to India and all the countries of the region. He thanked the Indian 
Government for hosting the General Conference in Hew Delhi, the majestic monuments 
of which were a reminder of the shared history of the peoples of the subcontinent. 
Pakistan was proud that the Nobel prize for physics had been awarded to 
Professor Abdus Salam, the Director of the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics in Trieste. The receipt of such a distinction was an honour which 
also reflected on the Agency. 

44. The present session was taking place at a critical time in the development 
of nuclear energy, which had been challenged by political leaders, scientists 
and environmentalists. The energy crisis had worsened. The industrialized 
countries were suffering as a result, but the consequences were even more serious 
for the developing countries, which required energy to build up an industrial 
infrastructure. Because it lacked fossil fuels Pakistan spent more than 4556 of 
its foreign exchange earnings on oil, and only nuclear energy would enable it, 
like the other developing countries, to satisfy its electricity needs. If it 
continued, the energy crisis would threaten the safety and welfare of both the 
industrialized and developing countries. Instead of forcing prices up by trying 
to outbid each other, all countries should collaborate to find a solution. All 
were interdependent, and no country could achieve the goal alone. They should 
work together to ensure that existing energy sources and raw materials were used 
to best advantage, to exchange their technical knowledge and not to waste the 
resources of future generations. They should also plan the future of nuclear 
energy, production of which had slowed down, so that it could meet future demand 
for electricity. Only nuclear energy would be capable of coping with the world's 
needs in the coming decades. 
45. He had to stress the inability of the international community to combat 
proliferation and reduce stockpiles of nuclear weapons. Those weapons continued 
to be manufactured and tested and the States which possessed them were not even 
capable of preventing other States with which they had special relationships 
from manufacturing them in turn. What was worse, those countries failed to 
denounce the actions of some countries such as South Africa when they carried out 
nuclear-weapon tests. The same States which were protesting against imaginary 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 15 

risks of proliferation and which had called for the conclusion of KPT remained 
silent when faced with real proliferation and appeared even to be trying to 
divert attention from it. Pakistan urged the Agency to work closely with 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations in order to clear up completely the 
matter of the nuclear test alleged to have been carried out by South Africa. 

46. Pakistan had always supported the fight against proliferation. The 
developing countries had no intention of using the resources they so urgently 
needed to ensure their development for the purpose of arming themselves. Pakistan, 
which had played a part in convening the United Nations Conference of 
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States in 1968, had been calling for the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapons-free zone in South East Asia since 1972. It had declared that it 
would neither acquire nor manufacture nuclear weapons. Since India had given 
the same assurance, despite having already carried out a nuclear explosion, the 
two countries could, by issuing a joint declaration, agree to make their region 
a nuclear-weapons-free zone. Such a step would be in line with the interest of 
world peace and the economic development of India and Pakistan. 
47. Three years previously Pakistan, along with 25 other countries, had put 
forward a draft amendment to Article VI aimed at securing fairer representation 
for the areas of Africa and the Middle East and. South Asia, which were at present 
under-represented. That amendment had been acceptable to the majority of 
countries, as Resolution 361 adopted at the twenty-second session of the 
General Conference had indicated. Now that negotiations had taken place, the time 
was ripe to adopt that amendment. It would not affect the existing balance but 
would do justice to the increasing role which the countries of Africa and the 
Middle East and South Asia were playing in respect of energy supply and the 
development of nuclear technology. 

GC(xnil)/OR.212 

page 16 

48. The allocations for technical assistance were inadequate and would not allow 
the Agency to satisfy all technically sound requests. The safeguards budget, by 
contrast, was to receive a disproportionate increase. Pakistan recognized the 
usefulness of the Agency's safeguards system but believed that the existing 
imbalance between safeguards activities and promotional activities ran counter to 
the Statute and was detrimental to the Agency's effectiveness. Not only did 
technical assistance receive insufficient funding, it was also subject to the 
imposition of increasingly strict conditions on the developing countries. There 
was a tendency within the Agency to make a distinction between signatories and 
non-signatories of HPT that was contrary to the Statute. Moreover, certain 
countries were refusing to have inspections made on their territories by 
nationals from countries which had not signed MPT. All the Agency's Members had 
the same rights, and such a tendency was bound to have unfortunate consequences. 
49. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) would soon be 
completed and would help create conditions favourable to the development of 
nuclear energy. That development could only take place in a climate of mutual 
trust and respect for international commitments on the part of all, particularly 
the supplier and exporter countries. The fight against proliferation must not 
serve as a pretext for going back on existing agreements. 
50. Pakistan was continuing to work for the development of nuclear energy as a 
means of enhancing food production, improving safety and hygiene and increasing 
industrial output. It had discovered new uranium deposits and had expanded 
its facilities for ore exploitation. A Centre for Nuclear Studies now offered 
post-graduate training. A sixth nuclear medical centre had been completed and a 
seventh was under construction. Part of the third centre of the Nuclear Institute 
for Pood and Agriculture had begun to operate. In June 1979 the fourth summer 
college on "Physics and Contemporary Needs" had taken place, and those colleges 
would henceforth be held each year. 
51. In conclusion, he wished to congratulate the Agency and the Director General 
on the results obtained during 1979. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 17 

52. Mr. NORD (Norway), after congratulating the President on his election, 
said that he wished to outline the report of the Norwegian Royal Commission 
which had been appointed to assess the safety of nuclear power. The report 
analysed safety factors related to the utilization of nuclear energy including 
the routine operation of light-water reactors in nuclear power stations, the 
risk of accidents, the processing and storage of radioactive wastes and problems 
connected with the proliferation of nuclear weapons. A majority of the 
Commission's members had concluded that the routine operation of nuclear power 
stations would not lead to releases or other irregularities involving greater 
risks than would be expected from other complex industrial processes and that the 
risk of major accidents during the operation of nuclear power stations could 
not reach an unacceptable level. The Commission had moreover emphasized that it 
was necessary to apply high standards and adequate surveillance through 
international arrangements and inspection; to ensure the protection and strict 
surveillance of the transport of nuclear material; to take into account, when 
evaluating the introduction of a nuclear programme, the increased possibility 
of proliferation of nuclear weapons and the need to make international safeguards 
extensive and effective; and, lastly, to tighten up loopholes in NPT. The 
majority of the Commission's members had also concluded that the disposal of highlevel 
wastes in deep stable rock formations would be a safe solution and that the 
use of nuclear energy in Norway would be acceptable provided that various 
qualifications and requirements were fulfilled. The reason he had examined the 
Commission's conclusions in some detail was that they might help to draw attention 
to problems of general interest to the Agency's Members. 

53. His delegation wholeheartedly supported the Agency's supplementary nuclear 
power safety programme and recommended that it be financed under the Regular 
Budget. It also attached great importance to the Agency's work in the area of 
nuclear safety and environmental protection, including the publication of 
Codes of Practice and Safety Guides. 

GC(XXni)/OR.212 
page 18 

54. The Agency's safeguards work had considerably increased during the past few 
years and there seemed to be some danger that the increased workload would 
result in less stringent control being exercised over each facility. Safeguards 
techniques should be improved. It was essential that the Agency should continue 
to be provided with the budgetary means necessary for the proper operation of 
its safeguards system, which was a widely recognized contribution to international 
security. However, his delegation was concerned at the sizable increase shown by 
the budgetary proposals for 1980 and felt it was essential to maintain at as low 
a level as possible those programme expenditures which could make do without a 
rise. As those observations were reflected in the budget proposals for 1980, his 
delegation would be able to accept them. Subject to parliamentary approval, it 
could also accept the target proposed for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund for the same year. 
55. Amendment of Article VI of the Statute in order to increase the membership of 
the Board was a difficult matter. A small Board was probably more effective, but 
it was likewise important that Members should have a fair chance to be represented 
on the Board, In those circumstances the problem must be handled very cautiously 
since any change might upset the delicate balance achieved through careful 
negotiations over the years. 
56. His delegation wished to express its satisfaction at the ratification of NPT 
by several countries since the last session of the General Conference and hoped 
that those who had not yet acceded would reconsider their position. 
57. I"t also welcomed the conclusion of negotiations on the draft Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the forthcoming completion of the 
International Huclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (iNFCE), and wished to express its 
appreciation of the valuable contribution made by the Agency to that work. 
58. Mr. SMOLDEREN (Belgium) said that the numerous scientific titles held 
by Mr. Sethna qualified him particularly well for the Presidency of the twenty-third 
session. Holding the General Conference in Hew Delhi underlined the universality 
of the Agency and the common interests of its Member States. He wished to thank 
the Indian Government for its hospitality and also to extend his congratulations 
to the Director General. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 19 

59. The transfer of the Agency to its Permanent Headquarters at the Vienna 
International Centre should enable administration to be rationalized, services 
combined and job duplication eliminated. It should therefore be the occasion 
for a careful review of the way in which the workload was distributed. The 
Secretariat would then be able to release personnel and transfer them to 
priority activities. Good habits of economy, profitability and even of austerity 
should be adopted from the outset. The international organizations should not 
increase their expenditure by a percentage greater than their Member States 
were prepared to accept in their national budgets. 
60. In view of the present financial difficulties the Agency should review 
its priorities and begin by allocating funds to the most important tasks. It 
would be inadmissible if the latter, particularly reactor safety studies, were 
to be financed from supplementary contributions when they constituted the main 
tasks of the Agency. Before expanding any part of its programmes, the Agency 
should make available the necessary means by reallocating budgetary funds or 
personnel. The Agency could also effect economies by reducing administrative, 
management and travel costs. It should, for example, try to obtain 
preferential -rates from airline companies. It could also cut down the number 
of meetings of experts, which would have the additional advantage of allowing 
the experts to devote more time to the organizations to which they belonged. 
61. Belgium attached great importance to the reactor safety programme, which 
it felt should be financed from the Regular Budget. In that field the Agency 
should concentrate not so much on carrying out research itself as on acting as 
a centre for the exchange and dissemination of information on behalf of various 
national bodies - one aim being to avoid job duplication and encourage 
initiatives. Such a programme, by helping to reduce the risk of accidents in 
nuclear power stations, would reassure public opinion and aid the growth of 
nuclear power. 
62. With respect to the proposed amendment to Article VI, he recalled the 
position of his Government that a fair balance must be maintained, in the 
composition of the Board of Governors, between the technically advanced 
countries and countries which held seats by virtue of regional representation. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 20 

63. With regard to relations 'between the Agency and EURATOM, he welcomed the 
accrediting of a resident representative of the EEC to the Agency. Many 
facility attachments had "by now teen completed, a fact which demonstrated the 
sincerity of the intentions of the Community's Members. The lengthiness of the 
negotiations had been entirely due to technical difficulties. Their successful 
outcome enabled Belgium to urge countries which had not yet signed NPT to 
do so without delay and to urge those that had done so to place all their nonmilitary 
facilities under the Agency's control. NPT did not discriminate 
between nuclear-weapon States and others where the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy were concerned, a fact which would be stressed at the second Review 
Conference which was to meet in 1980. He wished to pay a tribute to the United 
Kingdom and to Prance, countries which had voluntarily placed a number of their 
facilities under safeguards. 
64. The role of the Agency could only expand in the coming years. The energy 
crisis was giving way to a serious economic crisis, and nuclear energy had 
accordingly become vitally important for many countries, including Belgium. 
The Agency would thus be called upon to play a leading role in areas where 
information, co-ordination and promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
were among the tasks at hand. 
65. Mr. MOTOgSILA (Niger) said he wished to assure the Conference of the 
wholehearted support of his Government, which was taking part in a session of 
the General Conference for the first time. He congratulated the President on 
his election, which was a tribute to the progress achieved in the nuclear field 
by India, a developing country. He also thanked the Indian Government for its 
generous hospitality. 
66. Nuclear energy accounted for only 2$ of total energy production but it 
could reach 20$ by the end of the century. In 1978 nuclear power capacity 
throughout the world was 118 000 MW and that figure would quadruple by the end 
of the 1980s if present programmes were implemented; that was far from 
certain, however. Programmes drawn up after the 1973-1974 oil crisis had had 
to be revised downwards on several occasions. Concern with preserving the 
environment, ensuring safety and opposing nuclear weapons proliferation, 
together with the present recession and other factors, had caused the nuclear 
industry to be called into question. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.212 
page 21 

67. Countries had succeeded neither in altering their energy policies nor in 
introducing substitute energy sources because, on the one hand, habits and 
patterns of consumption had proved to be too strong and, on the other hand, in 
the case of nuclear energy, the public had begun to fear that multiplying the 
number of power stations would increase the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation, 
pose waste management problems and intensify the risk of accidents. 
68. As far as the risk of proliferation was concerned, figures showed that no 
country had taken advantage of the construction of a power station to manufacture 
nuclear weapons. It seemed rather that some people confused, either deliberately 
or unwittingly, the peaceful and military uses of nuclear energy. In that connection, 
he wished to quote an extract from a speech made by Colonel Seyni Kountche", 
the Head of State of Niger, who had said that while he did not wish to join in the 
debate on the place of nuclear energy in society he must emphasize that Niger, a 
uranium producer, did not have the means to transform uranium unaided, was already 
obliged to collaborate with the industrial countries to exploit it and was not 
capable of using it to produce energy. A number of countries reproached Niger 
for not having signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 
However, to do so was to equate a uranium-producing country too quickly with an 
energy-producing country and a nuclear weapons manufacturing country. 
Colonel Kountche" had recalled that Niger had always condemned proliferation and the 
possession of nuclear weapons, and had respected its commitments to the Agency. 
Niger, a poor landlocked country, was employing all its energy for its economic 
development and had no intention whatsoever of equipping itself with nuclear 
weapons. The Head of State had added that Niger would sign NPT when the 
appropriate time came. Doing so would not change in any way the principles 
applied at present, which were to make nuclear energy serve development in 
agriculture, medicine, research and electricity production. Niger would not 
abandon its rights and would conduct any possible negotiations in conformity with 
its interests. 
69. Having concluded the quotation, he criticized those who had found fault with 
Niger's policy on uranium exports. The latter represented 80$ of its total 
exports, which showed that they were essential to the national economy. Many 
countries had helped Niger to improve its economic position, and those countries 
deserved thanks. However, it was unacceptable that others who claimed that 
they wished to assist the developing countries should deny them the right to 
harness their natural wealth and exploit it commercially. Those countries were, 

GC(mil)/OR.212 
page 22 


moreover, the very ones which supported South Africa and Rhodesia and which had 
orchestrated a press campaign against Niger. His country had always sold 
uranium openly in a manner which was verifiable and which conformed with its 
commitments. It would never accept any encroachment whatsoever on its 
sovereignty but was prepared to work with all those who respected that 
sovereignty. He hoped that the opening of Niger*s mission in Vienna during 
1980 would strengthen its links with the Agency. 


70. Turning to the question of the fuel cycle, he recalled the controversy 
provoked by the development of nuclear energy which was responsible for the 
accumulation of wastes, some of which were highly radioactive. International 
solutions to that problem had to be sought. Accidents could occur in nuclear 
reactors but the evaluations which had been carried out showed that the risk was 
slight. Challenging the usefulness of nuclear energy was equivalent to 
challenging the future progress of all societies. It should not be forgotten 
that, if the advanced countries had to continue to produce energy in order to 
maintain the standard of living of their peoples, the developing countries were 
in even greater need of energy to raise their own standard of living. His 
Government expected a great deal from the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle 
Evaluation, which would help it to make its choice. 
71. He urged the General Conference to adopt the proposed amendment to Article 
VI of the Statute, which would help to lessen the gap between the industrialized 
countries and the developing countries. The development of relations between 
the economically advanced countries, the uranium-producing countries and other 
countries justified that amendment. 
72. Niger would approve the draft budget even though it was too large. The 
developing countries needed technical assistance from the Agency. The interests 
of the Member countries of the Agency varied greatly because of the differences in 
their levels of development. Nevertheless, it was to be hoped that they would 
succeed in finding solutions to their problems. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
August 1980* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi 
on Thursday, 6 December 1979» at 10.50 a.m. 
President: Mr. SETHNA (India) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
7 General debate and annual report for 1978 (continued) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Philippines 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
Australia 
Canada 
Poland 

Paragraphs 
1 - 148 


1 40 
41 59 
60 78 
79 99 
100 119 
120 130 
131 148 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 16 January 1980, 
**/ GC(XXIII)/620. 
The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 

80-2831 


GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 2 

GENERAL DEBATE AMD ANNUAL REPORT JOB 1978 (GC(XXIII)/6lO) (continued) 

1. Mr» M0RO21OY (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) said he would like to 
take the opportunity of expressing sincere gratitude to the Government and people 
of India for their hospitality and to convey to them his good wishes for the 
further strengthening of the traditional ties of friendship and co-operation 
between the two countries. 
2. Certain progress had recently been made in the struggle for peace and international 
security. Political detente continued to be the dominant trend in 
world politics and it was exerting a beneficial effect on all aspects of international 
life. The persistent efforts of all peaceloving forces had averted the 
threat of a thermonuclear war and had highlighted the problem of putting an end 
to the arms race. 
3. It was notable, within that contest, that the world public and leading statesmen 
in many countries had supported as an act of very great importance the signing 
of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT-II) between the Soviet Union and the 
United States of America and were in favour of its immediate ratification. 
4. The Soviet Union's firm adherence to the cause of peace had found expression 
in the new initiative shown by Mr. L.I. Brezhnev, Secretary-General of the 
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Chairman of 
the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, in Berlin during October 1979. 
5. The importance of the programme proposed by the Soviet Union for strengthening 
peace and for a military detente in Europe went far beyond the bounds of the 
European continent. It confirmed once again the consistency of the Soviet 
Union's policy of ending the arms race and reducing international tension. In 
that connection it should be recalled that the Soviet Government had recently 
put forward proposals, in the august forum of the United Nations, on ceasing 
production and gradually reducing stockpiles of nuclear weapons of all types, 
right up to the point of doing away with them entirely, and on the full and 
universal prohibition of nuclear weapon tests. The Soviet Union had proposed 
the conclusion of an international convention on the non-utilization of nuclear 
weapons against States which eschewed the production or acquisition of them and 
which had no such weapons within their territory. The Soviet Union was willing 
to formalize the relevant commitment with any interested State. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 3 

6. That new initiative on the part of the Soviet Union, together with the broad 
range of earlier Soviet proposals on problems of peace and disarmament, showed 
that, given good will, it was possible to make steady headway in the process of 
further reducing international tension and ensuring the security of all peoples. 
7. One of the most important tasks facing the Agency under the terms of its 
Statute and under the provisions of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons (NPT) was to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. The importance of 
the task was dictated, above all, by the fact that the truly successful development 
of nuclear power production and its fuel cycle, together with fruitful international 
co-operation in that field in the interests of all countries, could be 
ensured only when the international community was in possession of firm guarantees 
that such co-operation would not become a pathway for the spread of nuclear 
weapons. 
8. That fact had been stressed once again at the Soviet-United States summit 
meeting in Vienna. Declaring their intention to continue working in order further 
to strengthen the non-proliferation regime, the two parties had noted the importance 
of applying universal international Agency safeguards and declared their 
intention to continue efforts directed at strengthening such safeguards. 
9. An important instrument for ensuring such conditions was NPT itself, which 
would be celebrating, in 1980, ten years of effective existence, and which had 
now been acceded to by some 110 countries. The Treaty covered most of the nonnuclear-
weapon States with highly developed nuclear industries. 
10. A number of countries, however, were still not party to the Treaty, a fact 
which reduced its effectiveness. The Soviet delegation shared the concern which 
the Director General had expressed in that connection in his opening statement, 
and associated itself with the Director General and the delegates of Japan and 
of the German Democratic Republic in urging all countries not party to the 
Treaty, first and foremost those with a high industrial and scientific-technical 
potential, to accede to the Treaty, thereby making it univeral in nature, particularly 
in view of the forthcoming Second NPT Review Conference. 
11. Among measures aimed at strengthening the non-proliferation regime, the 
Agency's programme for development of the concept of international or regional 
nuclear fuel cycle centres deserved serious attention. Studies in connection 
with that programme were being made both by the Agency and as part of the 
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle (INFCE). 

GC(XXni)/OR.213 
page 4 

and the practical implementation of the programme would make it possible not only 
to organize the most effective Agency safeguards, but also to promote more rapid 
development of nuclear power production, primarily in countries with a small 
industrial potential* 

12. The Soviet Union was willing to assist in setting up such centres on the 
basis of the experience acquired in the USSR and the technical facilities that 
were available. 
13. Nearly all countries having a programme for the peaceful use of atomic energy 
had taken part in IHFCE, the final document of which contained a balanced and 
objective review of the most important aspects of all stages of the nuclear fuel 
cycle - economics, ecology, non-proliferation - and contained recommendations which 
would undoubtedly be useful to many countries in their national nuclear power programmes. 
The documents also identified complex problems which would have to be 
solved. 
14. The development of nuclear power was being accompanied by a considerable 
growth in world trade in nuclear materials and equipment, and in the volume of 
such items transported from one State to another. It was vital that trade in > 
nuclear materials and equipment should be conducted within the framework of a 
strict non-proliferation regime, so that it should not develop into a form of 
lucrative business to the detriment of international security. 
15. The Soviet Union was pleased to note that work on drafting an international 
convention on the physical protection of nuclear material, intended to protect 
nuclear material under international transport from unauthorized use, had been 
successfully concluded in Vienna in October. 
16. Signature and entry into force of that convention would be a further significant 
step towards consolidation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
In that connection the Soviet delegation wished to express its indebtedness to 
the Agency for the important contribution it had made to the drafting of the 
convention. 
17. The programme of development of nuclear power in the USSR had continued at 
the rates laid down in the directives of the 25th Congress of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union. There was also no change in the nuclear power 
strategy which, as had already been indicated several times, consisted in a 
combination of thermal and fast nuclear power stations and the radiochemical reprocessing 
of fuel to extract plutonium and unused uranium for recycling. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 5 

18. Throughout the period of growth of its conventional nuclear power capacity, 
massive research had also been conducted in the Soviet Union on the physics, 
engineering and design aspects of thermonuclear fusion reactors. True to its 
traditions of friendship and co-operation the Soviet Union had, with the Agency's 
support, initiated the development of such fusion reactors for future power production 
on an international basis. 
19. The Soviet Union was constructing its nuclear power base in close collaboration 
with other socialist Member States of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA), which had recently celebrated its thirtieth anniversary. An 
important step in the collaboration among Member States of the CMEA had been the 
drafting of a long-term programme of co-operation on such questions as the design 
and introduction of generating units embodying 1000-MW water-cooled and -moderated 
reactors and the further development of reactors of that type, and the development of 
high capacity fast-neutron reactor facilities. In the Soviet Union and other 
CMEA member countries, research was being conducted to derive benefits to man from 
atoms in yet another way - by building nuclear heat-and-power plants and nuclear 
heating stations for district heating and process steam production. That was a 
very important matter for northern countries: about 40$ of the total energy 
generated was used for such heating purposes. Moreover, replacing fossil-fuel 
boilers by nuclear boilers would significantly reduce pollution of the atmosphere 
of large cities and the surrounding countryside. 
20. In order to achieve that programme the heads of Government of the Member 
States of CMEA had signed an agreement in Moscow in June 1979 for wide-ranging 
international specialization and co-operation on production and mutual exchange 
of nuclear power equipment during the period 1981-90. In terms of output and 
facilities produced in common (to a value of several thousand million roubles), 
that agreement was the biggest ever in the context of-Bie CMEA. Around 50 industrial 
combines and enterprises in eight countries would be involved in the project. 
21. One of the main factors determining the prospects for nuclear power was the 
safety question. Recently a wide-ranging study and evaluation of operating 
experience with existing nuclear power stations had been carried out in the 
Soviet Union. Using the results of scientific research carried out, basic 
standards had been revised and introduced, which should make a more specific 
contribution to ensuring radiation safety. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 6 

22. On the whole, the first standard-unit-type nuclear power stations with 
WWR-440 and HBMK-1000 reactors had operated reliably and had demonstrated 
superior operational characteristics. Nevertheless, an extensive programme of 
work on nuclear power plant safety was being pursued both in the context of the 
Soviet national nuclear power programme and in conjunction with other socialist 
countries. 
23. The problem of ensuring reliable and trouble-free operation of nuclear power 
stations under conditions of accelerated development of nuclear power engineering 
was becoming one of global significance. The Soviet Union recognized the important 
role being played by the Agency in organizing international co-operation in 
that sphere, and considered that the Agency's activities in connection with the 
production of codes and guides on nuclear power station safety deserved maximum 
support. However, that alone was not enough: there was need for broad international 
exchange of the results of research and development work in the field 
of nuclear power station safety which, the Soviet Union believed, would considerably 
speed up the solution of that vital problem. He expressed his country's 
readiness to take an active part in such a programme of exchange. 
24. The Soviet Union had rendered and would continue to render technical and 
economic assistance to other countries in the construction of nuclear power 
stations and in the development of national nuclear power programmes. An 
important condition for such assistance was that receiving countries should undertake 
not to use the nuclear material and equipment received in order to develop 
or manufacture nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, and also that 
such material and equipment should be placed under Agency safeguards. Countries 
operating nuclear power stations constructed with technical assistance from the 
Soviet Union could count on a guaranteed supply of fuel for the stations and 
also on the re-acceptance of the spent fuel by the USSR for storage and reprocessing. 
Such arrangements solved the energy problems of those countries while 
ensuring strict observance by the supplier and recipients of contractual 
conditions and nuclear non-proliferation requirements. 

25. As could be seen from the annual report of the Agency for 1978 and the 
statement by the Director General, the Agency's activities had been further 
expanded in 1978-79 ancL were contributing to the development of international cooperation 
on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, -the strengthening of the nonproliferation 
regime and international security. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 7 

26. The Soviet delegation wished to acknowledge the role played by the IAEA 
Secretariat in organizing co-operation in such important areas of the Agency's 
scientific programme as nuclear power and its fuel cycle, nuclear power station 
safety and environmental protection, safeguards, controlled nuclear fusion and the 
International Nuclear Information System (INIS). The Soviet Union would continue to 
give extensive support to the Agency's activities connected with those matters. 
27. The Soviet delegation noted with satisfaction that in 1978, as in previous 
years, the Secretariat had reported that as a result of the Agency's safeguards 
programme it had not detected any discrepancy which would indicate that a 
significant quantity of nuclear material under safeguards had been diverted to 
the production of any nuclear weapon or other kind of nuclear explosive device 
or used for any military purpose. That conclusion was evidence of the political 
success of the Agency's international safeguards system applied both inside and 
outside the framework of NPT. 
28. A feature worth noting was the increase in the amount of nuclear material 
and the number of facilities coming under Agency safeguards. 
29. However, the introduction into the international safeguards sphere of 
nuclear fuel cycle facilities such as plants for uranium enrichment, the reprocessing 
of spent nuclear fuel and the preparation of mixed uranium-plutonium 
fuel necessitated the development of qualitatively new safeguards techniques. 
30. In addition to the development of safeguards methods and procedures for the 
"sensitive" stages of the nuclear fuel cycle, it was of extreme importance to 
make a radical improvement in the instrumental equipment available to the 
Agency's surveillance activities and also to implement to the fullest extent the 
new automated system for the processing of safeguards data, 
31. The Soviet Union would assist in that work; one way in which it would do 
so was by making an additional voluntary contribution towards the development 
and increased efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system. 
32. Since the Soviet Union attached considerable value to the Agency's work on 
the technical improvements of safeguards, it was ready to arrange in 1980-I982 
on a cost-free basis a series of studies at Soviet scientific research institutes 
designed to strengthen the technical basis of the Agency's safeguards. The work 
would involve the expenditure of up to one million roubles in national currency. 

0C(XXIIII)/OR.213 
page 8 

33. The Soviet Union attached great importance to the provision of technical 
assistance to the developing States Members of the Agency in order to promote 
the extensive use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes in those countries. 
It insisted of course that, in accordance with the Statute, such assistance 
should not be used for any military purpose. Out of the total sum of 5.7 million 
roubles paid in voluntary contributions in national currency by the USSR between 
1969 and 1979, 4«5 million roubles had been spent or committed. That had been 
greatly aided by the Agency's general policy of implementing long-term largescale 
programmes, as reflected in the guiding principles for the provision of 
technical assistance from the Agency's own resources laid down in 1978 by the 
Board of Governors. In expressing its satisfaction with the activities of the 
Department of Technical Assistance and Publications, his delegation wished to 
assure the Director General that, as far as the utilization of Soviet voluntary 
contributions was concerned, he could always count on full awareness of the 
importance of that work on the part of the USSR, 
34» In recent years the Agency had begun to make greater use of the possibilities 
in the Soviet Union for training specialists from the developing countries. The 
Soviet Government was willing to expand further that type of co-operation with 
the Agency by arranging courses in the USSR on the application of nuclear techniques 
in industry, agriculture and medicine. 

35» The Soviet delegation had been authorized by its Government to announce an 
increase in the voluntary contribution of the USSR to the General Fund from 
750 000 roubles in 1979 to 950 000 roubles in national currency in 1980. The 
USSR voluntary contribution could be used for supplying the developing States 
Members of the IAEA with equipment, instruments and materials, including small 
amounts of nuclear materials for research purposes and fuel elements slightly 

23ti

enriched in U for experimental reactors. It could also be used for providing 
those countries with uranium enrichment services (up to 5$ U) using raw 
material supplied by them, and for training their specialists in the USSR. 

36. In that connection his delegation wished once again to stress the need 
effectively to combine technical assistance with reliable measures for international 
control over it. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 9 

37. With respect to the Agency's annual report for 1978, the Soviet delegation 
had, on the whole, no objection to approving it, apart from the reservation in 
connection with nuclear facilities in West Berlin which had been entered at the 
June 1979 meetings of the Board of Governors. 
38. The experience of recent years had demonstrated that broad and equitable 
international co-operation on the peaceful utilization of atomic energy was 
impossible without a whole series of measures designed to strengthen the nonproliferation 
regime and ensure international security. Those measures, as his 
delegation had already mentioned, included an increase in the number of countries 
signing NPT, thus imparting a universal character to that Treaty; further 
improving the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system, which was the 
most important instrument in the international nuclear non-proliferation regime; 
strict control of nuclear exports; the improvement of national systems of 
accounting for and controlling nuclear materials and facilities; the evolution 
of a system whereby States would undertake collective action in cases which posed 
the danger of proliferation of nuclear weapons; the establishment of guarantees 
for the security of States which did not possess nuclear weapons and did not 
have them on their territory; and the further development and implementation of 
plans for the assured supply of nuclear fuel, international centres and facilities 
associated with the nuclear fuel cycle, international plutonium storage and 
spent fuel management. 
39. The Soviet delegation believed that the existing institutions and machinery 
for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, first and 
foremost among which were the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Non-
Proliferation Treaty, represented a secure basis for the successful accomplishment 
of those tasks. 
40. In conclusion, he wished the IAEA further success in its noble work of 
promoting the widespread use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. 
41. Mr. BARTOLOME (Philippines) said that, as a developing country, the 
Philippines could not but feel proud of the high level of technology which India 
had attained in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. That achievement had been 
rendered all the more meaningful by India's continuing willingness to share 
that technology with other developing countries. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 10 

42. The Philippines vividly remembered -the inception of the India-PhilippinesIAEA(
lPA) project related to a regional joint training and research programme 
using a neutron crystal spectrometer, a project that had been the first cooperative 
agreement in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy between two developing 
countries and the Agency. In 1972, it had matured into the Regional Go-operative 
A.greement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology (RCA), and had sown trust and confidence where previously only suspicion 
had reigned. The RCA co-operative programmes covered an extremely wide 
spectrum of activities, and with the recent participation of Australia and Japan 
the RCA had found renewed vigour and potential for expansion. That would, 
however, require additional financial resources, and the continuing support of 
the Agency would therefore be essential. 
43. The primary objectives of the Agency, which were too well known to require 
quoting, should be continually reflected in the organization's programme and 
budget. In recent years, the developing countries had come to realize that 
nuclear energy could become an instrument for economic development, and consequently 
there were now seven developing countries operating nuclear power 
plants with an aggregate output of 4000 MW(e). By 1985 those figures were 
expected to increase to 17, and 30 000 (MW(e) respectively. However, public 
misgivings about the safety of nuclear power plants and the risks of further 
nuclear proliferation, perceived above all by nuclear supplier countries, had 
seriously threatened nuclear power plant construction. Therefore the Agency, 
assisted by all its Member States, should continue to improve its safety and 
safeguards operations in order to ensure greater public acceptance and to 
diminish the risks of nuclear proliferation. 
44. Economic sanctions alone would not stop nuclear proliferation. The 
necessary political conditions had to be created in order to convince a country 
or Government inclining towards the nuclear option that the total benefits in 
going nuclear would not outweigh the total costs. The adverse effects of 
vertical proliferation on the effort to contain horizontal proliferation had to 
be recognized. It was indeed difficult to accept the argument that some 
countries had the unquestioned privilege of continuing to make more and better 
nuclear weapons, while others were restrained from acquiring technology that 
might, at most, enable them to make a few nuclear explosive devices. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 11 

45» Clearly, the nuclear-weapon States should accelerate their negotiations for 
the cessation of the nuclear arms race, and indeed for general and complete disarmament 
under strict international control. The non-nuclear-weapon States, on 
their side, should accept full-scope safeguards on all their peaceful nuclear 
activities, and should undertake not to acquire, develop or manufacture nuclear 
weapons or nuclear explosive devices. 

46. While admittedly not capable of stopping nuclear proliferation, the Agency's 
safeguards system was intended as a deterrent against such proliferation. 
47. His delegation was gratified to note that, following the Three Mile Island 
incident, the Agency had prepared a supplementary nuclear safety programme. 
The Philippines supported the Agency's efforts in connection with nuclear safety 
and looked forward to the immediate implementation of the recommendations of the 
Standing Advisory Group on the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials (SAGSTRAM). 
48. It also noted with satisfaction the increasing number of Member States which 
had become party to NPT, and urged Members to sign and ratify at the earliest 
possible date the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPNM). 
49. The main preoccupation of the developing countries was with the daily 
struggle for existence. It was in that context that Article IV.2 of NPT was 
extremely important. While that Article guaranteed the "fullest possible 
exchange of equipment, materials and scientific and technological information 
for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy", the Philippines found itself unable 
to secure an export licence for a nuclear power plant ordered under a contract 
signed several years previously. That situation had arisen in spite of the 
fact that the Philippines was a party to NPT and met all the non-proliferation 
conditions required by the supplier country for the export of a nuclear power 
plant. 
50. Yet the supplier country had unilaterally changed the conditions for supply, 
and had applied them retroactively in violation of existing international 
treaties and agreements. Such breaches of existing international agreements 
on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had been considered by some supplier 
countries to be an acceptable form of conduct in international relations, but 
clearly the application of double standards in that way could only lead to 
chaos in international affairs. 

GC(XXHI)/OR.213 
page 12 

51. There could be no question of the delay in supplying the plant being due to 
doubts about its safe use by the recipient. His Government had on many occasions 
expressed to the supplier country its willingness to improve the safety factor 
of the plant in any way that might be required in order to secure the grant of 
the export licence. It had received no specific replies to those overtures. 
52. As long as the regulatory body of the supplier country took time to decide 
whether it had jurisdiction on the matter of export of the plant, the Philippines 
construction schedule continued to fall behind. So far, there had been a delay 
of one year in construction because of the new export requirements. For every 
year of delay, the Philippines had to pay interest rates of °ffo per year on the 
loan, bear the cost of escalation, and pay for replacement power, equivalent to 
5.5 million barrels of oil per year from 1983 onwards, at a price of at least 
$50 per barrel. In all, that meant that each year of delay in construction 
cost his country well over $500 million. Since the Philippines per capita income 
was under $5°° per year, that meant that at least a million Filipinos would have 
to work one year to pay for every year of time required by the supplier country 
to determine jurisdiction on the matter. 

53. That situation obviously could not be permitted to continue. If it did 
continue, countries would attempt to develop individually and without safeguards 
their own fuel cycle arrangements, leading to increased risks of nuclear proliferation. 
54. He felt that the time had come for the Agency to play a more active role in 
international nuclear commerce. The Board of Governors should establish a 
committee, with membership open to all interested States, with the aim of drafting 
an international code of conduct for international nuclear commerce. That code 
should be binding and should contain provisions for assured supplies in exchange 
for acceptance of non-proliferation conditions. Changes in conditions for 
supply should be accepted only when mutually agreed to by all the parties concerned, 
55« The Agency's technical assistance programme was indeed small compared to the 

needs of the developing countries, but its implementation had none the less 

improved and the Secretariat was to be congratulated on that achievement. 

56. Coming as it did at a time of economic difficulties, the large increase in 
the Regular Budget for 1980 was a cause for serious concern. He felt that the 
Director General should undertake a desk-to-desk evaluation of work performance 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 13 

in the Secretariat to determine where reductions in staff could be made. The 
Director General should also assign the costs of all supporting activities to 
the functional operations of the Agencyc He had observed that the Agency's 
budget for 1980 already allocated costs to various functional programmes, 
although that still had to be done in respect of the new Permanent Headquarters. 
The operating costs of the VIC were at present shared with the United Nations on 
the basis of net floor space assigned. His delegation was certain that the 
same procedure could easily be applied to determining the Department of Safeguards' 
share in the operating costs. 

57. The Conference would recall that by Resolution 3417 A (XXX) of 
8 December 1975, the United Nations General Assembly had requested the Secretary-
General to increase the number of nationals of developing countries appointed to 
senior posts in the Secretariat. In 1978, the General Assembly had requested the 
Secretary-General to take further steps in that direction. His delegation had 
observed, however, from an examination of the Agency's staff list, that out of 
113 P-5s only 16 (14$) were nationals of the developing countries, out of 
17 D-ls only 4 (23!$) came from the developing countries, and out of 7 D-2s there 
was no one from the developing countries. Finally, out of five Deputy Directors 
General, there was only one from a developing country. 
58. It was thus clear that on the question of personnel there had been a strong 
reluctance by the Agency to conform to the recommendations of the United Nations 
General Assembly. It was time for that to change. 
59. The Philippines set great store by the efforts of the Agency, and had 
expressed its interest in it by actively participating in its relevant activities. 
It was his Government's intention to continue that policy. 
60. Mr. ZANGGER (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf of the delegation of 
the Principality of Liechtenstein, said he wished first to take the opportunity 
of expressing his gratitude to the Indian authorities for their invitation to 
hold the General Conference in India, and likewise to thank the Austrian 
authorities for placing the recently inaugurated Vienna International Centre (VIC) 
at the Agency's disposal. 
61. It was to be noted that the Regular Budget of the Agency had increased considerably 
in the course of the past three years, as illustrated, for example, by 
the percentage increase in assessed contributions of Member States. A major part 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 14 

of the increases were due to inflation, fluctuations in the exchange rate for 
the dollar and various other factors beyond the Agency's control, 'but over the 
same period there had also been an increase in real terms, corresponding to 
a growth of the Agency's activities. It was therefore gratifying to see a downtrend 
in the 1980 budget, the overall increase for that year being 22$, as 
opposed to roughly 30$ for the previous two years. Even more gratifying was 
the fact that the increase in real terms in the assessed contributions of Member 
States was only slightly above 1$, i.e. 10 times smaller than for 1979« 

62. It was to be hoped that the trend would continue and that the Agency would 
be able, in line with other international organizations, to fix a budget ceiling 
for real term expenditure that would remain stable during the years to come, 
even though recent discussion of the matter on an informal basis had suggested 
that such would not necessarily be the case in 1981. 
63. As far as Switzerland's activities in the field of nuclear research and 
development were concerned, work on advanced reactors continued to focus on the 
high-temperature reactor and was being carried out in collaboration with the 
Federal Republic of Germany. The Swiss contribution was geared especially to 
the type of reactor design based on a direct cycle with a high-power gas turbine. 
In addition, study of gas-cooled fast breeder reactors was being continued and 
the headway already made was encouraging. 
64. The leading light in the project was the Swiss Federal Institute for Reactor 
Research, which was also implementing a programme for the development of nuclear 
fuel in the form of mixed uranium and plutonium carbides to be used in the gascooled 
fast breeder reactors. The Institute also had a 5-MW pool-type reactor to 
be stepped up to 10 MW later on - which had taken over from the DIORIT heavywater 
reactor no longer in operation. 
65. Research was also under way in the field of nuclear safety, for example, as 
related to loss-of-coolant accidents, and the results obtained were being passed 
on as a contribution to the loss-of-fluid test facility project in the United 
States. 
66. Radioactive waste management and disposal were likewise a priority consideration 
in Switzerland. Special attention was being given to dispersion and 
diffusion in geological formations, and a national company representing combined 
public and private interests had begun a broad-ranging geological survey programme 
in order to localize suitable storage sites in the country. 
GC(Xnil)/OR.213 
page 15 

67. At the organizational level, the Institute for Reactor Research had already 
been diversifying its research activities in non-nuclear power production for 
several years, more especially in the solar energy sector. 
68. Lastly, Switzerland had stepped up research in the area of controlled thermonuclear 
fusion and was participating in the corresponding European Atomic Energy 
Community's (EURATOM) programme. The Swiss effort was focused mainly on plasma 
physics and the development of high-power magnets. 
69. With regard to Switzerland's nuclear power programme, the three light-water 
power plants at Beznau and Muehleberg, which had a total output of 1000 MW(e), 
continued to operate quite satisfactorily, using river water as the coolant. A 
fourth light-water power plant at Goesgen had just been put into commercial 
operation. It would produce more than 900 MW, thereby nearly doubling the 
installed nuclear power in Switzerland, where nuclear energy now accounted for 
almost 30% of the electricity produced. A fifth plant, under construction at 
Leibstadt, was to be commissioned in 1981/1982. Construction of a sixth nuclear 
power plant at Kaiseraugs+ had been held up due to opposition to the project, but 
a general licence for it had now been applied for under the new procedure adopted 
in Switzerland in 1979* 
70. Under the new system, which was in effect a revision of the Atomic Energy 
Act of the late 1950s, every new nuclear facility required a general licence 
issued by Parliament. One of the basic conditions for the issue of the licence 
was that the future operator had to demonstrate convincingly that the plant was 
indispensable from the standpoint of energy supply. A further condition was 
a guarantee that there would be satisfactory management of the radioactive waste 
produced. 
71. The problem of the public acceptance of nuclear energy in Switzerland 
required elucidation. The development and production of nuclear energy, which 
had been unanimously accepted during the 1950s and 1960s, had met with considerable 
opposition from the public in the 1970s. Growing awareness of the environment 
and apathy towards scientific and technical progress were among the factors 
that had brought about a marked change in the public attitude and had made 
nuclear energy a bone of contention, despite the fact that so many international 
organizations had come out in support of it as an essential contribution in 
solving the problem of meeting mankind's energy requirements. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 16 

72. The misgivings felt by a certain section of the population were rooted 
mainly in three problems - high-level waste disposal, the safety of nuclear 
facilities, and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The solution of those 
problems, all of which had international implications, largely depended on international 
co-operation, especially with the major industrial countries. 
73. The Swiss population, which had had occasion to vote twice on the subject of 
nuclear energy in the first half of 1979t was greatly divided in its opinion 
and there was now an urgent need for considerable efforts in the three areas mentioned 
in order to restore confidence in nuclear energy. Such efforts should 
take the following form: first, it was essential to devise systems for the final 
disposal of high-level waste as soon as possible. The delay in doing so was 
being interpreted by the public as an indication of uncertainty. It was hoped 
that international co-operation would result in multinational regional projects 
which would provide an optimum solution to the problem and that the Agency could 
play the part of a promoter. 
74. Second, in the area of nuclear safety, a thorough analysis of the accident 
at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, should make it possible to see what changes were 
necessary in all countries concerned to further reduce the probability and consequences 
of reactor accidents. The analysis should encourage industry to consider 
nuclear safety problems in a new light and help the relevant authorities 
to handle their work more effectively, though without making the procedures more 
complicated. In that connection the new efforts made by the Agency in the area 
of nuclear safety were greatly welcomed and the viewpoint that such activities 
should be funded from the Regular Budget deserved support. 
75* Lastly, with regard to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, it had to 
be recalled that the peaceful use of nuclear energy and the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons constituted in effect the two arms of a balance. It was not 
possible to change one without altering the other at the same time. If something 
were added to one side, it would have to be added to the other as well to restore 
the balance. It was therefore regrettable that the balance had not always been 
maintained in the past years. The present period was one of transition and all 

such transition was accompanied by situations involving imbalance. It was 

essential to restore the balance as soon as possible and provide clear-cut guidelines 
for the development of nuclear energy. If a stable situation was not 
brought about, the damage done to the energy policy of different States would 
increase beyond repair. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 17 

76. Within that context, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INPCE) 
would be expected to submit a report that could be adopted by all participating 
States as a basis for the future development of nuclear energy. The report would 
have to be followed by specific agreements and action at international level in 
certain parts of the fuel cycle and in the protection of nuclear materials, equipment 
and services. Such action, which would be a basis for the new international 
nuclear order, would require a great deal of work and all States interested in the 
utilization of nuclear energy should be invited to participate in it, since 
international collaboration was the only way to bring about an international 
nuclear regime acceptable to all concerned. Here again the Agency could play 
the role of promoter. 
77. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) would remain 
the keystone of the new international nuclear order; it was encouraging in that 
connection to see the increase in the number of States party to the Treaty. 
78. In conclusion, it had to be stated that the present year had been marked by 
mixed feelings on the part of the public at large with regard to all aspects of 
nuclear energy. People now felt that they must be given a great deal more 
information on the problems involved so that they would be in a position to give 
a considered opinion. Accordingly, it was up to the International Atomic Energy 
Agency to provide such information, with particular emphasis in the three areas 
of international importance described above. 
79« Sir John HILL (United Kingdom) said that the Government of the United 
Kingdom believed that nuclear power had a vital role to play in meeting further 
energy requirements. A positive nuclear policy was being pursued in the United 
Kingdom and nuclear power already accounted for over 12$ of electricity supply. 
That would grow to 2055 in a few years' time with the commissioning of the three 
advanced gas-cooled (AGR) stations now nearing completion. Orders for two more 
AGR stations, each comprising two reactors and planned for operation in the late 
1980s, had been confirmed and work had started on the sites. In addition, work 
was continuing on the development, design and safety analysis of the prototype water


fed reactor (PWR) option for the United Kingdom, and licensing arrangements were 
being explored. 

80. The prototype fast reactor (PFR) at Dounreay had continued to operate and had 
proved to be a development facility of considerable flexibility. In particular, 
a series of experiments had demonstrated that, for the pool design of reactor, the 
natural circulation of the sodium coolant would remove shutdown heat from the core 

GC(XXHI)/OR.213 
page 18 

even with the primary pumps switched off. The transition from pumped flow to 
natural flow took place smoothly and it would be many hours before the temperature 
of the sodium reached boiling point and required any means of powered heat removal. 
Those experiments had demonstrated the ability of the fast reactor to withstand 
total power loss and had enhanced existing confidence in the safety of the system. 

81. The fuel had performed particularly well in PFR and the designers were confident 
that it would withstand the requirements of a commercial reactor. In 
September, the Prime Minister had formally opened the fast reactor fuel reprocessing 
plant at Dounreay. That plant was now reprocessing the enriched uranium 
fuel from the first Dounreay fast reactor, which had been shut down in 1977, and 
would then go on to reprocess the plutonium fuel from PFR. That would represent 
a very significant step towards closing the fast reactor fuel cycle. 
82. Within the next few weeks, the United Kingdom Government would receive a 
report from the British nuclear industry on the various strategies by which the 
fast reactor system - of which the United Kingdom already had many years' development 
experience - could be further pursued. 
83. It was the United Kingdom's policy to reprocess irradiated fuel from thermal 
reactors as well as fast reactors on the grounds of both efficient energy usage 
and the efficient management of radioactive waste. Design and development work 
on the thermal oxide reprocessing plant at Windscale was progressing rapidly and 
contracts had been secured for the full rated capacity of the plant. As far as 
waste disposal was concerned, all the design and development work for the active 
pilot vitrification plant at Windscale had been completed and construction was 
well advanced. The United Kingdom continued to hold the view that that technology 
would prove to be a fully satisfactory method of immobilizing highly 
active waste. 
84. Decisions had been taken during 1979 to further increase the capacity of 
the Urenco centrifuge enrichment plants -a joint United Kingdom, German and 
Dutch project - at Capenhurst in the United Kingdom and Almelo in the Netherlands, 
and a site had been designated for the construction of a plant in the Federal 
Republic of Germany. The slowdown in world nuclear power construction programmes 
had inevitably limited the growth in demand for enriched uranium and the 
centrifuge programme was as a result proceeding at a rate significantly slower 
than that envisaged some years ago. 
GC(XXCII)/OR.213 
page 19 

85. The United Kingdom's experience of the peaceful uses of nuclear power extended 
over more than two decades and it had never had an accident at a commercial power 
station which had given rise to any public hazard. Nobody, however, could afford 
to be complacent where nuclear safety was concerned and every effort would be 
made to ensure that the existing high safety standards in the United Kingdom were 
maintained and the search for further improvements continued. 
86. The Tokyo Summit countries had agreed that the expansion of nuclear power 
should proceed under conditions guaranteeing people's safety. They had also 
recognized that the Agency could play a key role in meeting that objective. 
Although national Governments had to accept responsibility for the safety of 
their own nuclear facilities, it was nevertheless vital that nuclear safety issues 
should be discussed internationally, so that knowledge and experience could be 
shared world wide. The United Kingdom considered that the Agency was the best 
body to sponsor international work on nuclear safety. It hoped that the Agency 
would also make every effort to co-operate with other international bodies, such 
as the Nuclear Energy Agency of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, and EURATOM, which were also keenly interested in nuclear safety. 
87. Nuclear energy was a significant and vital aid in promoting the economies 
of the under-developed countries, particularly in the fields of medicine, agriculture 
and electricity generation. The United Kingdom Government attached 
great importance to the work being done by the Agency to develop the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy and accordingly had pledged its full voluntary 
contribution for 1980 to the Agency's technical assistance programme. In 
addition, the United Kingdom would continue to make available to the Agency 
separate funds for the provision of fellowships in the United Kingdom for 
training scientists. 
88. The United Kingdom Government also attached great importance to safeguards. 
The application of Agency safeguards in the United Kingdom under the terms of the 
voluntary agreement, for example to the Dounreay fast reactor and the fast 
reactor reprocessing plant, would provide the Agency with valuable experience in 
various plants of advanced design. 
89. The United Kingdom had continued to seek way? in which to give practical 
assistance to the Agency in improving the effectiveness and efficiency of its 
safeguards operations and would continue to organize training courses as in 

0C(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 20 

previous years. In addition, it was considering undertaking a programme of 
research in areas in which the Agency had asked for assistance. 

90. The effectiveness of the operations of the Agency inspectorate was vital if 
the nations of the world were to succeed in preventing the spread of nuclear 
weapons. He was pleased to see from the Safeguards Implementation Report for 
1978, that once again the inspectorate had not detected any discrepancies which 
would indicate the diversion of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear 
material and that, as a consequence of those observations, the Director General 
considered it reasonable to conclude that the nuclear material under Agency safeguards 
had remained in peaceful nuclear activities. That was a praiseworthy 
achievement on the part of the safeguards system. At the same time, the system 
still lacked the universal application which his Government supported and which 
it considered to be in the interests of the whole international community. 
91. The risks associated with the proliferation of nuclear weapons were a matter 
of concern for every nation. In the decade since its entry into force, the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) had been at the centre 
of efforts by States to deal with that problem. The Second NPT Review Conference, 
to be held in Geneva in August 1980, would be a major event. As a depositary 
Power of the Treaty the United Kingdom had been involved in the preparatory 
arrangements for the Conference. It had been much encouraged both by the considerable 
progress made in the Preparatory Committee and also by the recent new 
accessions to the Treaty. There were now 111 parties to NPT and it was to be 
hoped that there would be further accessions before the Review Conference. 
92. To those who were sceptical about the achievements of NPT, he wished to point 
out that there had been no breaches of the Treaty involving proliferation nor had 
there been any violation of the international safeguards accepted by Member 
countries as part of their Treaty obligations. To that extent it had enjoyed a 
decade of success. The dangers of proliferation would continue to exist, however, 
and the political commitment by the parties to NPT was the most important single 
barrier to the spread of nuclear weapons. 
93. The nuclear-weapon States had their part to play in strengthening and maintaining 
the Treaty. His Government welcomed the SALT-II agreement between the 
United States and the Soviet Union and earnestly hoped that it would be ratified 
and implemented. The United Kingdom was continuing to work actively with the 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 21 

United States and the Soviet Union to draw up the text of a sound comprehensive 
test ban treaty. 

94. The United Kingdom also recognized that the NPT enshrined a balance between 
the availability of nuclear materials and technology for peaceful purposes on a 
non-discriminatory basis and the acceptance of reasonable non-proliferation 
restraints. Coming, as it would, six months after the completion of the 
International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INPCE), the Review Conference should 
contribute to further strengthening of international consensus on the way in which 
that balance should be implemented in the interests of all. 
95. With regard to INFCE he observed that, when it had been launched two years 
previously, certain experts had pointed out that they knew of no technical fixes 
which could make any fuel cycle proof against misuse for nuclear explosives. It 
seemed likely that the conclusions of INFCE would confirm that view and point to 
the limited role of technical measures in preventing proliferation. In drawing 
attention to that conclusion, he did not wish to underrate the value of the 
evaluation as a whole. Never before had Governments, together with the Agency, 
co-operated on such a scale to examine and argue the merits of different fuel 
cycles and alternative technologies. The economic, technical and environmental 
assessments in the eight working group reports would be a valuable basis for 
decision-making by nuclear authorities and their Governments over the coming 
years. In addition, INPCE should prove of assistance in the task of educating 
public opinion about nuclear energy and in winning acceptance for nuclear programmes. 
It was a challenge of immense importance to all concerned to see that 
the true facts were understood, and it was a challenge which had to be taken up 
urgently and won. 
96. His Government believed that, when the final plenary conference of INPCE 
had taken place, its conclusions and the items which were already on the international 
agenda in the linked fields of nuclear trade and non-proliferation 
should be carefully reviewed and each pressed ahead in its appropriate forum. 
The United Kingdom saw a role for the Agency in that which was all-important. 
As he had already said, he looked forward over the coming years to the development 
and strengthening of the international consensus on nuclear co-operation 
and trade. It had to be based on a balance between the rights and the obligations 
of Governments, and the United Kingdom considered the Agency to be the 
appropriate place for such a consensus to be developed. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 

page 22 

97. He wished to single out two topics for particular comment. International 
Plutonium storage was now being examined by an Agency expert group. The United 
Kingdom saw that as a logical and necessary extension of the safeguards system, 
foreseen at the time when the Agency's Statute was drawn up and provided for in 
Article XII.A.% He very much hoped that a scheme for that most important area 
could be agreed and submitted to the Board of Governors by February 1981. 
98. The other INPCE subject on which he wished to comment was the need for consensus 
on both assurances of supply and conditions of supply. That consensus 
should cover a number of related needs: first, the need for reliability in 
supplies of nuclear material and equipment; second, the need for common 
approaches to non-proliferation in national import and export policies; third, 
the need for an agreed procedure through which those non-proliferation undertakings 
could be updated; and finally, there was a need to examine further the 
requirement for short- and medium-term mechanisms to ensure the availability of 
i nuclear material in the event of delays or cut-off in supplies. 

99- The United Kingdom therefore welcomed the proposal which the Director 
General had put forward in his address, that a committee should be set up by the 
Board of Governors to explore those issues. It supported the idea for two 
reasons. First, because it regarded them as important issues and ones which 
were not being discussed internationally at the present time; and second, 
because it believed that it was appropriate for the Agency to take the lead in 
following up issues of that kind identified by INFCE. There was no other suitable 
forum where that could be done. There was no point in creating another international 
body to undertake such tasks when a suitable one already existed in the 
form of the Agency, in which his Government had the fullest confidence following 
more than twenty years' experience of successful operation. 

100. Mr. GEORGE (Australia) wished to express his delegation's thanks to the 
Government of India for offering to host the Conference, and for the excellent 
arrangements that had been made. 
101. The events of the past year had emphasized the seriousness of the energy 
crisis. If the living standards of the developed world were to be maintained 
and those of the developing world raised, it would be necessary not only to 
expand the use of traditional sources of energy but also to take maximum 
advantage of less conventional ones, including nuclear energy. Australia was 
doing what it could to promote the achievement of that objective. It was 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 23 

already a significant exporter of coal, had committed itself to the export of 
large quantities of natural gas, and was also undertaking the regulated and 
responsible development of its substantial uranium resources. In several ai^eas 
of the country uranium mining was being initiated or resumed and uranium concentrates 
were being stockpiled or released for export. 

102. Since his Government wished to see the maximum processing of Australian raw 
materials prior to export, it was studying the feasibility of establishing a 
commercial uranium enrichment industry in Australia. It was fully conscious of 
the non-proliferation and safeguards issues raised by uranium enrichment, and 
in the course of the feasibility study he had just mentioned, multination participation 
would be carefully examined. 
103. Australia recognized that for the developing countries it was not only 
access to energy source materials but also the existence of their own technological 
base which would allow them to gain maximum advantage from nuclear energy. 
That was why Australia attached particular importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance activities. The report for 1978 stated that the total volume of 
technical assistance provided by the Agency rose by 44$ during the year in 
question - a particularly satisfactory result. He was pleased to announce that 
in 1980, as in previous years, Australia would contribute its full assessed share 
to the General Fund for the financing of technical assistance. 
104. Australia would also continue to support activities under the Agency's Asian 
Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA). Indeed, the increasing interest shown 
in RCA by countries in the region seemed to assure its successful future. It was 
moving into a second, and more ambitious, phase with the proposed UNDP project 
on the industrial applications of isotopes and radiation technology, and Australia 
was giving careful study to ways in which it might contribute to that new 
development. 
105. It had long been Australian practice to make nuclear facilities available 
to countries in the region in order to assist in training their nuclear 
scientists. Malaysia had recently decided to take advantage of that arrangement, 
and Malaysia's first nuclear research reactor would in due course be 
operated by Australian-trained personnel. 
106. There were two other areas of the Agency's programme which his Government 
considered to be of fundamental importance. Those were nuclear safety and 
safeguards. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 24 

107. Nuclear safety was a matter of legitimate public concern, and in that connection 
he wished to commend the Agency on its prompt reaction to the Three Mile 
Island incident by introducing a supplementary nuclear safety programme. 
108. Australia also shared a common interest in ensuring that efforts to render 
nuclear energy widely available did not increase the risks of proliferation. In 
that context there had been some recent developments, most of which were cause 
for a certain degree of satisfaction, although others gave cause for alarm. 
There had been disturbing indications, since the preceding session of the General 
Conference, that some countries were proceeding with the construction of unsafeguarded 
facilities. Irrespective of the purpose for which they were intended, 
the construction of unsafeguarded facilities would introduce a new degree of 
uncertainty, and would also threaten the development of international trade and 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. His Government urged all 
Member States to accept full-scope safeguards and to discourage unsafeguarded 
facilities. 
109. Happily, the past year had also brought several encouraging developments in 
the sphere of non-proliferation. A number of countries had become party to NPT 
during the year, bringing it closer to the goal of universality, and Australia 
particularly welcomed the accessions of Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh. NFT 
remained the best achievable guarantee that peaceful nuclear development would 
not lead to the further proliferation of nuclear weapons, and he urged those 
countries which had not yet acceded to NPT again to give consideration to doing 
so* 
110. A further encouraging development was Argentina's expressed intention to 
conclude with the Agency a full-scope safeguards agreement pursuant to Article 13 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty. 
111. Australia's firm commitment to non-proliferation was fully reflected in its 
safeguards policy, which his Government believed to be an effective barrier to 
the diversion of material of Australian origin to other than peaceful purposes. 
Australian policy was designed to strengthen and reinforce the international 
non-proliferation regime. He was pleased to report that during the past year 
his country had concluded three more bilateral safeguards agreements - with the 
Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom and the United States of America. Those 
agreements would provide the necessary non-proliferation framework for exports 
of Australian uranium to the countries concerned. Negotiations on safeguards 
agreements were continuing with a number of other States. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 25 

112. The Agency was to be commended on its continuing careful implementation of 
existing safeguards arrangements, and its work in developing safeguards techniques 
for application to enrichment plants, reprocessing plants and fast-breeder 
reactors. The progress made in finalizing facility attachments relating to 
installations in non-nuclear-weapon States Members of EURATOM was also to be 
welcomed. The annual report for 1978 noted, as in previous years, that the 
Secretariat had not detected any discrepancy which would indicate the diversion 
of a significant amount of safeguarded nuclear material for military purposes 
or for the manufacture of any explosive device. That assurance was most gratifying, 
and he wished to stress that the significance of the safeguards programme 
in providing an orderly basis for the development of peaceful nuclear trade and 
co-operation could not be overestimated. 
113. The Australian Government attached major importance to international efforts 
to counter nuclear-weapon proliferation, and in particular favoured the early 
conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty. 
114. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), which was nearly completed, 
had been a most productive exercise and had provided a sound basis for achieving 
greater stability and predictability in peaceful nuclear co-operation through the 
gradual development of an international consensus. Australia was pleased that 
it had been able to play a constructive role in INFCE, to which of course all 
participating States and the IAEA itself had made valuable contributions. 
115. A measure of common agreement had emerged in INPCE on the problems associated 
with the various stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. One important result already 
apparent was the greater attention which possible new institutional barriers to 
proliferation were receiving. However, appropriate follow-up action in political 
circles would be necessary if concrete results were to be achieved, and the IAEA 
would have an important role to play in that regard. 
116. Many Governments were giving consideration to the international handling of 
nuclear issues in the post-INFCE period. Australia did not see the need to 
maintain a study of broad scope beyond the conclusion of INPCE in February 1980, 
but favoured a more pragmatic approach aimed at erecting "building blocks'*. The 
way would then be open to reaching the broader and longer-term objective of an 
international consensus on arrangements covering the nuclear fuel cycle and international 
trade and co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including 
non-proliferation arrangements. The recently concluded convention on the physical 

GC(XXUI)/OR.213 
page 26 

protection of nuclear materials and the studies on plutonium storage and spent 
fuel management at present 'being carried out under the auspices of the IAEA. 
were examples of "'building 1)10011" activities. He welcomed the finalization of 
the text of the convention on the physical protection of nuclear materials as 
an addition to the growing network of measures to improve conditions for the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy. The text would be given careful consideration 
by his Government. 

117. In taking specific action during the post-INFCE period care would have to 
be exercised in choosing the timing of such action and the forums in which it 
jld be staged. Unduly hasty action might contribute to opportunities for confrontation 
- for example, between developed and developing countries or between 
suppliers and consumers of nuclear materials and services and related equipment 
and technology. One of the major achievements of INFCE was that confrontations 
of that kind were avoided. Discussion of nuclear issues in the post-INFCE 
period should be carried out in a context which ensured an appropriate balance 
between the various countries and interests concerned. For example, Australia 
as a major potential supplier of uranium would not wish to see questions of 
uranium supply isolated from discussion of the supply of nuclear materials, equipment 
and technology in general. 

118. In that connection some countries had sought to focus attention solely on 
the supply of nuclear fuel. It was, however, clear from the report of 
INFCE Working Group 3 that the likely causes of interruption in supplies were 
not specific to any one stage of the fuel cycle. Working Group 3 dealt with 
nuclear supply issues as a whole and its work laid the foundations for possible 
future international action in that area. Such action should, inter alia, ensure 
that commercial and non-proliferation issues were clearly separated. 
119. Finally, he wished to emphasize that the IAEA, continued to enjoy Australia's 
full support. As the principal international agency charged with promotional 
and regulatory responsibilities in the nuclear field, the Agency was faced with 
tasks of growing technical and political complexity. At the same time it was 
placed under budgetary constraints which made implementation of its statutory 
responsibilities increasingly difficult. The Agency should therefore undertake 
further efforts to keep its administrative expenses to the absolute minimum; in 
order that implementation of its substantive programmes should not be jeopardized. 
In facing up to the challenges before it, the IAEA could look to Australia for 
steadfast support. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 27 

120. Mr. COPITHORNE (Canada), after expressing his delegation's appreciation 
for the gracious hospitality extended by the Government of India in inviting 
the General Conference to New Delhi, recalled that Canada had been an active participant 
in the negotiation of the Agency's Statute almost a quarter of a century 
previously. The Agency's record of achievement had amply fulfilled the expectations 
of its founders, and its stature could be expected to grow with the 
coming years. 
121. In his statement the Director General had made a trenchant analysis of the 
energy situation which confronted all the nations of the world. Conventional 
hydrocarbon reserves were diminishing at an alarming rate and the need to develop 
and apply alternative technologies was acquiring increased urgency with each 
passing day. 
122. It seemed paradoxical that, at a time when Governments were being pressed to 
develop and apply all available energy technologies, the use of nuclear energy 
for the generation of electricity was being called into question on a number of 
grounds. At the same time, there had been continuing concern that the use of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes should not lead to the proliferation of 
nuclear explosive capability. 
123. The Agency, as was well known, had been established "to accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world". Canada, as a developer and supplier of reactor technology, and 
as a major exporter of uranium, shared that objective and had strongly supported 
the Agency's efforts over the years to attain it. The Agency's technical assistance 
activities, its work in the fields of nuclear safety and environmental 
protection, life sciences and food and agriculture, and its support for the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics were all reflections of those 
efforts. 
124. He was pleased to announce that, as in previous years, and despite a policy 
of severe fiscal restraint, Canada would contribute in 1980 its full share to 
the Agency's General Fund for the financing of technical assistance. Canada 
continued to attach great importance to the dissemination of nuclear technology 
and its support of the Agency's technical assistance programme bore witness to 
a desire to ensure that developing countries had access to the benefits of 
nuclear science. 

GC(XXm)/OR.213 
page 28 

125. Canada, in its nuclear export policy, had followed a course of action 
designed to fulfil its obligations as a 15610136? of the IAEA and as a party to KPT. 
It had exported nuclear material and technology to a large number of developing 
as well as developed countries. The CANDU reactor had over many years proved 
to he a highly effective, efficient and safe generator of electricity at an 
economical cost. In Canada, a nuclear capacity of approximately 5500 MW(e) was 
now installed with another 10 000 MW(e) under construction or committed. A 
further 1800 MW(e) were under construction or committed abroad. 
126. At the same time, Canada recognized the complementary obligation under the 
Agency's Statute and NPT to ensure that its nuclear exports did not contribute to 
the proliferation of nuclear explosive capability. Since 1976 those non-nuclearweapon 
States which had acceded to NPT or had otherwise made an equivalent binding 
commitment regarding the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons or other explosive 
devices and had accepted international safeguards on all their nuclear activities 
had been eligible for Canadian nuclear exports under new contracts. At the same 
time Canadian nuclear exports to nuclear-weapon States could be used only for 
peaceful purposes not involving explosions. Canada remained convinced that those 
conditions provided the necessary framework for developing the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy while minimizing the risk of proliferation of nuclear explosive 
capability. Unless assurances could be provided that nuclear power would not 
lead to such proliferation, the public support necessary for a viable nuclear 
industry and international nuclear commerce would melt away. People must be 
convinced that nuclear power could be developed with minimal proliferation risk. 
127. In that context Canada strongly supported the IAEA*s safeguards operations 
and appreciated the efforts of the Secretariat to improve those operations in a 
realistic and pragmatic manner in the light of ever more stringent requirements. 
The international non-proliferation regime was heavily dependent on the existence 
of an effective and objective safeguards system, and Canada looked forward to 
being able to continue to co-operate with the Agency in the further development 
of such a system. 
128. Nuclear safety was clearly an area of high priority if public confidence 
in nuclear development was to be maintained. His Government particularly welcomed 
and supported the Agency's intention to expand its work in that field, 
129o The results of INFCE, and also the 1980 Review Conference on NPT, would 
constitute important elements in the international effort to create a framework 
for the global sharing of the benefits of nuclear energy. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 29 

130. He wished to close his remarks on an optimistic note. With the necessary 
political will the international community could devise the means to deal 
effectively and in a farsighted manner with the various issues that had given 
rise to doubts and difficulties. The remarkable potential of nuclear science 
could be, and had to be, utilized exclusively for the benefit of all mankind, 
131. Mr. LUCZKTEWICZ (Poland) said that Poland was a strong supporter of 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy and was in favour of the development 
of nuclear power, Poland also supported the consolidation of the non-proliferation 
regime and, in particular, the universal application of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), In that connection he wished to 
stress the vital importance for world peace and disarmament of speedy implementation 
of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT-II) and the recent 
initiatives by the Soviet President, Leonid Brezhnev, during his visit to Berlin, 
Poland considered that prompt ratification of SALT-II and a constructive approach 
to the Berlin proposals would be a further step towards making disarmament a 
continuous irreversible process and creating better prospects for the widespread 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
132. Poland, like many other countries, had energy problems. One way in which 
it was tackling those problems was to accelerate the programme of construction 
of nuclear power stations and nuclear district heating stations. 
133. Poland had been a member of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
(CMEA) for over 30 years and was participating in the CMEA's extensive nuclear 
power programme by developing plant for nuclear heat supply stations. 
134« The development of nuclear power in the world was encountering difficulties 
of a political character inspired by various groups which based their arguments 
on the risk associated with possible accidents at nuclear plants, 

135« He stressed that Poland placed the greatest confidence in the safety systems 
employed over the years in power reactors produced in the USSR, and Poland 
therefore, like other socialist countries, was embarking on its nuclear power 
programme without any misgivings, 

136. In the coming year the Agency should concentrate its efforts on research 
programmes designed to promote the further development of nuclear power in 
Member States on the basis of maximum possible reactor safety, Poland considered 
the elaboration of new safety guides for nuclear power station operation 
to be one of the Agency's most important technical programmes. The Agency 

GC(XXHI)/OR.213 
page 30 

should also continue with its traditional programmes on health physics, the 
application of nuclear technology to agriculture, etc. 

137« Poland supported the new draft 'budget for i960 that had been approved fey 
the Board of Governors. 

138. In executing its scientific programmes, the Agency should aim to expand 
the volume of technical assistance rendered to developing countries. However, 
that assistance should be directed only to those countries whose policies 
guaranteed that the assistance supplied would not be used for non-peaceful 
purposes. 
139» One of the Agency's most important tasks was to reinforce the non-proliferation 
regime through the development of safeguards techniques. Poland welcomed 
the progress that had been achieved in that area by the Agency and also the 
bringing under safeguards of plants operated by the non-nuclear-weapon States 
of the European Atomic Energy Community (EORATOM). 

140. However, Poland continued to feel that NPT still suffered from lack of 
universality, and recent events had shown that the risk of nuclear proliferation 
was increased when NPT ceased to apply. 
141. The International Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), which would be concluded 
early in 1980 had played a positive role in the quest to strengthen NPT. The 
concluding conference on INFCE in February 1980 would be formulating recommendations 
which, on the one hand, could form a basis for establishing international 
guarantees for long-term fuel supplies and, on the other hand, pave the way 
towards solution of the problem of ensuring non-proliferation with full-scale 
development of nuclear power. 
142. In Poland's opinion, the Agency should have the task of executing the INFCE 
recommendations. 
143. The "International plutonium storage" and "International spent fuel management" 
programmes being undertaken by the Agency corresponded to the spirit of the 
INFCE programme, and the Agency should complement those with any other programmes 
that might be decreed necessary by the concluding conference. 
144« The Polish delegation wished to take that opportunity of expressing its full 
support for the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the 
drafting of which had recently been finalized in Vienna. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.213 
page 31 

145. At the same time Poland wished to declare its readiness to make scientific 
staff and laboratory facilities available to help the Agency with its work on 
developing effective methods of control in the safeguards and physical protection 
field. 
146. Poland supported all projects aimed at developing new applications of nuclear 
energy for the benefit of mankind, a good example of that being international 
collaboration under the aegis of the Agency on the development of an international 
fusion reactor for power production. The Agency's technical programmes and the 
technical assistance being rendered by the Agency also served that goal. Accordingly, 
Poland was pleased to announce that it would be making a voluntary contribution 
to the General Fund for 1980 of 4.5 million zlotys. 
147. The way in which those resources were used would depend largely on the 
Agency's activities. For its part, Poland was ready to co-operate with the 
Secretariat in seeking more effective ways of using existing resources to deliver 
technical assistance to developing countries. 
148. In addition, Poland would be offering ten fellowships in 1980 at its most 
advanced research centres. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
August 1980* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi 
on Thursday, 6 December 1979, at 3.30 p.m. 


President: Mr. SETHNA (India) 
later: Mr. SAMANIEGO (Ecuador) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** Paragraphs 
7 General debate and annual report for 1978 
(continued) 1 83 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Spain l 8 
Finland 9 18 
Italy 19 26 
Austria 27 34 
Argentina 35 44 
Mexico 45 50 
Bangladesh 51 57 
Czechoslovakia 58 62 
Hungary 
Tunisia 
63 
71 
70 
76 
Romania 77 83 

*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 30 January 1980. 
**/ GC(XXII)/620. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 

80-2835 


GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 2 

GENERAL DEBATE AM) ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1978 (continued) 

1. Mr. OLIVARES BAQJE (Spain) said the world energy crisis had shown the 
importance of nuclear technology for the production of electricity. The Spanish 
parliament, during its consideration of the National Energy Plan in July 1979, had 
approved a resolution recognizing that nuclear power was indispensable and 
requesting the Government to implement a nuclear programme corresponding to the 
needs of the country, without neglecting to take the strictest safety precautions. 
2. According to the approved Energy Plan, nuclear power would by 1990 represent 
27.1$ of the total installed electric power and 39.3$ of the electricity 
produced (as against 3.7$ and 7.8$ at the present time): that showed the 
importance of nuclear power for future power generation in Spain. Currently, 
Spain had three nuclear power plants with a total output of 1.2 GW. Seven 
additional units would be put into operation during the next two years and a total 
of 17 should be operating in 1990 (with an output of 15.55 GW)» The contribution 
of Spanish industry to the construction of those power plants was also noteworthy: 
66.5$ for the first seven and 80.9$ for the remaining plants. 
3. The National Energy Plan also assigned great importance to nuclear safety. 
It provided for the establishment of a nuclear safety council which would have 
various responsibilities. The structure of the Nuclear Energy Board was to be 
modified: while continuing its traditional activities in fundamental research 
and staff training, it would also be able to participate in industrial activities. 
4. The nuclear power debate had crossed all frontiers and become international. 
The Spanish delegation wished to stress the importance for all Member States of 
full implementation of the supplementary nuclear power safety programme approved 
in June 1979 by the Board of Governors, and supported the recommendations put 
forward in that connection by the Governments of Brazil, the Federal Republic of 
Germany and Sweden (document GC(XXIII)/INF/l86). The standards established by 
GC(X3ail)/OR.214 
page 3 

the Agency could serve as a basis and frame of reference for national bodies and 
could even furnish an argument to counter the objections raised by the opponents 
of nuclear power. The establishment within the Secretariat of standing expert 
groups to give technical advice to Governments interested m that field would be 
extremely useful. 

5. The Spanish Government supported without reservation the Agency's programmes 
of assistance to developing countries. Naturally, Spain co-operated most closely 
with Spanish-speaking countries. In that connection, he wished to mention the 
supplementary agreements concluded by Spain with Argentina, the Federal Republic 
of Germany, Venezuela and Uruguay; Spain had by now signed 16 such agreements 
altogether. The co-operation with Ecuador was progressing well, and should result 
in the construction of a research centre with a 3-MW reactor. The collaboration 
of Spain with the Chilean Atomic Energy Commission was going forward as planned. 
6. The Agency had entrusted Spain with the task of organizing an interregional 
training course on nuclear power project planning, development and construction, 
which had been held in Madrid at the end of 1978, and an interregional training 
course on quality assurance, which had been held recently, also in Madrid. 
Moreover, since the previous General Conference session, Spain had welcomed 
31 fellows of various nationalities, of whom 25 were Spanish-speaking. 
7. The Spanish Nuclear Energy Board had undertaken co-operation programmes with 
Colombia, Peru and Mexico for uranium ore prospecting and mining. In addition, 
Spain was considering with Peru and Mexico the possibility of extracting uranium 
during the production of phosphoric acid by a technique developed entirely by the 
Nuclear Energy Board. It had also assisted various countries in the field of 
nuclear law and in the preparation of nuclear safety standards. 
8. In conclusion, he wished to stress that as a result of the system of rotation 
tacitly established within the Board of Governors, Spain was a Member of the 
Board only once every four years. That situation was regrettable, and Spain 
would be unable to increase its contribution to the Agency's activities in the 

GC(xXra)/OR.214 
page 4 

future unless its position on the Board corresponded to its position in the 
nuclear field. His delegation would consider carefully any proposal for 
modification of the Board's composition that satisfied Spain and other 
countries in the same situation. 

9. Mr. KORHONEN (Finland) said that nuclear power had not yet fully 
played the role expected of it, and that at a time of rising prices and decreasing 
availability of energy sources efforts should he made to enhance that role. The 
criticisms levelled at nuclear power related to safety, waste and proliferation, 
and it was essential to find solutions to those problems on an international 
level, in particular within the IAEA. That would callfor adequate funding of the 
Agency's activities and for a reappraisal of its programmes. 
10. In view of the experience gathered by the Agency over more than twenty years, it 
was only natural that the international conference on nuclear energy to be convened 
in 1983 in accordance with Resolution 34/68 of the United Nations General Assembly 
should enjoy the full co-operation of the Agency, both during the preparatory work 
and during the conference itself, and should make use of the results of the final 
plenary conference of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE), the 
second NPT Review Conference and the second Salzburg-type conference. 
11. One of the great objectives of the foundation of the Agency had been that it 
should become a kind of "atom bank" which would make nuclear fuel available to 
Member States. That had not come to pass, and the Agency had concentrated on 
nuclear technology. However, nuclear power had become essential to a growing 
number of Member States, and it was appropriate to ask whether the Agency had 
been able to adapt its' programmes to the new situation. Similarly, the new 
demands concerning, in particular, safety and waste had perhaps not received as 
much attention as was needed. In view of the rapid expansion expected of the 
Agency's activities, the necessary financial and other resources must be assured. 
12. It had become clear that more attention must be paid to nuclear safety and 
environmental protection. Finland approved of the prompt action taken by the 
Director General to strengthen the Agency's safety programme, and had lent its 
0C(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 5 

full support. The fact that it was the responsibility of national authorities 
to ensure nuclear safety must not hamper international co-operation and the 
establishment of international criteria and guidelines. In that context, it was 
crucial that countries should develop their safety and regulatory capabilities 
in parallel with their nuclear power programmes. 

13. The Government of Finland considered that technical assistance activities 
should be given high priority. The Agency should be capable of helping countries 
to implement their nuclear power programmes, it being understood that those 
programmes must take into account the existing infrastructure and the available 
options in order to make the best possible use of resources. 
14. Apprehensions concerning the proliferation of nuclear weapons could not be 
dispersed as long as effective safeguards were not applied to all nuclear 
activities of non-nuclear-weapon States and as long as assurances against 
diversion were insufficient. 
15. The Agency's annual report made reference to a possible increase in the 
number of States having unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. That would undoubtedly 
affect efforts to promote the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. 
As a supporter of the NPT regime, Finland, together with the other Nordic 
countries, had recently circulated a document during the General Assembly of the 
United Nations stating that the manufacture of nuclear explosives by any 
additional State would constitute a grave threat to the international community. 
In that document, the Nordic countries had also expressed the hope that no 
non-nuclear-weapon State would attempt to develop or acquire nuclear weapons. 
16. The Government of Finland was fully aware that other considerations had a 
bearing on the issues of non-proliferation. It was clear that assurances of supply 
should be included in any agreement on nuclear co-operation and non-proliferation. 
States that had renounced nuclear weapons and accepted safeguards on their 
territory had a right to expect that their energy needs would not be overlooked. 
The Agency seemed to be the appropriate body for the consideration of measures 
that would facilitate access to nuclear materials for States that were committed 
to the objectives of non-proliferation and had accepted the application of 
safeguards. 
17. In his delegation's view, better use should be made of the Agency's expertise 
in waste management, a problem that had undoubtedly obstructed the use of nuclear 
energy in many countries. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 6 

18. The examination of various institutional and multinational mechanisms was, 
in the post-INFCE period, one of the most important activities to he carried out 
within the framework of the IAEA to counter the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
19. Mr. COLOMBO (Italy) said that further economic growth would be 
extremely difficult, if not impossible, without the assistance of nuclear energy, 
which was the only alternative to fossil fuels and was needed by both developed 
and developing countries. In that situation, the essential role of the IAEA 
was to promote international co-operation and technical assistance to 
developing countries, to contribute to the preparation of codes and standards 
and to participate in all action aimed at preventing diversion of nuclear 
materials. 
20. The Italian Government wished to confirm its commitment to those endeavours, 
and had decided, in particular, to contribute 260 million lire to the Agency's 
fund for technical assistance. It also commended the International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics on its efforts to promote scientific progress in the 
developing countries. 
21. His delegation wished to stress the importance of a close examination of 
the Agency's priorities with a view to checking the increasingly rapid growth 
of the budget and limiting all general expenditure not directly linked to the 
operational and institutional programmes of the Agency. 
22. The Italian Government shared the concern of other countries at the danger 
of proliferation of nuclear weapons, but remained convinced that existing 
international agreements should not be departed from. There was no need to 
create new types of safeguards, but to make the best use of existing instruments, 
particularly NPT, to which more countries should accede. Moreover, it was 
vital that Articles IV and VI of HPT should be duly applied. In that context, 
his delegation hoped the negotiations on a complete nuclear test ban and on the 
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT II) would soon be brought to a conclusion. 
Regarding Article IV of MPT, which was closely connected with the 
application of Articles I, II and III, the Italian Government was convinced 
that the second NPT Review Conference would pay due attention to that fundamental 
issue. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 7 

23. His country had taken part with great interest in IUFCE and was satisfied 
with the results obtained, which should assist in promoting the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. The INFCE studies had shown that no cycle was ideal from 
the point of view of non-proliferation, and that the strategies to be adopted 
must therefore vary from country to country. Italy was currently contributing 
to the studies concerning international plutonium storage and spent fuel management, 
but naturally recognized that the political, legal and economic problems 
involved could be solved only with the assistance of all concerned. Italy was 
already applying all the safeguards measures deriving from its international 
commitments, in particular where spent fuel storage was concerned. As to the 
storage of plutonium, Italy was prepared to consider the outcome of the 
activities undertaken in that field in a spirit of co-operation, provided that 
the new mechanism was objective, reliable and non-discriminatory. 
24. The Italian Government welcomed the successful conclusion of the meetings 
to consider the drafting of a Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material and hoped that the scope of the Convention could eventually be enlarged. 
25. At home, Italy had produced 44CO million kWh of nuclear power in 1978. At 
the end of 1977, the Italian parliament had adopted a national energy plan, 
the nuclear section of which provided for twelve new reactors of 1000 MW(e) 
each. Those projects had met with the opposition of public opinion, a problem 
that might be reduced by improved public information and education. To that 
end, the Rational Nuclear Energy Commission (CKEH) had proposed amendments to 
the existing laws, and the Italian Government had recently established a 
Permanent Committee on Energy and a Special Commission on Nuclear Safety. 
Concerning research and development activities, the Government was currently 
examining a five-year plan (198O-84) drawn up by CNEN, the objectives of which 
were to improve plant safety and the protection of the population, to master the 
available technology, to continue research and development work on fast breeder 
reactors (in close collaboration with the French Commissariat a l'energie 
atomique), and to continue efforts towards nuclear fusion. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 8 

26. Abroad, Italy was encouraging international co-operation in reactor 
safety research and was taking part in the multilateral collaboration on 
fast breeders which was focused on the construction of the Superph^nix power 
plant. 
27. Mr. HOESS (Austria) congratulated the President on his election and 
thanked the Indian Government for its hospitality. He reminded the delegates 
that the Permanent Headquarters of the Agency in the Vienna International 
Centre had been inaugurated on 23 August 1979? and expressed the hope that the 
new facilities would enable the Agency to work under more favourable conditions. 
The temporary laboratory at the former Headquarters had been moved to the 
Austrian Research Centre in Seibersdorf, where the Austrian Government had 
constructed new buildings to house the dosimetry laboratory and the Safeguards 
Analytical Laboratory. Thus, it had been possible to concentrate all of the 
Agency's laboratories in Austria on one site. He thanked the Director General 
for the kind words he had addressed to the Austrian Government, which would 
continue to grant full support to the Agency's work. 
28. He had listened with great interest to the Director General's statement, 
and he wished to stress the importance of technical assistance, non-proliferation 
and DJFCE. The Austrian Government welcomed the fact that the target for 
voluntary contributions had been fixed at US $10.5 million. Subject to 
parliaaentary approval, he was able to pledge for 1980 the amount of $71 400, 
which was $13 600 more than in 1979. 
29. The Austrian delegation had noted with satisfaction the increase in the 
number of States party to NFT and in the number of safeguards agreements 
concluded by the Agency with its Member States. The second NPT Review 
Conference would be meeting in Geneva in August and September 198O. It should 
enable all Members to outline their objectives and the means of attaining them. 
The articles which deserved the most attention were Article IV and Article VI. 
Concerning the former, the Agency should make transparent the assistance 
already provided to the less developed countries and the areas in which such 
assistance should be expanded. In connection with Article VI, it would be up 
to the nuclear-weapon powers to demonstrate their commitment to peace and 
GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 9 

dStente. It was to be hoped that the result of SALT II would be a first step 
in that direction. Closely related to non-proliferation was the question of 
the physical protection of nuclear materials. As a result of a lengthy effort 
begun by the Agency in 1972, a convention on that question had been concluded 
in Vienna on 26 October 1979• Although it dealt exclusively with the transport 
of nuclear materials, that convention might facilitate the adoption by all 
countries of common rules applying to the use, storage and transport of such 
materials. 

30. The latest results of INFCE made it easier to understand how techniques 
developed and how they depended on each other. Those results would enable the 
developing countries to identify, on the one hand, the areas where nuclear 
energy would be most useful to them, and on the other, the problems entailed 
by non-proliferation. The evaluation would soon be concluded, and a conference 
would meet in February 1980 to consider the results. As the Director General 
had suggested, there should be some follow-up to the evaluation, and the Agency 
should be responsible for it . 
31. Austria attached particular importance to the question of nuclear safety. 
The Austrian Government approved of the launching of a supplementary nuclear 
power safety programme, and would participate in it; it also welcomed the 
convening of a conference to examine questions connected with nuclear safety 
in Stockholm in 1980. A serious matter directly related, in his view, to that 
supplementary programme was the question of what might be called the "transfrontier 
aspects" of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
32. At the present time, 227 nuclear power plants were in operation and 219 
power reactors were under construction throughout the world. Since the 
beginnings of nuclear energy the international community had been concerned 
about the impact of its applications on safety. It was with a view to enlarging 
the contribution of nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity, and also 
to ensuring safety, that the Agency had been established, and it was thus 
responsible, inter alia, for establishing and adopting safety standards for 
the protection of health and the minimization of accident risks. The Agency 
had, moreover, developed various instruments and formulated recommendations 

GC(X3ail)/OR.214 
page 10 

which had enabled its Member States to ensure maximum safety in their facilities. 
Austria had always approved of the Agency1 s activities and its efforts to increase 
safety, hut felt that the transfrontier prohlems that might he raised hy nuclear 
power plants required further examination. 

33. The supplementary nuclear power safety programme would certainly allow the 
study of all possible safety measures, hut such measures should not he considered 
simply on the national level, because the consequences of an accident occurring 
in one country might be felt in other, neighbouring countries. It was thus an 
international matter which should be considered in terms of international 
environmental law. According to the Stockholm Declaration, States must ensure 
that activities within their jurisdiction did not cause damage to the environment 
of other States. Many different mechanisms were conceivable for regulating all 
the transfrontier problems that might be raised by nuclear power plants. Those 
mechanisms should be adapted to all possible situations and should take into 
account essential factors such as the distance between a power plant and a 
frontier, without losing sight of the general problem. Countries could 
certainly conclude bilateral agreements directly, but a global treatment of the 
question was also required. The Agency could draw on its vast experience in 
studying the appropriate mechanisms. Austria hoped that a debate would arise, 
that the problems which might be encountered in future years would be identified 
and that solutions would be found. It was necessary to define terras such as 
"transfrontier" and "vicinity to borders". The study should cover aspects of 
geography, geology, hydrology, meteorology, and so on. The best method of 
establishing international collaboration should be sought; reference might be 
made for that purpose to information derived from ecological accidents in the 
past and to the evolution of international law on environmental questions. The 
Agency might prepare the conclusion of international agreements and assist 
countries which had little experience of such matters. Bach country should 
determine how to protect not only its own population, but also that of other 
countries. Austria hoped that consideration would be given both to the 
interests of various countries and to those of the international community, 
GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 11 

which was not possible without the co-operation of all concerned. In conclusion, 
his Government believed that the Agency, which had so far studied questions 
related to safety mainly on the national level, should now turn to the international 
aspects of safety. The Director General might appoint an expert 
group to consider the matter under the supplementary nuclear power safety 
programme. The Agency was clearly the appropriate body to examine that 
problem, although it might also be considered by the General Assembly of the 
United Nations. 

34. He approved of the Director General's efforts to strengthen the role of the 
Agency, especially by improving the dissemination of information on nuclear 
matters, and wished to congralulate him and the Secretariat on the excellent 
work performed in the course of the past year. 
35. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina) said that 1979 had been a good year for 
his country in the nuclear field. The national executive authority had 
approved by decree the construction of four 600-MW power stations and auxiliary 
plants which were due to enter into service between 1987 and 1997. The longterm 
programme involved had made it possible to carry out realistic planning of 
a number of basic elements (participation by local industry, size and date of 
entry into operation of supply facilities). It was, moreover, consistent with 
two main aims of nuclear development in Argentina, namely to provide the country 
with the necessary infrastructure for the construction of its own power 
stations and to enable autonomous use to be made of its uranium resources in 
the national interest. After a call for tenders, followed by careful examination 
of the offers submitted, the National Atomic Energy Commission had been 
instructed to draw up contracts for the building of a heavy-water plant and to 
form an engineering company for the construction of the third nuclear power 
plant, Atucha II. That work should start at the beginning of 1980. Atucha II 
would in fact be the first oower station for which the Agency's safety guides 
and codes and the regulations of the International Commission on Radiological 
Protection (ICRP) would be applied for the purpose of obtaining the requisite 
licences. Moreover, the Atucha I power station had had the highest load factor 
of all reactors over 150 MW in 1979> and work on the Embalse power station, in 
the installation of which Argentina was taking an important part, had progressed 
very considerably. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 12 

36. Prospecting activities had teen continued. Argentina had 37 250 t of 
uranium in reasonably assured reserves and 15 900 t in additional reserves, at 
an estimated cost of up to US $50 per pound. The National Atomic Energy 
Commission had also been instructed to develop a policy which would enable 
a rapid determination to be made of the total reserves of nuclear ores (with outside 
help) and part of the new resources discovered to be exported. Uranium 
production capacity had risen to 220 t of yellow cake per year. From 1983 
onwards, the uranium requirements for Argentina's nuclear programme should be 
completely covered. 
37. Activities related to the production and application of radioisotopes 
had continued to increase by comparison with the previous year (17$ increase 
in production and 45$ rise in the number of users). The high level attained by 
Argentina could be explained by the fact that the National Atomic Energy Commission 
had responsibility for the subject and maintained excellent relations with 
the other organizations involved. The Commission had continued its general 
activities in research and development and training. 
38. The peaceful intentions of Argentina were sufficiently well established to 
make it unnecessary for anyone to try and intervene in its nuclear programme 
under the pretext of preventing proliferation. Those intentions had in any 
case been proved by its active participation in international organizations and 
by the bilateral agreements on co-operation signed with other countries, especially 
in Latin America. Argentina supported, for example, the activities of the Inter-
American Nuclear Energy Commission. As a member of the Co-ordination Group of 
the Non-Aligned Movement, Argentina had offered to host the next meeting. At 
the General Assembly of the United Nations, it had, along with other countries, 
presented a draft resolution requesting the convening of an international 
conference to examine all aspects of co-operation in the nuclear field. 
GC(XKCII)/OR.214 
page 13 

39. Argentina had increased its participation in the activities of the Agency, 
motivated by the fact that the Agency's aims coincided with those of the national 
nuclear programme. At meetings of the Board, the Argentine delegation had, as 
appropriate, spared neither praise nor criticism. It had for example several 
times protested about the constant reduction in the funds at the Agency's 
disposal for providing technical assistance to developing countries caused by 
the restrictive policies of the technically advanced countries. The Argentine 
Government had just decided to forego from 198O the assistance that it had been 
receiving under the Agency's regular programme, since that assistance did not 
meet the real needs of the country. On the other hand, Argentina had in 1979 
greatly increased its own contributions in cash and in the form of fellowships. 
i* hali

In 1979t accepted responsibility for two projects which had been requested 
by Latin American countries and which the Agency had been unable to finance. 

It had also hosted two symposia and had provided more experts than the other 
countries of the region. 

40. Finally, the Argentine Government had decided to make a voluntary 
contribution of J94 500 to the General Fund. As it had already pointed out in 
the Board, the Argentine delegation much regretted the fact that, despite 
its general increase of 9.8$ over 1979, the Regular Budget involved a reduction 
of I.156 in the funds allocated to technical assistance. Although the target for 
voluntary contributions had been raised, the reduction was aggravated by the 
accumulation of contributions paid in non-convertible currencies. 
41. Voluntary contributions should not be tied to the condition that the beneficiary 
countries be parties to some particular treaty: that was a form of discrimination 
contrary to the Statute. It was regrettable that certain Member States had 
adopted that attitude in 1979» without any opposition from the Board. The 
Argentine delegation also deplored the fact that in February 1979 the Board 
had broken with the tradition of the consensus by voting on paragraph A.l(i) 
of the Guiding Principles and General Operating Rules to Govern the Provision 
of Technical Assistance. A criterion foreign to the Statute had been introduced 
thereby , namely accession to a treaty which Argentina considered to be 
discriminatory. 

GC(XXHI)/OR.214 

page 14 

42. Argentina firmly believed in the safeguards system. All its important plants 
were subject to safeguards and it had acceded to various non-proliferation treaties, 
including the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the 
Tlatelolco Treaty). However, the safeguards system was a severe burden on the 
Agency's budget. Efforts should be concentrated on essential activities and all 
waste should be avoided. The Director General should, in addition, draw up a 
draft safeguards agreement consistent with the text of the Tlatelolco Treaty. The 
only draft which had so far been prepared was inappropriate since it was based on 
an NPT-type agreement. Negotiations on the question were continuing between 
Argentina and the Agency. 
43. Argentina was also concerned about the negative effect that could be produced 
by a different system of international control which might be superimposed on the 
safeguards system. It was to be hoped, more specifically, that the Expert 
Group on International Plutonium Storage would not go outside its terms of 
reference. 
44. Finally, certain of the Agency's activities had merited unstinted praise in 
1978 and 1979: they included protection of the environment, agriculture, treatment 
of foodstuffs, the physical and biological sciences, INFCE and the Nuclear Safety 
Standards (BUSS) programme. The Agency was also to be congratulated on the action 
it had taken at the time of the Three Mile Island incident and on its programmes 
related to nuclear waste. Recognition should also be given to the work done by 
the Trieste International Centre for Theoretical Physics. 
45. Mr. COSTA ALONSO (Mexico) said that there was a clear need for his 
country to develop the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Such development 
would of course involve a number of problems; the scientists would have 
to make a careful study of the safety measures to be taken and public opinion 
would have to be correctly informed so that air/ possible risks were seen in the 
proper light and humanity was not deprived of certain options as a result of 
unreasoned fear. For that reason the Agency's activities were of special 
importance. 
46. Mexico held the sixth place in the world in terms of oil reserves and was 
conscious of the responsibilities that involved. At the General Assembly of the 
United Nations, the President, Mr. Lopez Portillo, had stressed the need for a 
GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 15 

world energy plan which would, among other things, rationalize the use of 
primary energy and ensure a smooth transition to the utilization of new sources. 
The rich countries, the largest consumers of energy, should make maximum use of 
the new sources and leave the traditional ones to others. It was also essential 
that all potential reserves, traditional or new, and including of course nuclear 
energy, should be systematically exploited. 

47. For its part, Mexico intended to diversify its sources and to give special 
importance to nuclear energy. The necessary legal framework had already been set 
up with the formation of a number of specialized and co-ordinated organizations. 
Mexico was trying to establish the necessary infrastructure and to train the 
personnel required for the implementation of an overall nuclear development 
programme because it did not want to have recourse to importing complete nuclear 
power stations, leaving only minor installation work for national enterprises 
and largely excluding Mexican technicians from participation. 
48. Apart from the installation of the necessary power stations to satisfy the 
growing demani for electrical energy, Mexico's nuclear programme also included 
the setting up of a national reactor and fuel—cycle industry. Mexico would need 
international co-operation, but such co-operation would have to respect the plans 
and priorities of the country without imposing conditions incompatible with its 
sovereignty. 
49« Mexico had never accepted any form of direct inspection by another country, 
believing that that would constitute an infringement of its sovereignty and 
that all responsibility in the matter of safeguards rested with the Agency. 

50. The peaceful intentions of Mexico could not be doubted. A party to NPT, 
Mexico was also one of the initiators of the Tlatelolco Treaty. The resources 
devoted to armaments, including nuclear weapons, should be used for the benefit 
of humanity and in particular for that of the developing countries. Mexico held 
fast by the principles of the Agency and was concerned to see that certain countries 
were trying to modify their commitments even before carrying them out. The nonnuclear-
weapon States, including Mexico, who had fulfilled their obligations under 
NPT had the right to insist that the nuclear powers carried out in turn all 
the obligations which they had assumed under Article IV of that Treaty. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 16 

51. Mr. EBSAS (Bangladesh) congratulated the President and the eight 
Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and the other 
members of the General Committee on their election, and thanked the Indian 
Government for its hospitality. 
52. Bangladesh had recently signed HPT and had thus reaffirmed its commitment 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Peace could only come through the 
elimination of all weapons, including nuclear weapons. All moves towards limiting 
those armaments were a contribution to peace. The smaller countries were of 
course making their contribution by unilateral acts such as acceding to NPT. 
However, disarmament depended mainly on the great Powers, who should slow down 
the arms race until they eventually ceased producing arms altogether and 
destroyed their stocks. 
53. The Bangladesh delegation highly appreciated the presentation of the 
Agency's budget for 1980. Although the total increase in the budget over the 
1979 figure was 21.6^, the increase in the technical assistance programme was 
only 11.9$ (without allowance for the rise in the cost of services and for 
inflation). Technical assistance was being relegated to second place, behind 
safeguards; the Agency did not have the means to grant all sound requests for 
assistance. The poorest countries were therefore hampered in their development; 

they needed the Agency's assistance to procure spare parts since they could not 
build up stocks owing to lack of funds. The Bangladesh delegation urged therefore 
that the total funds allocated to technical, assistance should be raised 

to the same level as those for safeguards. The Agency should also set up a 
revolving fund of about $10 000 to aid the developing countries in cases of 
emergency and should organize seminars and symposia in those countries. 

54. The Bangladesh delegation had noted from the annual report for 1978 that 
the cost of nuclear energy was going to become more competitive. The main reason 
why the developing countries had difficulties in producing nuclear energy was 
that there were few small and medium size reactors available and the initial 
investment costs were high and constantly increasing. The Agency should encourage 
suppliers to produce such reactors and should try to persuade the various 
international finance organizations to provide special credits for their 
GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 17 

purchase. Bangladesh was negotiating to buy a small reactor and was grateful 
to the Agency for providing assistance in evaluating the offers. It hoped that 
the Agency would continue its support and provide training for the necessary 
personnel. The developing countries which embarked on nuclear energy programmes 
required help in all activities connected with the fuel cycle. The IBPCB 
results would provide them with valuable information. Bangladesh strongly 
supported the idea of setting up regional fuel-cycle centres. 

55. Bangladesh wished to thank the Agency for encouraging regional collaboration, 
particularly in connection with an industrial project on the applications of 
isotopes and radiation under the Regional Co-operation Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA). The 
Agency should establish a regional centre and a regional office to handle such 
projects, and it could count on the support of Bangladesh for that purpose. 
56. Bangladesh was committed to the utilization of atomic energy for its 
national economic development. It had, for example, continued the construction 
of various institutes at the Savar Atomic Research Centre and completed the 
building destined for the Irradiation and Pest Control Research Institute. 
Orders had been placed for a computer at the Centre and for a research reactor 
intended for the Institute of Nuclear Technology. In the field of agricultural 
research, the Institute of Nuclear Agriculture had continued to study the 
problem of plant improvement and had obtained a number of new mutants. 
Bangladesh had also completed studies on zinc deficiency in the soil and the 
means by which it could be overcome. It had received assistance in that programme 
from the Agency and from the Swedish International Development Authority 
(SIDA). Work had been started on the construction of two new centres for the 
medical applications of nuclear energy. Exploration work for uranium and 
other heavy metals along the coast was being carried out with the aid of the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 
57. Bangladesh was grateful for the Agency's help but hoped that the amount 
of technical assistance it received could be increased. It pledged its support 
and was confident that the Agency would successfully carry out its mission. 

GC(XXni)/OR.214 
page 18 

58. Mr. BARABAS (Czechoslovakia) noted that there were a number of 
international political factors which were currently of great importance for the 
Agency's activities; they included in particular the SALT talks, at which the 
Agency had been asked to strengthen its safeguards system. Of equal importance 
was the Soviet initiative towards disarmament and detente taken on the occasion 
of the thirtieth anniversary of the German Democratic Republic. For its part, 
Czechoslovakia had suggested that it would be useful to adopt, preferably under 
the auspices of the United Nations, a document which would impose on States the 
obligation to unite their efforts towards resolving the urgent problems of 
disarmament and would define specific political principles relevant to that end. 
In that context, the draft declaration on international co-operation for achieving 
disarmament which Czechoslovakia had presented at the thirty-fourth session of 
the United Nations General Assembly should contribute to the aims unanimously 
agreed on at the tenth special session of the General Assembly devoted to 
disarmament. 
59. The Czechoslovak delegation fully supported the safeguards activities of the 
Agency and wished to stress the need to increase the efficiency of the existing 
system and to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. 
60. Czechoslovakia continued to give unfailing attention to multilateral 
scientific and technical co-operation. It was trying to satisfy its own energyneeds 
and to forestall the effects of the world crisis on its economy, in 
particular by developing nuclear energy, though without neglecting other 
available resources. 
61. Since the last session of the General Conference, Czechoslovakia had put 
into operation its first WER-44O reactor, and a second unit was in the process of 
being installed. The Soviet-designed equipment would enable the first stage of 
the nuclear energy plan, for which an installed capacity of 5280 MW(e) was 
foreseen, to be achieved by 1988; the second stage was to be completed ir. 1995. 
Czechoslovakia had become a very important partner of the Soviet Union and the 
other CMEA countries in the field of nuclear power station technology and was 
among the ten industrialized countries of the world which manufactured complex 
nuclear equipment. Its rapid progress would not have been possible without the 
assistance of the Soviet Union. Czechoslovakia was planning for an irstalled 
GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 19 

nuclear capacity of 9280 MW(e) in 1990 and 22 000-24 000 MW(e) in the year 2000. 
It believed that nuclear energy offered a satisfactory solution to the problem 
of supplying heat to large cities and was planning to construct nuclear power 
stations for the production of process heat so that oil imports could be reduced, 
Czechoslovakia would not have been in a position to undertake its nuclear energy 
development programmes without the close collaboration of the Soviet Union and 
the other members of CMEA. 

62. Czechoslovakia was working in systematic co-operation with the Agency in 
various fields, including nuclear safety and the use of radionuclides and ionizing 
radiation. In 1980, the Czechoslovak Government would be organizing in 
Czechoslovakia an international course as well as other technical functions 
related to the Agency's work, and would provide five long-term fellowships in higher 
educational establishments, four one-year fellowships and supplementary financial 
support towards three one-year fellowships financed by UHDP. Czechoslovakia's 
contribution to the Agency's technical assistance programme would be increased 
in 1980 to 300 000 crowns. 
63. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary) said that the Hungarian Government would 
continue to give constructive support to all initiatives, proposals and talks 
aimed at ensuring the maintenance of peace and security and at bringing about 
political and military dStente throughout the world, Hungary would support the 
proposals of the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries on disarmament. 
It much welcomed the conclusion of the talks leading to the second Strategic Arms 
Limitation Treaty, ratification of which would greatly improve the international 
situation. Hungary also welcomed the statement made on 6 October 1979 by 
Mr. Leonid Brezhnev that the Soviet Union was ready to make a unilateral reduction 
in the number of troops and the amount of military equipment temporarily situated 
in the German Democratic Republic. Hungary honed that the member countries of 
NATO would respond in a positive manner to Mr. Brezhnev's proposals. In 
conjunction with the Warsaw Pact countries, it had nroposed to NATO that all the 
States involved in the European Security Conference should renounce the first 
use of nuclear and traditional weaoons. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.214 

page 20 

64. Hungary had supported all -the proposals on disarmament made at the 34"th 
session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and was gravely concerned 
to see that there were forces in the world acting against the spirit of nonproliferation. 
It welcomed the fact that the 6th conference of the non-aligned 
countries in Havana had made an important contribution to the maintenance and 
defence of peace throughout the world. It was strongly in favour of the 
irreversible process of political and military detente and urged NATO to give up 
its plans to enlarge its nuclear rocket arsenal in Western Europe. 
65. Hungary had few raw materials and energy resources, and the construction of 
its first nuclear power station was essential for the supply of electricity. 
It was planned that one third of its electricity would come from nuclear sources 
by the end of the century. Research was also being carried out with a view to 
improving methods for the utilization of radioisotopes in industry, agriculture 
and medicine. Ever closer bonds of co-operation were being established, both 
bilateral, as with India for example, and multilateral (especially within CMBA). 
Thus, for example, a high-voltage line had been installed in Hungary to provide 
a connection with the grids of other CMEA countries. Hungary was moreover 
involved in the construction of a nuclear power station for the production of 
electricity in the USSR. A scientific expedition had been arranged to study 
the radioactivity of the Danube, and at the request of the Agency Hungary had 
organized a meeting of experts on the subject. 
66. Hungary continued to support the Agency's activities and believed that 
questions related to the peaceful uses of nuelear energy should be examined by 
a Salzburg-type world conference held under the Agency's auspices. The 
Agency's work in the field of nuclear safety was likewise important, especially 
that concerned with the formulation and publication of standards. Hungary had 
taken an active part in the preparation of the text for the International 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials. It welcomed the 
Agency's efforts in safeguards and its contribution towards the organization of 
the second NPT Review Conference. 
67. With regard to the Department of Safeguards, the Hungarian delegation 
believed that it was essential to increase the efficiency of the inspectors' 
work so that the number of inspectors could be reduced. It was concerned at 
the tendency of some countries to introduce various criteria so that they oould 
refuse to accept the inspectors proposed by the Agency. That practice 
militated against rational and economic use of the inspectors' time. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 21 

68. The Agency's technical assistance programme was of great importance and in 
that connection Hungary was providing four fellowships per year. It benefited 
from the services of Agency experts and in turn was making available a number of 
Hungarian experts. It welcomed the fact that the Agency was making good use of 
its voluntary contribution to the technical assistance fund, in particular for 
the purchase of nuclear equipment destined for medical purposes. In 1980, i t 
would make a voluntary contribution of one million forints. During 1979, 
Hungary had organized two meetings of experts and a course on the use of research 
reactors, 
69. In certain countries, public opinion was coming out against the use of 
nuclear power stations for the production of electricity. The Agency's response 
should be to reinforce its public information work in an effort to right that 
situation, 
70. In spite of certain reservations, Hungary had approved the Agency's budget 
for 1980. It had learned with regret, however, that the Agency had presented 
supplementary estimates for 1979 and 198O, since that meant a significant rise 
in expenditure without any programme increase. The Hungarian delegation wished 
to stress that expenditure should be covered not only by an increase in the 
budget but also by rational economies and a redistribution of the available funds. 
71. Mr. GHEZAL (Tunisia) congratulated the President on his election and 
expressed the gratitude of his delegation to the Indian Government for its warm 
welcome. He paid tribute to the work of the Director General, who had given a. 
clear and objective presentation of international energy problems and the 
activities of the Agency, 
72. If the energy crisis were to continue, as seemed likely, all countries would 
be affected and would have to turn to other sources of energy, including 
renewable sources. Nuclear energy, even if it did not solve all problems, was 
therefore a necessity. The use of nuclear energy had recently been questioned 
as a result of changes in public opinion and the Three Mile Island incident. 
The significance of that incident had, after examination, been reduced to its 
proper proportions. Moreover, the Agency had reacted immediately by adopting a 
supplementary safety programme. It had also proved itself by the effective 
support it had given to DTPCE, whose work was now practically complete, and to 
the conference on the physical protection of nuclear materials. 
73. His delegation had noted with interest that additional States had signed 
NPT, but hoped that the Treaty would not become an obstacle to the spread of 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. The funds allocated to the safeguards 

GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 22 

programme were increasing too rapidly in comparison with those for technical 
assistance. The provision of technical assistance was after all one of the two 
main activities of the Agency, and the Statute accorded it equal importance with 
safeguards. 

74» The Tunisian Government was giving special attention to the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy in the country, especially in the fields of 
agriculture, public health, standards laboratories and oil exploration. The 
Tunisian plan for the development of energy up to the year 2000 involved a growing 
reliance on renewable sources and especially on nuclear energy, which would provide 
solutions to some of the problems peculiar to the developing countries, such as 

encroachment of the desert. 

75. The Agency should give greater assistance to the developing countries in the 
field of training and should arrange for the transfer of the technologies they 
lacked. It could for example set up a long-term training programme on a special 
reactor for the benefit of scientists and technicians from the developing 
countries. 
76. With regard to the proposed amendment of Article VI.A.2, the Tunisian 
delegation believed that the change conformed to the spirit of the Statute, which 
laid down the principle of equitable representation for the various regions. 
Moreover, the countries from Africa and the Middle East and South Asia, and 
indeed the developing countries as a whole, had too few nationals employed by 
the Agency and were being unfairly treated. It was time that the Agency 
remedied that situation. 
77 • Mr. NICDKBSCU (Romania) thanked the Indian Government for offering to 
host the twenty-third regular session of the General Conference. He requested 
the Vice-President to congratulate Mr. Sethna on his election. 

78. He was certain that all participants would try to find ways to ensure the 
unhindered transfer of the nuclear technologies, materials and equipment necessary 
for all countries, and particularly the developing countries, to profit from the 
most advanced applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. He 
recalled the proposal made by his Government concerning the setting-up of 
definite programmes of co-operation. The attempt to establish monopolies under 
the pretext of preventing proliferation was unacceptable. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.214 
page 23 

79. The President of Romania, Mr. Nicolae Ceaucescu, attached great importance to 
international peace, security and co-operation and accordingly also to the 
organizations of the United Nations family. He had stated in his report to the 
Xllth Congress of the Romanian Communist Party that the new international economic 
order should be based on the principles of equality and justice so that the least 
developed countries could have access to scientific and technical progress to 
facilitate their economic development, and so that conditions could thus be 
created for the equitable evolution of all regions in the world. 
80. The Romanian Government believed that in 1978 the Agency had successfully 
discharged its obligations towards Member States, especially through the 
provision of technical assistance and through its programmes in nuclear power 
and reactors, nuclear safety, plasma physics and controlled nuclear fusion, the 
applications of isotopes and radiations and training. Even so, the Agency ought 
to increase its technical assistance to the developing countries. It should in 
fact establish a reasonable balance between the technical assistance and safeguards 
activities, since the latter derived solely from the desire to develop the 
applications of nuclear energy for purely peaceful purposes. Romania would 
therefore be making a voluntary contribution to the technical assistance fund in 
proportion to its rate of assessment. It would also make available six training 
fellowships of 10 months each. 
81. Nuclear power was essential in Romania for progress in technology and the 
development of energy-based schemes. It was planned to install 660 MW of nuclear 
power by 1985 and 10 000 MW by the year 2000. In carrying out its nuclear power 
programme, Romania would endeavour to co-operate as broadly as possible with the 
competent international organizations in an attempt to solve the energy problems 
of mankind. 
82. Romania attached great importance to its collaboration with the Agency and 
hoped that the links which it and other countries had with the Agency would be 
strengthened. It supported the initiatives taken to ensure more equitable 
representation of the developing countries on the various bodies in the Agency. 
83. During 1979 Romania had been closely involved in the Agency's programmes. 
The Agency, for its part, had provided considerable technical assistance for 
Romania's nuclear power programme (supported by UHDP), for its heavy-ion physics 
programme, and for the training of a number of Romanian experts. The Agency 
could be assured of Romania's continued support. 
The meeting rose at 7.15 P»m. 



GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
August 1980* 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi 
on Friday, 7 December 1979, at 10.50 a.m. 


President; Mr. SETHNA (India) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda** 
5 Arrangements for the Conference 
(b) Closing date of the session and 
opening date of the next session 
General debate and annual report 
for 1978 (resumed) 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Saudi Arabia 
Egypt 
Netherlands 
Malaysia 
India 
Greece 
Sweden 
Viet Nam 
Israel 
Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea 

Paragraphs 


1 -5 


l -5 


6 - 127 


6 -13 
14-28 
29 -47 
48-62 
63 -73 
74-81 
82 -98 
99-104 


105 -116 


117 - 127 


*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 17 January 1980, 
**/ GC(XXIII)/620. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 


80-2839 



GBO(XXIII)/OR.215 

page 2 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR TEE CONFERENCE 

(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
1. The PRESIDENT recalled -that, under Rule 8 of the Rules of Procedure, 
the Conference had to fix a closing date for the session, on the recommendation 
of the General Committee. 
2. The General Committee had considered the matter and had authorized him to 
recommend on it s behalf that 10 December 1979 be fixed as the closing date. 
3. The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted. 
4. The PRESIDENT further informed the Conference that the General 
Committee had recommended fixing Monday, 22 September 1980, as the opening date 
of the twenty-fourth regular session, which would be held in Vienna as usual. 
5. The recommendation of the General Committee was accepted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1978 (GC(XXIII)/6lO) (resumed) 

6. Mr. AL-KABBANI (Saudi Arabia) said that the Agency could not hope to 
live and grow in a political ivory tower. The General Assembly of the United 
Nations had recently decided, without even mentioning the IAEA, to inquire into 
reports that South Africa had conducted an atomic explosion, which was an act of 
proliferation whether or not the country carrying out the explosion was a party 
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). That might 
suit certain countries, but it was definitely not in the best interest of an 
agency entrusted with the implementation of NPT. In technical matters related 
to atomic energy, the Agency should be the sole organ on which the United Nations 
should rely. 
7. The annual report for 1978 briefly described the situation faced by nuclear 
power. The decline in orders for power reactors was attributed to "public 
misgivings about the safety of nuclear power plants" and "proliferation". Such 
misgivings and fears were on the increase, although authorities and utilities 
were finding ways and means of making nuclear power safer and the Agency was 
expanding and intensifying its safety programme and activities. Nuclear power 
was also suffering from the mingling of political and technical matters and from 
tampering with the facts. The loud cries in the street, rather than sober 
scientific work, seemed to be gaining ground in assessments of the safety of 
nuclear power and thus in determining its future. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 3 

8. The public wished to be kept informed. If the Agency did not give it the 
truth, others would continue to mislead the public with appealing slogans. 
Neither the Agency nor nuclear commissions could accomplish much in scientific 
isolation surrounded by a hostile climate. The harm done to nuclear power 
at present would be felt ten or twenty years later - exactly as in the case 
of oil - although there the harm had derived not from inadequate public relations, 
but from excessive wastefulness. 
9. It might seem absurd that the delegate of the largest oil-exporting 
country was taking so strong a line in favour of nuclear power, but the depletion 
of oil in the near future was not merely theoretical speculation, it was a 
scientific fact. While Saudi Arabia was doing its utmost to help industrial 
countries meet their oil requirements, it was the duty and obligation of those 
countries to conserve oil and to develop and exploit every other available 
source of energy. Saudi Arabia was more than keen on participating in any 
serious attempt to develop alternative energy sources. Large sums of money had 
been invested in a"*"* ventures with other countries to utilize solar energy, 
and Saudi Arabia took great interest in all other methods of energy production, 
including nuclear energy. 
10. A closely related matter was that Saudi Arabia was seeking help in 
ascertaining whether the Red Sea was being polluted by radioactive wastes being 
dumped into it . The Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (iMCO) 
and the Agency should attend to that important problem. 
11. Saudi Arabia spent millions of dollars on desalination and imported water 
at a cost that was sometimes higher than that of imported oil in the industrialized 
countries. Like many other countries in arid or semi-arid regions, 
Saudi Arabia therefore eagerly and expectantly observed work on nuclear 
desalination. It had been suggested that Saudi Arabia would have enough water 
to make deserts bloom and that a dual-purpose project consisting in generating 
electricity and using the heat to desalinate sea-water would be economically 
competitive. However, the annual report completely avoided mention even of the 
word "desalination". It was impossible to overestimate the importance of using 
nuclear energy for both desalination and power generation; in countries such as 
Saudi Arabia, that was a matter of dire necessity. Once nuclear safety reached 
a level where unnecessary fears of such uses would be dispelled, progress in 
that direction could be accelerated. The IAEA should guide the world community 

aC(XXIII)/OR.215 

page 4 

• and scientific direction to a point where safety and radioactive b y careful

waste management were advanced enough for the world to use nuclear energy 

with complete confidence in the results. 

12. The Saudi Arabian delegation's views concerning the transfer of nuclear 
equipment or fissionable material or technology to Israel or South Africa and 
concerning the important issue of representation on the Board of Governors of 
the two areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia were well known. 
The General Assembly had in 1978 invited the Agency to give "thorough, prompt and 
fair consideration" to the question of representation on the Board of Governors. 
13- Saudi Arabia had continuously supported the Agency and admired its quiet 

and constructive work. In recognition of that, and because of the importance 

of the Agency's achievements, Saudi Arabia had contributed US $100 000 to the 

International Huclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (HTFCE) in 1978. In 1979, Saudi 

Arabia had allocated more than one third of the total voluntary cash contri


butions received by the Agency for financing the supplementary nuclear power 

safety programme. 

14» Mr. OSMAS (Egypt) said that he welcomed the convening of the Agency's 
General Conference in India, whose people had maintained their rioh and 
impressive cultural heritage, while moving forward on the path of modernization, 

15. The Agency's Regular Budget for 1980 had shown an unprecedented increase 
over the figures for the preceding years. During the Board meetings in 
June 1979i bis country, together with the Group of 77, had taken a common stand 
on that question, after a thorough study of the difficulties involved, which 
were mainly due to unstable exchange rates, inflation and other unforeseeable 
increases in expenditure. 
16. It was regrettable that a request was being made for new appropriations of 
nearly four million dollars, and he shared the concern expressed by other 
delegations about such substantial increases in expenditure each year. It was 
therefore gratifying to note that the Director General, in his opening address, 
had stressed the Agency's responsibility for continuing a policy of strict 
economy and financial stringency. At the same time, however, any reductions 
in funding should not relate to actual operational programmes and promotional 
activities of benefit to the developing countries. 
17. His delegation attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance programme, hence it deplored the fact that technical assistance and 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 5 

other promotional activities had not kept pace with its regulatory and control 

activities. Leaving aside currency fluctuations and inflation, the technical 

assistance programme hardly showed any growth at all in real terms. There was 
a growing awareness, in the developing countries in general, and in the African 

countries in particular, of the many benefits that the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy could bring, hence the part of the Director General's statement concerned 
with the Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA) for Asia was of special 

interest. Africa also needed the Agency's assistance in co-ordinating research 
programmes in agriculture and medicine, hence a regional co-operation agreement 
along the same lines as the RCA for Asia would be of great benefit to the 
African continent. Under it the Agency would be able to help in organizing 
regional training seminars in fields such as irrigation, water conservation, 
soil conservation and similar topics. Egypt would be willing to make available 
its experience and facilities, including the Regional Centre for the Arab Countries 
and the newly opened National Radiation Technology Centre, for such a programme. 

18. Serious consideration should be given to the proposal to finance technical 
assistance from the Regular Budget. In the meantime it was hoped that the 
figure of $10.5 million for the target for voluntary contributions to the 
General Fund in 1980 would be reached. 
19. There was no doubt that the Agency's safeguards programme remained the 
focus of the non-proliferation efforts of all countries, and all Member States 
were urged to continue their support and co-operation in order to ensure its 
success. With such support existing efforts to promote the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy could make headway. But at the same time the need for restraint 
in increasing the fast-growing safeguards expenditure should be kept in mind. 
20. His delegation wished to reiterate its support for the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and the establishment of nuclear-free zones. In that connection, 
the General Assembly of the United Nations had recently adopted the resolution 
submitted by Egypt for the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle 
East. He also supported the complete denuclearization of the whole area of 
Africa. It was the duty of all countries located in those two areas to comply 
strictly with the provisions of the relevant General Assembly resolutions and to 
refrain from developing military nuclear capabilities. Furthermore, there was 
an urgent need for the rapid conclusion of a treaty for a complete ban on nuclear 
weapon tests. 


GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 6 


21. Over the past two years Egypt had taken part in the Agency meetings held in 
Vienna with the aim of drafting a convention on the physical protection of nuclear 
material in international transport. The meetings had reached a successful conclusion 
and a final act had been signed in October 1979« The entry into force of 
the convention would relieve the international community of a big burden and 
provide the world with added protection by which to prevent theft and ensure the 
safe transfer of nuclear material. 
22. Over the past two years Egypt had also participated actively in the work of 
IBFCE aimed at strengthening the non-proliferation regime in conjunction with 
the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The work done showed that 
the evaluation study had resulted in a large number of ideas for technical or 
institutional improvements. The INFCE plenary conference to be held in 
February 198O would provide a concrete basis for the future utilization of 
nuclear energy and for mutual understanding and co-operation between consumer and 
supplier countries. In that connection the Director General's suggestion for a 
Committee of the Whole to ensure supplies of nuclear fuel and equipment under 
adequate safeguards was to be commended. 
23. The question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Agency's Statute 
had been under discussion since February 1977. His delegation's views on the 
injustice of the continued under-representationf on the Board, of the areas of 
Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia in the present formulation of 
Article VI.A.2 had been made known during the debate on that important matter at 
the 1978 General Conference and in the Board of Governors. It was hoped that the 
present General Conference would arrive at a consensus by which to restore the 
balance in representation on the Board. 
24. One of the Agency's most significant activities in recent years had been 
the expansion of its role in the areas of nuclear power, nuclear safety and 
environmental protection. In that respect, and also in its efforts to promote 
the application of nuclear techniques in environmental and safety research, the 
Agency deserved praise and encouragement. 
25. At an international conference held in Hamburg in May 1979 - despite the 
fact that it took place only shortly after the accident at Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania - nuclear power was still declared to be the only visible energy 
alternative to the limited and rapidly depleting fossil fuel resources, 
particularly oil. Nevertheless, for several years nuclear energy had been the 
GC(XXIII)/0R,215 
page 7 


subject of an extensive controversy, involving a wide range of questions and 
complex issues, which had caused a great deal of concern over the future of 
nuclear power. 


26. His delegation shared that concern, which had been provoked by a series of 
recent events involving the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the risk of 
nuclear war by accident and the safety of nuclear plants. Those three important 
aspects of nuclear energy confronted Member States of the Agency in general, 
and the nuclear powers in particular, with great responsibilities. 
27. It was up to the Agency to play an important and effective role in that 
regard, hence it was encouraging to note the contribution made by the Agency to 
the work of INFCE, its efforts towards non-proliferation through its safeguards 
programme, and its efforts for the consolidation and expansion of its nuclear 
safety programme. It was also good news that there would be an international 
conference on safety in Stockholm in October 1980. 
28. But further efforts and political initiative were needed if the fears of 
the public were to be really dispelled, for example, complete nuclear disarmament 
and greater safety measures for the protection of man and his environment. 
29. Mr. de BOER (Netherlands), after emphasizing his delegation's 
appreciation of the exceptional and heartwarming hospitality extended by the 
Indian Government and expressing the hope that the splendid ambience of 
New Delhi might contribute to the success of the Conference, said it was 
commonly known that the world would be facing serious problems in the field 
of energy if important and far-reaching decisions were not taken in time. 
Nuclear energy was regarded by most Governments as an important contribution 
to the solution of energy problems, though the development of nuclear energy 
was confronted with increasing difficulties. That had resulted in serious 
delays in the installation of nuclear capacity in comparison with the original 
plans. Although the fears and doubts that had certainly been one of the 
causes of those delays were perhaps not always justified, they nevertheless 
could not simply be neglected. His Government believed that public opinion 
had to be taken seriously and the public had to be informed about all the 
relevant aspects of nuclear energy. What was more important, solutions had 
to be found for any real problems. 

ac(xxm)/oR.2i5 


page 8 


30. He welcomed in that respect the initiatives announced by the Director 
General in the field of safety, and his Government would support those 
activities. The Netherlands would of course also participate in the international 
conference on nuclear safety to he convened on Swedish initiative. 
31. As regards environmental problems, the management and storage of radioactive 
wastes was the most crucial. According to a comprehensive Netherlands Government 
study on storage of radioactive wastes recently published, there were satisfactory 
solutions available for that problem. 
32. Owing to the tone of anxiety accompanying the broad discussions on atomic 
energy matters going on in the Motherlands, his Government intended to organize 
a wide-ranging public debate on the use of nuclear energy in the country. 
That nationwide debate was scheduled to last for about two years, after which 
final decisions would be taken on the utilization of nuclear energy for the 
generation of electricity. 


33. There was no need for him to express again his Government's conviction 
that the further spread of nuclear weapons was a danger to the existence of 
mankind. If the number of States possessing nuclear weapons or other nuclear 
explosive devices were to increase, the whole effort to halt the nuclear arms 
race and to bring about nuclear disarmament would be jeopardized. 
34. BPT remained, in his view, the most efficient political tool with which to 
prevent the further spread of nuclear weapons. The Netherlands Government 
wished to express its gratification that Bangladesh, Indonesia and Sri Lanka, 
together with the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and Tuvalu had acceded to 
MPT during 1979. 
35« Closely linked to the existing non-proliferation effort was the application 
of safeguards by the Agency. The application of full-scope safeguards in 
all countries would greatly strengthen confidence that peaceful nuclear energy 
was not being misused. The IAEA must therefore be given full support in 
fulfilling its tasks in that field. He also noted with satisfaction that a 
convention had been concluded on the physical protection of nuclear material. 
Although his delegation had hoped for a convention wider in Bcope, it considered 
it an important step towards more secure management of nuclear materials. 


36. Under what conditions could the application of nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes be fostered without creating unacceptable proliferation risks? It was 
that question which had created tensions between supplier and recipient countries 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 9 


and between industrial and developing States. Such tensions could hamper international 
co-operation and could in the long run be counterproductive as regards 
non-proliferation policies. It was necessary to develop new multilaterally 
acceptable and universally applicable international rules for co-operation in 
nuclear matters. 


37. In his Government's opinion, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation 
(INFCE) was a first step towards a new consensus in that field. Such a complex 
exercise as INFCE constituted a great accomplishment, achieved with IAEA 
assistance, and his Government would carefully study the final report. 
38. It had become clear during the work of INFCE that technical measures alone 
could not solve the basic questions at issue, and by now it was generally 
accepted that measures of a more political nature were needed if nuclear energy was 
to be used for peaceful purposes without increasing the proliferation danger. 
39. The Director General had suggested the establishment of a committee which 
would, in particular, study ways and means of ensuring the supply of nuclear 
materials under appropriate non-proliferation conditions. His Government 
supported this proposal in principle, and believed that the useful work done 
by INFCE Working Group 3 in that direction should be followed up. 
40. An IAEA expert group on international plutonium storage had started work 
about a year previously and his Government was already impressed by the positive 
results it was achieving. An effective international plutonium storage regime 
would considerably reinforce the present safeguards system and could pave the way 
for better relations in international nuclear trade. The Netherlands would 
co-operate to the full in the group's activities with a view to bringing about a 
satisfactory and timely conclusion to its work. 
41. An expert group on management of spent fuel was exploring procedures for 
international co-operation in that field, in particular for the benefit of 
smaller countries. Such co-operation could be useful in evolving alternative ways 
of organizing the back end of the fuel cycle. In coming years the development of 
a generally accepted set of conditions for the export of nuclear materials and 
equipment had also to be pursued. Such generally accepted conditons would, 
inter alia, make nuclear trade more predictable and thereby remove possible fears 
that nuclear requirements were not going to be met. 
42. As would be clear from what he had just said, various measures needed to be 
worked out in order to arrive at a new consensus and the issues involved called 
for treatment in various fora and according to differing time-tables. His Government 

GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 10 


therefore had had some doubts as regards fixing the date for an international 
conference for the promotion of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, as proposed by Yugoslavia. Such a conference could certainly play 
a positive role in the development of a new international nuclear consensus, but 


it seemed too early to decide when it could best be convened. In the meantime, 
agreement in principle had been reached during the current session of the General 
Assembly of the United Nations to convene the conference by 1983; in the view of 
his Government, the IAEA should play an active and central role in preparing the 
conference, and the Netherlands would do everything possible towards making it a 


success. 


43. His delegation considered that the Agency's technical assistance programme 
was doing well, the total resources allocated to the programme having increased by 
nearly one third since 1977* He realized that, for the countries which needed the 
assistance most, progress might not be fast enough, but the figures were 
undoubtedly promising. There had also been a welcome increase in UNDP-financed 
assistance. The Netherlands, as the second largest contributor to UNDP, was happy 
to note the Agency's efforts to co-ordinate its activities with those of UNDP so 
as to render its assistance even more effective. 
44. Among the principal forms of development assistance was the application of 
isotopes and radiation in agriculture. Progress in agriculture in a developing 
country often constituted the basis for its economic and social upswing. One 
important aspect of agricultural development was the prevention of food losses as 
a consequence of spoilage. In the Netherlands a Pood Irradiation Programme had 
started within the framework of the International Facility for Pood Irradiation 
Technology (IPPIT). The Pood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(PAO) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) were 
also co-operating in the field of food irradiation and the outcome of all that 
work could be a substantial reduction in losses of food. It was therefore with 
some regret that he had noted a decline in the ratio which such activities bore 
to the overall programme of the Agency, primarily in favour of general atomic 
energy development and nuclear physics. He trusted that the next annual report 
would again show a rising trend in the field of application of isotopes and 
radiation in agriculture. 
45. Although the budget for 1980 already represented a very large sum, further 
funds would now have to be provided because of the fall in the dollar exchange 
rate since June. He realized that the budgetary increase was to a large 
extent due to factors beyond the Director General's control. At the same time, 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 11 


a net programme increase of 2.9$ was relatively high, and the proposals for 
1981 showed an even higher percentage. His delegation therefore wished to 
stress the need for efficient redeployment, wherever possible, of resources 
within the Agency's budgets during the next years. 


46. Although, in the budget for 1980, the Netherlands would have preferred that 
a smaller proportion should be represented by the costs of general services, his 
Government was nonetheless prepared to accept the document as proposed. 
47. The year 1979, with its ups and downs in the use of nuclear energy, 
certainly had not been an easy one, but he had every confidence in the IAEA 
as the appropriate organization to tackle those complex matters. He wished 
the Agency every success in the continuation of its vital task. 
48. Mr. KHOR (Malaysia) wished on behalf of his delegation to convey to 
the Government of India its appreciation for the excellent facilities and the 
other assistance provided to ensure the success of the Conference. The meeting 
had had the inspiring experience of hearing the inaugural address of the 
Prime Minister of India. His statement would no doubt guide the Conference in 
its deliberations. 
49. It was the hope of his delegation that the few days of its stay in India 
would furnish a new insight into the problems facing the world in its handling 
of the atom, and in particular would show how the power of the atom could be 
used to meet the increasing needs of mankind. 
50. The two main pillars of the work of the IAEA were, as everyone knew, safeguards 
and technical assistance to developing countries. 
51. With regard to safeguards it was satisfactory to learn that, in 1978 as 
in previous years, the Secretariat had not detected any diversion of significant 
amounts of safeguarded nuclear materials to military purposes. Five additional 
countries had acceded to NPT, making the present total 111. As a party to NPT 
Malaysia naturally welcomed that development and believed that NPT and IAEA 
safeguards together formed the best possible basis for preventing further 
horizontal proliferation. He also wished to congratulate the Secretariat on 
the additional progress made in the implementation of safeguards on nuclear 
facilities in the non-nuclear-weapon States of the European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM) and in certain other countries. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 12 

52; The report of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INPCE) 
had reaffirmed the importance of IAEA safeguards, and had suggested that other 
measures such as regional fuel cycle centres and the international storage of 
Plutonium were needed to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. 

53. Regarding that other pillar of the Agency's work, namely the provision of 
technical assistance to developing countries, the 1978 annual report stated 
that 64 projects involving the application of isotopes and radiation in 
agriculture and animal husbandry were now going on in some 41 countries. 
Malaysia had been a recipient of assistance in recent years and was 
appropriately grateful to the Agency. 
54» Malaysia, in its efforts to improve its people's quality of life through 
science and technology transfer, had just embarked on a nuclear programme on a 
modest scale. Priorities in research were accorded to agriculture, medicine 
and industrial applications. As a newcomer in the field of nuclear research 
and its applications, Malaysia sought the co-operation of developed countries 
in providing research and training facilities for its personnel. 

55» The Agency's Department of Research and Isotopes had been doing good 
work in promoting the use in the developing countries of Asia and the Pacific 
region of nuclear techniques in tropical medicine, the investigation of water 
resources and certain branches of industry. The Regional Co-operative 
Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science 

(RCA) had benefited greatly from the assistance rendered by that Department of 
the Agency. Malaysia, as a member of RCA, was committed to supporting the 
various projects undertaken by that regional association and believed that the 
benefits accruing from some of those projects would also extend to countries 
outside the region. He wished to take the opportunity of expressing his 
appreciation for the contribution that Australia and Japan were now making to 
RCA. 

56. How, then, should one take stock of and appraise the progress made 
during the last year in activities associated with those two pillars of the 
Agency's being to which he had been referring? 
57. Malaysia believed that there should be universal adherence to KPT and 
that the Agency's safeguards system should be perfected if the world was to be 
protected from the threat of a nuclear holocaust. But one could not look at 
safeguards under MPT from the horizontal standpoint alone, although the emphasis 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 13 

within the Agency in recent years had tended exclusively in that direction. 
It was a recognized fact that the nuclear arsenals already in the hands of 
sons nuclear-weapon States were sufficient to destroy the world, and hence, 
while it was correct to speak of the need to apply safeguards to the nuclear 
activities of non-NFT countries, there should be - but unfortunately there was 
not - the same emphasis and attention being devoted by the IAEA to nuclear 
disarmament. An unjust lack of balance was therefore present, and in those 
circumstances it was hardly surprising that some States remained unconvinced 
of the benefits of MPT and that discussions on the subject of safeguards in 
the Board at times had a highly emotional overtone. 

58. The Agency's Statute established a link between the two main pillars, 
namely promotional and regulatory functions. In fact, Article II of the 
Statute stated that the second was consequent on the first. But what did 
one find in practice? Safeguards and related activities had monopolized the 
time and energy of the Secretariat and the Board. One aspect of the Agency's 
promotional role, namely the provision of technical assistance, had been given 
second place and was funded literally from charity, while funds for safeguards 
went up by leaps and bounds and came from the Regular Budget. Could the Agency 
for long afford that dichotomy, that discrepancy, without its credibility and 
viability being seriously threatened? 
59» The Agency's technical assistance programme continued to be seriously 
affected by lack of funds and the assignment of insufficient human resources. 
The few staff members in the Division of Technical Assistance were too preoccupied 
with the day-to-day work of looking for experts, the delivery of 
equipment, the placement of fellows and meeting new requests from developing 
countries to have enough time for any serious evaluation of the overall situation. 
In fact, considering the restrictions and handicaps under which they were 
working, one was really amazed at the patience and dedication with which they 
continued their efforts. 

60. The Director General in his report to the United Nations General Assembly 
in November and again in his report to the Agency's General Conference had 
drawn a very stark picture of the world energy situation, and had underlined 
the role that nuclear power could play in mitigating the energy crisis. He 
had mentioned the paralysis which had affected the energy programmes of some 
leading industrial countries. He had also presented a convincing scenario 
describing what would follow from competing demands on the fast disappearing 

0C(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 14 

oil resources and the current lack of decision on nuclear power as a replacement 
for oil. However, Malaysia was glad to note that such paralysis and indecision 
had not prevented the Secretariat from providing assistance to the nuclear 
power programmes of the developing Member States of the IAEA. His delegation 
also welcomed the additional steps that the Director General had taken in 
respect of the Agency1s safety programme following the Three Mile Island nuclear 
plant incident. 

61. Decisions had recently been made in other fora which had a direct bearing 
on the statutory functions of the Agency. The United Nations General Assembly 
had just adopted a resolution calling for the convening of an international 
conference to promote co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, with 
the IAEA playing an appropriate role. The United Nations Conference on 
Science and Technology for Development, recently held in Vienna, had produced 
a set of proposals for the role of science and technology in the social and 
economic programmes of developing countries. Those developments gave scope 
for positive action on the part of the Agency. 
62. It was the hope of his delegation that the discussions at the twenty-third 
regular session of the General Conference would bring out in all present a 
stronger belief in the potential of the atom both as a source of power and 
as a tool for promoting better agricultural methods, health, prosperity and 
peace in the world at large. But time was not on the side of those who only 
waited. The next step should be an agenda for action. 
63. Mr. SINGH (India) said that India had played an active role in the 
IAEA since its inception and remained committed to the principles embodied in 
the Statute for accelerating the contribution of atomic energy to peace and 
prosperity throughout the world. Ever since the beginnings of its atomic 
energy programme over thirty years ago, India had remained steadfast in its 
resolve to utilize atomic energy solely for peaceful purposes. 
64. The present Conference was being held at a time when the future of nuclear 
power in the world was under close scrutiny. Nuclear power plants had a safety 
record unparalleled by any other industry and measures should be taken to 
create informed public opinion for a wider appreciation of that fact. In view 
of the rapidly declining reserves of fossil fuels nuclear energy offered the 
only viable alternative source of energy in the coming decades. India considered 
that the Agency had a vital role to play in bringing about greater public 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 

page 15 

awareness of the benefits of nuclear power and, at the same time, disseminating 
information on research and development work in fields such as waste disposal, 
radiological protection and nuclear power plant safety in a manner which would 
allay unfounded fears and misgivings in the minds of the general public. 

65. His delegation was pleased to note the new sense of urgency and purpose 
in the Agency's activities in the field of nuclear safety, as exemplified by 
the statement made by the Director General. India supported that important 
field of the Agency's activity and, as its contribution to that exercise, would 
make available to the Agency the services of its experts as and when required. 
With regard to the financing of the 1980 nuclear safety programme, his delegation 
felt that the Secretariat should make further efforts to locate the necessary 
funds from within the budgetary allocation of five million dollars. It also 
believed that there was scope for more funds to be diverted to that important 
work of the Agency by making reductions in non-promotional programmes and 
reallocations within other sub-headings. 
66. Noting the increase in the proposed budget for 1980, as recommended by 
the Board of Governors, the Indian delegation again urged the need for greater 
economy. It viewed with serious concern the fact that safeguards activities 
continued to account for a disproportionate share of the Agency's resources 
and that the imbalance in the Agency's budget between promotional and regulatory 
programmes was becoming more pronounced with each passing year. He was 
referring in particular to the 2.3$ programme growth under safeguards which 
had been partially offset by a 1.2$ reduction for all other programmes, 
including promotional activities. It could not be ignored that the highest 
growth in the 1980 budget over the 1979 adjusted budget was under the headings 
of safeguards and administration. 
67. The Agency seemed to be steering itself into a position where its overwhelming 
concern and the major thrust of its activities was to achieve limited 
non-proliferation objectives at the risk of hampering peaceful nuclear activities. 
68. In India's view, the offers of some nuclear-weapon States to place certain 
civilian nuclear facilities of their choice under Agency safeguards for durations 
to be determined by them were limited and largely cosmetic gestures which 
failed completely to mitigate the inherent discrimination in the NPT safeguards 
regime. There was a danger that the Agency would miss the wood for the trees 
if it continued to engage in such limited safeguards activities, which 

ac(xxin)/OR.2i5 
page 16 

served no realistic purpose. The existing threat posed by the vast stockpiles 
of nuclear weapons represented a far greater risk to the survival of mankind 
than the consequences of horizontal proliferation. The real threat posed by 
the growing number and, increased sophistication of nuclear weapons should not 
be viewed in the light of geostrategical or geopolitical perspectives of a 
few centres of power, since it was the future of the whole of mankind that was 
at stake. India also felt that more attention should be devoted to the 
immediate and overwhelming need for energy supplies, particularly in developing 
countries, where energy requirements determined not only the quality of life 
but the survival of millions. 

69. India had noticed a disturbing trend towards the discriminatory acceptance 
of the Agency's safeguards inspectors by various States. His delegation 
regretted to note that certain States had been rejecting inspectors on 
totally unsupportable grounds. That would only result in States whose 
nationals had been rejected taking reciprocal action, thus creating a vicious 
cycle which would not only strain bilateral relations between Member States 
but also pose severe administrative problems for the Agency and possibly 
result in additional expenditure, owing to the need to maintain a larger 
number of inspectors. 
70. The Indian delegation also regretted that the newly adopted Guiding 
Principles and General Operating Rules to Govern the Provision of Technical 
Assistance by the Agency included principles which, in its view, were discriminatory 
and not in conformity with the Statute. The revised guidelines 
also attached conditions to the provision of technical assistance through 
formulations derived from a discriminatory treaty and simultaneously imposed 
progressive restrictions on peaceful activities. In those circumstances, 
India had declared that it was no longer interested in receiving technical 
assistance from the Agency since, as a matter of principle, it would not be able 
to give its consent to any undertaking that was not in conformity with the 
Statute. However, in consideration of the importance that it attached to the 
promotional activities of the Agency and in deference to the views of other 
Member States, India would continue to provide technical assistance to developing 
countries. It had made a modest contribution over the years to the technical 
assistance programme by providing fellowships and services of experts besides 
facilities for scientific visits. He was happy to announce that India would be 
making a voluntary contribution to the General Fund of US 876 650, its assessed 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 17 

share of the target. It was to be hoped that the target of tlO.5 million would 
be fully realized and also that the Agency would be able to reduce the unobligated 
balance in the volume of technical assistance over the coming year. 

71. The question of the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute again 
figured on the agenda. He wished to reiterate his delegation's support for the 
principle of more equitable geographical representation on the Board of Governors 
and express the hope that a workable formula acceptable to all would emerge from 
the Conference's deliberations. 
72. The question of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
South Asia had been referred to the previous day by one of the speakers in the 
general debate. The general question of the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free 
zones in various regions of the world had been the subject of a comprehensive 
study undertaken by a United Nations group of experts. The most important and 
basic principle enunciated in that study had been that the initiative for the 
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone should come from the States within the 
region concerned and that participation should be voluntary. That principle 
had been reiterated in the Final Document adopted by consensus by the special 
session of the United JTations General Assembly devoted to disarmament in 1978, 
where it was clearly stated that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones 
should be on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at by the States of the 
region concerned. His Government attached great importance to that principle 
because it believed that for such a zorm to be viable it should come into being 
as a result of initiatives taken jointly by the States concerned and should not 
be imposed on them. Reference had also been made to the question of safeguards 
in the context of proliferation. If international verification through safeguards 
was to be meaningful, it could not be confined to selected groups of 
nations or to particular geographical areas. It had to apply universally to 
all nations and to all parts of the world. He also wished to take the opportunity 
of recalling the Prime Minister's reference to India's nuclear programme in the 
course of his inaugural address when he had stated "we have never deflected from 
our commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy". 
73. In conclusion, his delegation wished to express its sincere appreciation of 
the dynamic and efficient manner in which the Director General had conducted the 
Agency's affairs during the past year. 

GC(XXIII)/0H.215 
page 18 

74. Mr. DOKAS (Greece) expressed the appreciation of the Greek delegation 
for the efforts of the Director General and his staff to realize the objectives 
of the Agency. 
75« Although Greece had little first-hand experience in the field of reactor 
safety, it realized that nuclear power production would have a crucial role in 
meeting the energy needs of the country towards the end of the century and therefore 
supported the decision to expand the nuclear safety activities of the Agency 

76. The preparation of detailed safety codes and guides 'by the Agency and the 
technical assistance for their application was of special value for countries 
like Greece. 
77. Also, the assurance of nuclear fuel supply and disposal of the radioactive 
wastes resulting from the operation of nuclear plants was of great importance for 
Greece and it trusted that the technical and analytical studies of the IKPCE 
working groups would lead to a practical result with a positive contribution 
towards the development of nuclear power programmes, while at the same time 
minimizing the risk of proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
78. The world, and particularly the developing countries, had to meet the 
challenge of the growing demand for energy. In the coming few decades nuclear 
power would he the only competitive alternative for energy requirements. Greece 
recognized that non-proliferation and reactor safety were two very serious 
problems and obstacles to the development of nuclear power but it believed that 
they could be solved with the scientific and technical means currently available, 
if accompanied by sincere co-operation and genuine endeavour on the part of 
Member States. 
79. He wished to inform Member States that Greece, after nine years of intensive 
and systematic exploration for uranium in northern Greece, had discovered 
considerable uranium reserves and potential reserves of still unknown extent. 
80. The main efforts of the Greek Atomic Energy Commission were now being 
concentrated on the Serrai area, where the uranium deposits in the neogene 
sediments of the Strimon Basin were of great importance. A satisfactory number 
of bore-holes had been made and a medium-scale experimental mining operation 
was under way to prove the continuity and extension of the uranium-bearing 
lignites and bituminous clays. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 19 

81. Greece would continue to extend its support to the Agency's activities. 
It had already pledged its assessed share (US $38 850 equivalent) of the target 
for the General Pond for 1980, had already pledged and paid its assessed 
share of the special contribution for the Agency's participation in INFCE during 
1979 and, finally, had already remitted to the Agency an amount of $5000 as a 
special voluntary contribution to the Agency's supplementary nuclear power 
safety programme. 
82. Mr. ECKERBERG (Sweden) said he wished to express his appreciation for 
the generous hospitality accorded to the twenty-third regular session of the 
General Conference of the IAEA by the Government of India. 
83. During the past year nuclear energy had been the subject of an intensive 
debate in terms both of safety and of the risk inherent in the spread of a 
nuclear explosive capability. 
84. In many countries, including Sweden, the public at large and the political 
parties had been engaged in a polemic regarding the reliability of, and prospects 
for, nuclear power. The issues included the role of nuclear energy in future 
energy supply, operational safety, waste management, non-proliferation and the 
real cost of nuclear energy. Generally speaking, doubts about nuclear energy 
had led to a slow-down in the nuclear sector, intensified efforts to harness 
alternative sources of energy, and stricter conservation measures. In Sweden a 
consultative referendum on nuclear power had been scheduled for March 198O. The 
outcome of it would help to determine the future role of nuclear power in the 
country's electricity generation. There were at present six nuclear power 
plants in operation in Sweden. Pour additional plants had been built but they 
would not be put into operation before the referendum. Huclear-based electricity 
continued to account for a quarter of the total electricity generation in Sweden. 
85. With regard to nuclear safety, the accident in March 1979 at Harrisburg, 
Pennsylvania, had been a dramatic reminder of the fact that matters of operational 
safety at nuclear facilities required the closest attention. Experience gained 
from the accident had already contributed significantly to the reinforcement of 
safety at nuclear power plants in a number of countries. For example, a commission 
appointed by the Swedish Government had included 49 specific recommendations for 
new and improved safety measures in its recent report. 
86. Matters of health and safety and environmental effects associated with the 
use of nuclear energy neither could nor should be regarded as an exclusively 

GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 20 

national concern. Hence intensified interest and joint efforts on the part 
of States were called for, and in that respect the Agency occupied a central 
position. 

&7« According to the Agency's annual report, there were 227 nuclear power 
reactors in operation in 21 Member States as of December 1978. The operational 
safety and the limitation of possible releases of radioactivity and radioactive 
effluents from those plants, as well as from other fuel cycle facilities, were 
governed by national regulations and monitored by national authorities. Their 
activities were largely guided by national standards based on the recommendations 
of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) and other 
international bodies. The existence of those safety standards, which were in 
effect guidelines, had also been of value for countries embarking on nuclear 
programmes. It had rightly been pointed out that there was growing realization 
that accidents could have consequences extending beyond national boundaries. 
Hence it might now be the right moment to raise the status of the relevant 

safety standards, which should be integrated into the framework of an international 
nuclear safety agreement. The parties to it would commit themselves to 
implementing basic principles and minimum standards in the construction, 
operation and decommissioning of reactors, and also in respect of maximum 
doses, limits for the release of other substances, emergency planning and 
conditions for the handling and storage of waste. A commonly agreed minimum 
basis would be established through an international convention of that type 
and the achievement of it could be an important task for the Agency in the years 
to come. 

88. Against that background his delegation welcomed the Agency's supplementary 
nuclear power safety programme adopted by the Board of Governors. The Swedish 
Government had made a voluntary contribution of US 880 000 to help finance its 
implementation. The Swedish Government had further agreed to host an Agency 
conference on current nuclear power plant safety issues in October 1°80, 
in Stockholm, aimed at promoting intergovernmental co-operation with a view 
to a consensus on nuclear safety. 
89. With regard to proliferation risks, the development and achievement of 
nuclear explosive capabilities by additional States would not only gravely 
affect both regional and global security, but also be detrimental to efforts 
to promote international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 21 

Hence it was to be hoped that no non-nuclear-weapon State would attempt to develop 
or acquire a nuclear explosive capability. All States were urged to do their 
utmost to enhance international confidence and trust. Furthermore, the nuclearweapon 
States had an important contribution to make to the non-proliferation 
effort by implementing Article VI of the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and taking specific steps to end the nuclear arms race and 
reduce their stocks of nuclear weapons. 

90. Disturbing reports from some parts of the world that attempts were being 
made to achieve a capability to produce nuclear explosives made it clear how 
important it was to continue supporting and promoting NPT and the Agency safeguards 
system. The recent accession to NPT and the Tlatelolco Treaty of several new 
countries was therefore encouraging. 
91. The acceptance by all non-nuclear-weapon States of Agency safeguards on all 
their nuclear activities would be a particularly important contribution towards 
increased international trust and confidence. Pull support should be given to the 
Agency in its work of improving the efficiency, and broadening the coverage, of 
its safeguards system. 
92. The recently drafted Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material was another Agency-sponsored international measure directed against 
unlawful use of nuclear material, and all States ought to sign it. 
93. During the past two years, the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation 
(INFCE) had involved a large number of States in a search for technical and 
institutional measures which would promote both nuclear supply and nonproliferation. 
The results of INFCE should assist Governments in their fuel cycle 
options and in their efforts to improve international confidence in nuclear energy 
programmes. 
94. INFCE would also help to provide a basis for continued non-proliferation 
efforts, and would contribute to the strengthening of nuclear safety. It was 
obvious, however, that a number of problem areas related to non-proliferation 
would still require attention at international level in the 1980s. For example, 
the need for increased predictability of supply; internationally agreed 
criteria for the use and storage of plutonium; options for international 
co-operation in the storage and management of spent fuel; and extended coverage 
and efficiency of Agency safeguards. The overall aim should be to achieve an 
international consensus, which would include a set of guidelines for States 

GC(XXril)/OR.215 
page 22 


engaged in international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
Such guidelines would be intended to enhance confidence, first, in the predictability 
and certainty of supply in the field of nuclear energy, and, second, 
in .Agency safeguards and other measures aimed at ensuring that proliferation of 
nuclear weapons to additional States did not take place. The Agency could play 
a vital role in formulating the relevant recommendations. 


95. Within that context, the .Agency's study on international Plutonium storage 
currently in progress was making encouraging headway. Sweden was taking an 
active part in it and had agreed to contribute approximately $93 000 to the 
voluntary fund established for that purpose, 
96. The parallel study by the Agency of international spent fuel management 
provided a useful forum for international discussion of practical solutions, 
including possible international co-operation in the field. The institutional 
aspects, including safeguards, were more apparent in the case of plutonium 
storage than spent fuel management. An international plutonium storage scheme 
could result in measures for control and storage of plutonium and would entail 
increased responsibilities on the part of the Agency. 
97. In conclusion he wished to pledge Sweden's assessed voluntary contribution 
for 1980 to the General Fund, which amounted to SH38 600. 
98. The Agency's responsibilities with regard to nuclear safety, the implementation 
and development of Agency safeguards and other agreed non-proliferation 
measures now represented a growing challenge to the organization, and its future 
role and responsibilities lay primarily in the promotion of nuclear safety 
and safeguards. Since those were essentially regulatory functions, nuclear fuel 
cycle supply activities, in his view, should be carried out separately from them. 
99. Mr. NGUYEN DIMM TU (Viet Nam) said that it was with great pleasure that 
his delegation was participating in the twenty-third regular session of the General 
Conference and was particularly gratified that the venue should be the capital 
of a country famous as a cradle of civilization. He wished to express his 
sincerest gratitude to the Government and people of India for the sympathy and 
support which they had always lent to the Vietnamese people in its defence of 
its just cause. 
100. As the result of a succession of historical events the Vietnamese people 
had been obliged to conduct a long and weary struggle, extending over more than 
GC(3Qtni)/OR.215 
page 23 


one third of a century, and was now faced simultaneously with two onerous tasks reconstruction 
of the country and defence of the independence and liberty which 
had been won back at so high a price. 


101. In spite of all those difficulties, his Government was conscious of the 
enormous benefits which nuclear energy could offer to the development of the 
economy, to the raising of living standards and to the improvement of the health 
of the population. For some years past, therefore, a certain effort had been 
made to develop the peaceful utilization of atomic energy in Viet Nam. In 
addition to promoting the training of experts in nuclear science and technology, 
various nuclear medicine laboratories had been established for diagnosis and 
treatment of illnesses using radioisotopes and ionizing radiation. A start 
had also been made on the application of nuclear techniques in agriculture, 
geological prospecting, analytical work and certain branches of industry. 


102. After thanking the socialist and other friendly countries for their 
valuable co-operation and assistance in the first stages of the introduction of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy in Viet Mam, he stressed his appreciation 
of the part played by the IAEA in promoting international co-operation and 
furnishing assistance to the developing countries. It was to be hoped that 
such assistance would become ever more effective. In particular, his Government 
was most grateful that the IAEA had acceded to the first requests for technical 
assistance submitted by his country. As a result, Vietnamese experts had been 
able to attend various training courses organized by the Agency, 
103. After more than thirty years of war, the Vietnamese people had no other 
wish than to enjoy a lasting peace which would enable it to develop its economy 
and build up a life of happiness and well-being. However, it had always to be 
ready to preserve the freedom which it had reacquired at such great cost. The 
fact was that a certain Asiatic Power was threatening peace and security in the 
Far East and impeding the further development of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy in Viet Nam and other countries in that part of the world. The Socialist 
Republic of Viet Nam opted firmly for a foreign policy based on peace, 
co-operation and friendship with other peoples, and wished to develop its 
relations with all other States on the basis of peaceful coexistence. It 
was in that spirit that Viet Nam fully approved of the Treaty on Strategic Arms 
Limitation (SALT II) recently signed in Vienna and of the peace initiatives 
recently taken by the Soviet Union in Europe. The Socialist Republic of 



GC(XXEIl)/OR.ai5 
page 24 

Viet Sam was prepared to play an active part in the struggle to eliminate for 
ever the risk of nuclear war and to defend world peace. 

104. It was in the light of those considerations that his delegation wished 
the twenty-third regular session of the Agency's General Conference every 
success in its work. 
105. Mr. EILAM (Israel) considered that the Agency faced complex tasks as 
a result of the increasing shortage of energy at reasonable costs, the urgent 
need to find alternative supplies of energy, and the shortage of drinking 
water in arid and semi-arid developing countries. 
106. In the face of considerable difficulties the Division of Technical Assistance 
had been able to improve its operational systems and to assist in the implementation 
of national nuclear programmes in some developing countries although 
even greater achievements would have been more gratifying. 
107. The escalation in the price of oil, the expected further rises in that 
price and the shrinking fossil-fuel reserves had led many Member States particularly 
those not blessed by nature as far as sources of energy were 
concerned - to recognize that until the end of the century the only proven fuel 
for the production of electricity apart from fossil fuel would be nuclear fuel. 
The final communique1 of the Tokyo summit meeting of the industrialized countries 
at the end of June 1979 had warned that, without the expansion of nuclear power 
generating capacity in the coming decades, economic growth and higher employment 
would be hard to achieve; the members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance 
had signed an agreement on 28 June 1979 committing themselves to install about 
15 COO MH(e) of nuclear power by 1990 to provide 30$ of their electricity 
requirements; even oil-producing countries were considering the acquisition of 
nuclear technology, and some developing countries were attempting to minimize 
the impact of the energy crisis by achieving self-sufficiency in their fuel 
supply. 

108. Energy-related problems such as siting, safety and public acceptability 
had forced the Government of Israel to review its energy expansion programme. 
However, Israel was committed to the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes 
to improve the standard of living of its people, and it was prepared to assist 
other developing nations, within the limits of its capacity, in those fields 
where its achievements could be of help to others, as in desalination and 
irrigation. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 25 

109. Israel was convinced that nuclear power programmes could be implemented in 
developing countries even though contemporary reactors were too large for the 
relatively low power consumption and small electricity grid in most of them. 
110. In view of the projected growth of nuclear power in general, and the 
dependence of developing countries on the import of nuclear power technology 
and fuel supplies in particular, and in view of the danger of replacing one 
dependence by another, there was an urgent need for the Agency's technical 
assistance programmes to be adjusted to the future power needs of developing 
countries. The technical assistance programme should emphasize, inter alia, 
training and advisory services in planning national nuclear power programmes, in 
regulatory activities, siting, safety, manpower planning, etc., and in nuclear 
power plant operation. 
111. International standards and uniformity might also be established in that 
manner, and might subsequently assist the Agency in performing its functions 
more efficiently. 
112. Assistance should be funded from extrabudgetary as well as budgetary funds, 
after readjustment of the base rate of assessment to reflect the real income 
of countries, the redistribution of financial resources in the world and 
especially the huge income of the oil-producing countries, 
113. Assistance should be provided by the Agency on a non-discriminatory basis 
and should correspond to a country's real requirements. 
114. There was an immediate need for action and guidance by the Agency in the 
field of public acceptance on an international level, since opposition to the 
development of nuclear power had begun to take on world-wide proportions and 
there was a trend towards international solidarity of opposition movements. 
115. A further crucial problem confronting human society in general, and developing 
countries in arid and semi-arid zones in particular, was the scarcity of 
drinking water. The State of Israel was making major efforts to contribute 
to the solution of that problem by desalination techniques. Semi-industrial 
models built in Israel were being used by various countries and work on a 
large-scale pilot plant was continuing. Those installations were still 
connected to conventional fossil-fuel power plants but the ultimate goal was 
to use nuclear power for desalination. The State of Israel was eager to 
share its know-how and experience in that field with all nations, particularly 
in the Middle East and Africa, and urged the Agency to take a leading part in 
such co-operation. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 26 

116. Finally, he commended the .Agency on its part in the conclusion of the 
Convention for the Physical Protection of Buclear Materials. It was to be 
hoped that the entire world would stand unified and that all Member States 
would co-operate in preventive measures against all kinds of terrorism involving 
nuclear material that might endanger the very existence of the international 
community. 
117. Mr. CHOI HAK GUN (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that he 
wished to express his gratitude to the Government and people of India for having 
put forth such great efforts to make preparations for the present session of 
the General Conference. 
118. The IAEA was faced with the noble mission of accelerating the wide utilization 
of atomic energy for peace and the welfare of peoples throughout the 
world. At the present time, in spite of certain difficulties and obstacles, 
nuclear power was undergoing a process of steady growth and was one of the sources 
of energy which could to a substantial degree replace organic fuels and hydro 
resources. The Agency was paying considerable attention to various problems 
associated with the development of nuclear power, and was indeed intensifying 
its activities in that sphere. 

119. His Government attached particular importance to the Agency's work on 
improving safety conditions at nuclear power stations. Under its programme 
of safety standards the Agency was preparing a set of internationally agreed 
recommendations on nuclear power station safety, and he was gratified to note 
that good progress was being made in that work. 
120. Against the background of the rapid expansion of the nuclear industry the 
reprocessing of radioactive wastes was becoming a pressing problem, calling 
for immediate solution. His delegation likewise supported the Agency's efforts 
in that direction. 
121. The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea also approved 
the work of the International Nuclear Information System (IHIS), as was attested 
by his Government's decision to become a member of the System. 
122. Increased technical assistance was of vital significance for nuclear 
activities in the developing countries. Recent measures taken to increase the 
effectiveness of technical assistance included the promotion of long-term 
projects and better utilization of available currencies. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.215 
page 27 

123. His delegation was pleased to note that the target for the General Fund, 
the main source of financing technical assistance, had been raised in 1980 to 
$10.5 million, and he promised prompt payment of his country's contribution. 
124. He reported that during the past year his country had achieved substantial 
success in various aspects of fulfilment of the second Seven-Year Plan, 
particularly as regards politics, economics and culture. 
125. The needs of a continually expanding socialist structure of society also 
included scientific research on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. There were 
at present in progress in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea research 
projects concerned with almost all branches of nuclear science, including 
nuclear physics, radiochemistry, nuclear electronics, the use of radioisotopes, 
etc. The utilization of nuclear techniques in many parts of the national 
economy likewise called for the training of qualified staff. 
126. He was unable to avoid drawing the Conference's attention to the fact that, 
in spite of the hopes and wishes of the entire Korean people for de'tente and 
for the reunification of their divided country, a very tense situation still 
prevailed in the Korean peninsula. Everyone knew that, following the unanimous 
demand by all peace-loving peoples, the 30th session of the United Nations 
General Assembly had adopted a resolution calling for the withdrawal of all 
foreign troops from southern Korea and the establishment of conditions favourable 
for the peaceful reunification of the whole country. However, four years had 
passed since then and American troops, far from having been withdrawn from 
southern Korea, had been reinforced there. During the recent period the United 
States of America had been continually bringing nuclear and other weapons of 
mass destruction into southern Korea, in contradiction of the ideals of the 
IAEA with regard to the peaceful utilization of atomic energy. 
127. Expressing the hope that peace-loving Governments and nations would continue 
to support the just cause of his people in its efforts to ensure the withdrawal 
of American forces and nuclear weapons from southern Korea, he concluded by 
assuring the Conference of his country's deep interest in the work of the IAEA 
and its sincere wishes for the success of the Conference. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 


GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
International Atomic Energy Agency August 1980* 
GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

ENGLISH 


TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi 
on Friday, 7 December 1979, at 3.10 p.m. 


President; Mr. SETHNA (India) 
later: Mr. GOLDSCHMIDT (France) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda •** 


General debate and annual report for 1978 (continued) 1 - 74 


Statements by the delegates of: 


Holy See 1-3 
Venezuela 4-8 
Bulgaria 9-10 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 11 - 17 
Denmark 18 - 21 
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 22 - 28 
Peru 29 - 37 
Nigeria 38- 45 
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic 46 - 55 
Morocco 56 - 60 
Ecuador 61 - 65 

Zaire 66 - 71 
Portugal 72 - 74 

* A provisional version of this document was issued on 5 February 1980. 
**/ GC(XXIII)/620. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 

80-2843 


GC(mil)/OR.2l6 
page 2 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1978 (continued) 


1. Mr. PERESSIN (Holy See) said that in his address to the General Assembly 
of the United Nations, His Holiness Pope John Paul II had recalled that the 
progress of humanity must he measured not only by the advances of science and 
technology, cut above all by spiritual and moral progress. In the light of that 
principle, the vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons could only be regarded as 
scandalous. As long as such proliferation continued, discussions of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy would always be influenced by it, because nuclear 
materials were in danger of being diverted from peaceful purposes, and that 
danger inspired fear in the minds of large sectors of the public. Admittedly, 
the nuclear industry was subject to scrutiny more than any other, and the hazards 
connected with the fuel cycle had been investigated seriously. Nevertheless, 
much remained to be done, and the Agency should redouble its efforts to establish 
the strictest safety standards, in particular where the reprocessing of spent 
fuel and the decommissioning of nuclear facilities were concerned. 
2. As the debate on nuclear power had become more and more polemical, the 
attitudes of both advocates and opponents had hardened. Many - notably 
Christian churches and groups of Christians - flatly rejected nuclear energy or 
demanded a moratorium for its development to be stopped temporarily. The Agency 
should not refuse to listen to them nor leave them without an answer. The public 
should be informed honestly about the dangers of nuclear power, so that it could 
make rational judgements that were not inspired by fear; and everyone should be 
able to participate, at his own level, in decisions concerning nuclear energy. 
His delegation also wished to warn against the dangers of wasteful consumerism, 
which was liable to distract man from his noblest aspirations. 
3. The Holy Father's question whether the progress achieved by man made life on 
earth more human should be central to discussions and decisions concerning nuclear 
energy. The criterion for judging achievements in the nuclear field should be 
the well-being of each individual and of mankind as a whole. 
Hr. Goldschmidt (France) took the Chair. 


4. Mr. TORRES SERRANO (Venezuela) requested the temporary President to 
transmit to Mr, Sethna the Venezuelan delegation's congratulations on his election 
as President of the Conference; he commended the Indian Government on its 
excellent preparations for the Conference and thanked the inhabitants of New Delhi 
for their hospitality. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.216 
page 3 


5. His delegation considered that technical assistance should be increased to 
give more scope for co-operation with the growing number of countries wishing to 
use nuclear energy peacefully in solving their problems of economic and social 
development. 
6. The evolution of nuclear activities in Venezuela was affected by the fact that 
the country was at the same time a producer and exporter of energy. Internally, 
it followed a policy of saving energy, limiting its oil production and at the same 
time seeking to develop high-potential oil-fields. It had begun to exploit its 
hydro resources, which potentially amounted to 20 000 MW, and its coal deposits, 
which would be able to support a regional iron and steel industry and a national 
electricity-generating programme. 
7. Venezuela could thus afford to hesitate before taking the decision to start 
a nuclear programme. It had requested its National Council for the Development 
of the Nuclear Industry to evaluate the advantages nuclear energy would have for 
the development of the country, taking into account the existence of the other 
energy resources, since it did not intend to undertake the peaceful utilization of 
the atom without careful preparation and the certainty that it would meet the 
needs of the country. In that respect, Venezuela enjoyed the support of the 
Agency, whose work it observed closely and with which it hoped further to improve 
its relations. 
8. He wished to recall that Latin America had attempted to remove from its 
peoples the threat of nuclear destruction by concluding the Treaty for the 
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (the Tlatelolco Treaty), which 
was acquiring ever greater importance at a time when it was vital to take steps 
to bring the nuclear arms race to an end. 
9. Mr. KOSTADINOV (Bulgaria) said that after the Soviet-American Strategic 
Arms Limitation Talks the peoples of the whole world hoped that the resultant 
SALT II Treaty would be ratified and would come into force in the near future. 
In addition, the new proposals announced by Mr. Leonid Brezhnev in his speech in 
Berlin on 6 October 1979 opened the way to a new series of negotiations on disarmament 
and detente in Europe and throughout the world. His delegation also 
wished to stress the importance of the second NPT Review Conference, the success 
of which would be facilitated by a strengthening of the Agency's safeguards 
system. Similarly, the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 
would help to reinforce the nuclear non-proliferation regime and the development 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. At the same time, the General Assembly 

GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
page 4 

of the United Nations, at its thirty-fourth session, was considering a number of 
proposals, in particular some important ones made by the Soviet Union, that would 
contribute to reducing the risks of proliferation. 

10. His country supported the Agency's activities, especially where the 
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and the improvement of the Agency's 
safeguards were concerned. It co-operated with the Agency not only by applying 
safeguards to all the nuclear reactors in Bulgaria, but also by providing the 
Agency with the services of experts on the International Nuclear Information 
System (INIS) and certain scientific and technical aspects of safeguards, by 
supplying prototype verification equipment and by conducting technical experiments 
on the Bulgarian research reactor. His country also participated in the 
multilateral technical assistance activities of the Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance (CMEA) and had, in particular, taken part in the expedition organized 
by the CMEA member countries to study the radioactivity of the Danube. 
11. Mr. AL-ESKANGI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) considered that the IAEA and the 
industrialized countries should urgently develop nuclear energy as far as possible 
in order to avoid a catastrophic energy situation arising in the decades to come. 
All efforts should be directed to the construction of safer, more economical and 
more reliable nuclear power plants. Light-water reactors would play the principal 
role until the year 2000; at about that time the use of fast breeders should 
become widespread, whereas heavy-water reactors would probably represent only a 
limited capacity during the 1990s• 
12. The uranium supply situation was not very encouraging. Recent studies 
showed that world consumption up to the year 2000 would amount to about 3 million 
tonnes and would probably reach a cumulative total of 10 million tonnes by 2025, 
whereas in December 1977 'the reserves which could be considered reasonably assured 
were only 2.2 million tonnes. It was therefore urgently necessary to accelerate 
the development of fast breeders in order to avoid a nuclear fuel crisis similar 
to the one being currently experienced with fossil fuel. 
13. In nuclear technology the gap between developing and developed countries continued 
to grow, and his delegation wished to reiterate its urgent appeal to the 
developed countries to increase their technical and financial assistance, in 
particular in connection with the fuel cycle and processing; the financing of 
such assistance should be regularized. Also, Article VI of the Statute should be 
amended. 
14. His country had, in October 1979, concluded a safeguards agreement under 
paragraphs 1 and 4 of Article III of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
page 5 

Weapons (NFT); that agreement covered the twin objectives of using nuclear energy 
for peaceful purposes and strengthening the country's development plans. 

15. He wished to draw the attention of the Conference to the activities deployed 
by Israel and South Africa to develop nuclear weapons; they constituted a serious 
threat to the peace and security of the region, and his delegation urgently 
requested the Agency to inquire into those activities and to stop all technical 
assistance to Israel in order to preserve the credibility of NPT. 
16. 
One of the principal aspects of his country's nuclear activities was uranium 
fin
ore processing. A Co irradiation facility would shortly be put into operation, 
and the construction of a nuclear research centre at Tajura was progressing well. 
The centre would have a 10-MH research reactor and sub-critical assembly, a thermonuclear 
fusion research laboratory equipped with a tokamak device, two 14-MeV 
neutron generators and a hot laboratory for nuclear chemistry. 

17. In conclusion, he wished to thank the Agency for the assistance it had given 
to his country, which had decided to increase its voluntary contribution for 1980 
to US $70 000. 
18. Mr. von BULOW (Denmark) congratulated the President on his election and 
expressed his gratitutde to the host country. The Agency's Secretariat and the 
Director General were carrying out their tasks perfectly, and Denmark, which had 
always participated fully in the Agency's activities since its establishment, 
would continue to support it. 
19. Denmark, which produced 92$ of its energy from imported oil, had been one of 
the countries most affected by the energy crisis from the beginning. The 
Government had taken vigorous steps to save energy, increase the production of its 
own gas and oil and develop alternative sources of energy. The electric utilities 
had been urged to make greater use of coal and to prepare for the introduction of 
nuclear power. The Government had asked experts to investigate the economic consequences 
of adopting or rejecting nuclear power. Once satisfactory solutions to 
the problems of reactor safety and radioactive waste disposal had been found, a 
referendum would be held. 
20. His country thus had a particular interest in the Agency's work on reactor 
safety and waste disposal. The codes of practice and safety guides were very 
useful, as was the supplementary nuclear power safety programme, which would 

GC(XXIII)/OR.216 
page 6 

enable safety to be increased without causing delays in implementation. The 
Agency's studies of waste disposal also held much promise. The utilities had 
been requested to provide information on the conditions under which safe 
disposal was possible. His Government considered that countries like Denmark, 
with a small area or a relatively modest nuclear power programme, should seek an 
international solution to the problem of waste management. His country therefore 
required the Agency's assistance and approved of its work on such a solution, 
which would help to preserve the energy supply of future generations. 

21. He also attached great importance to the safeguards system, which helped 
to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to the plutonium storage 
scheme. By improving safety and security the Agency would stimulate international 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
22. Mr. NEMETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) stated that political 
detente had now beoome a reality, thanks to the efforts of the Soviet Union, the 
Socialist Community and the peace-loving countries. It was alarming to note, 
however, that forces existed in the present state of the world which desired to 
reverse the course of history and to return to the "cold war". That was why 
his country considered it important not only to prevent the militaristic circles 
of the imperialist countries from continuing the arms race, but also to achieve 
real disarmament. A step in that direction had been the signing of the Soviet-
American Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, which demonstrated that it was indeed 
possible, while recognizing the legitimate interests of the parties concerned, 
to arrive at an agreement on the most complex international problems. Furthermore, 
the Soviet proposals announced on the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary 
of the German Democratic Republic opened the way towards effective disarmament 
and the benefits of de'tente and peaceful co-operation. The non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons was of crucial importance and justified the proposals put forward 
by the Soviet Union at the twenty-third session of the United Nations General 
Assembly, which had taken decisions of principle on those matters. It was now 
necessary to incorporate them in agreements binding under international law. 
In that context, his delegation was gratified that about 110 States were already 
parties to NPT. It also welcomed the conclusion of the negotiations concerning 
a convention on the physical protection of nuclear material. Those grounds for 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
page 7 

satisfaction should not, however, veil the dangers of nuclear weapons in the 
hands of countries practising an aggressive foreign policy, such as 
South Africa and Israel. It was therefore all the more important that the 
Agency and all States should redouble their efforts to check the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 

23. In a situation where traditional sources of energy were rapidly being 
exhausted, the development of nuclear power was assuming growing importance. 
The Socialist countries were in favour of active co-operation in nuclear 
technology between all interested countries, and the tokamak thermonuclear 
reactor project was a promising step in that direction. 
24. One of the main conditions for the development of nuclear energy was the 
safe operation of power plants, and it was a cause for regret that certain 
Western companies, for financial reasons, did not pay sufficient attention to 
that problem. The Socialist countries, in contrast, had accorded pride of 
place to the consideration of nuclear safety, waste management and other 
problems affecting the safety of man and his environment. 
25. The Ukraine's internal activities included a growing amount of research 
on nuclear energy, in particular on the fundamental and practical aspects of 
nuclear physics, radiations and the uses of radioisotopes and sources of 
ionizing radiation in chemistry, physics, medicine, biology and geology. 
Under the five-year plan, the construction of nuclear power plants in the 
Ukraine would solve a whole complex of problems associated, inter alia, with 
heating, irrigation, agro-industrial centres and water supply. The Byelorussian, 
Moldavian and Ukrainian Academies of Sciences were jointly conducting research 
on fast breeder reactors. 

26. Internationally, the Ukraine was continuing to develop its co-operative 
activities and relations, especially with the IAEA. In the past three years, 
three IAEA experts' meetings, several training courses and two study tours had 
taken place in the Ukraine, which was prepared to organize one or two further 
study tours for experts from developing countries in 1980 and 198I. 
27. His delegation was authorized to pledge a voluntary contribution to the 
General Fund of 100 000 roubles for 1980. That sum could be used for the 
supply of materials and equipment to developing countries Members of the 
Agency and for study tours in the Ukraine. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.216 
page 8 


28. The establishment of a Standing Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear 
Energy within the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance was of the highest 
importance for nuclear co-operation. In conclusion, mention should be made 
of the joint effort of the CMEA countries to study the radioactivity of the 
Danube, the Black Sea and the Baltic. 
29. Mr. BARRBDA DBLGADO (Peru) thanked the Government and people of 
India for their hospitality and congratulated Mr. Sethna on his election as 
President of the Conference. He considered it encouraging that, at a time 
when the advantages of nuclear power for solving the energy problem and for 
development were being doubted in many parts of the world, India, which had 
a philosophical culture going back thousands of years, had embarked on an 
extensive nuclear power programme in order to ameliorate its people's lives. 
30. In 1976 nuclear activities in Peru had seen a turning point with the 
elaboration of a realistic plan designed to put nuclear energy at the service 
of national development within a reasonable period and at reasonable cost. 
The first stage of that plan, covering the years 1977 to 1983, involved the 
training of a sufficient number of staff with the appropriate qualifications 
and the setting up of the minimum installations needed to ensure full development 
of the capacity available. Simultaneously, a study was to be made of 
Peru's uranium resources and of the possibility of constructing nuclear power 
stations; that included an estimate of the approximate date of installation 
of the first power station and its capacity. Peru's nuclear plan was being 
implemented at a satisfactory rate and with a positive cost-benefit ratio in 
view of the investments that had been approved. 
31. In addition to the training of staff, which was a matter of priority, 
the objectives of the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute were as follows: 
construction, under an agreement with the National Atomic Energy Commission 
of the Republio of Argentina, of Peru's new nuclear research centre; 
prospecting for uranium and evaluation of Peru's uranium potential; separation 
of radioisotopes and labelling of molecules in order to satisfy local 
demand; application of nuclear techniques in medicine, in co-operation with 
the University of Peru; nuclear applications in agriculture by the National 
GC(XXIII)/OR.216 
page 9 


Agricultural Institute; radiation protection and nuclear safety; construction 
of a 10-MW research and training reactor; and nuclear power planning 
studies in oo-operation with national organizations concerned with electrical 
energy. 


32. It was clear that'those objectives could not be met unless Peru received 
all possible technical assistance. Internationally, Peru had benefited from 
the joint assistance of the IAEA and UNDP and, in a bilateral context, it had 
concluded a co-operation agreement with the Republic of Argentina for the 
construction of the new nuclear centre and for the training of scientific and 
technical staff. An additional sphere of po-operation was the United Nations 
nuclear energy project, under which approximately 83 million were to be 
invested over the years 1977 to 1981. 
33. It was necessary to inform the Conference frankly about the concern that 
countries such as Peru felt in relation to the problem of the transfer and 
exchange of nuclear technology. The countries of the world were divided 
into two very distinct categories: those in which nuclear energy had reached 
the highest levels of industrial development and technical perfection, and 
in which the problems encountered related to economic or political competition 
and technical optimization; and those, constituting the large majority, which 
faced fundamental problems such as a lack of appropriate scientific and 
technical knowledge, the difficulty of adapting the technological progress 
and procedures of more advanced countries to their own situation, and finally 
the limitations on their own means and resources. The main question was how 
to co-ordinate the aims and interests of the countries in those two categories 
so as to promote nuclear development in the world as a whole and in each 
country in particular. 
34. The most urgent need was to achieve concerted action which would benefit 
all, and in which all participated, without any country dominating. In that 
connection, his delegation was gravely concerned about matters such as the 
defence of natural resources or the changing legal position in different 
oountries. It was certain that faotors such as the Club of London, the 
Finland Resolution, the Tripartite Meeting and the general instability 

GC(XXIII)/OR.216 


page 10 


of nuclear legislation in certain States merely accentuated the dangerous 
division that was manifesting itself in various forms of discrimination between 
nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States, between supplier countries and 
purchaser countries, between North and South. Meetings such as the General 
Conference, which brought around the same table countries with very different 
levels of nuclear development, could enable appropriate solutions acceptable 
to all countries to be reached, without discrimination and without any attempt 
to obtain one-sided advantages in the application of concepts or criteria advantages 
often enough justified in the name of the non-proliferation 
principle. 

35. The vast majority of developing countries, which believed in peace, had 
signed NPT or the Tlatelolco Treaty or safeguards agreements with the IAEA. 
However, those of them which had embarked on nuclear power programmes were 
being subjected to strong pressure by the nuclear powers. The Non-Proliferation 
Treaty had established a balance of responsibilities, but it seemed that the 
nuclear-weapon States had so far done hardly anything to meet their obligation 
to proceed with nuclear disarmament and to enable countries which had renounced 
nuclear weapons to gain access to nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. 
Such behaviour tended to create a natural bias, in most countries of the world, 
against the nuclear-weapon States. 
; 36. The development of a strategy which would allow an effective and 

' economical transfer of technology was a matter of primary concern in the 

'. nuclear world. The problem of the transfer of technology lay in reconciling 
the apparently antagonistic interests of the supplier country and of the 
recipient country. In many spheres those two basic interests could find a 
balance. Where nuclear technology was concerned the situation was completely 
different. Transfer assumed a certain equality in the technical and scientific 
development of the two parties which could not be found in the world of today, 
since technical and scientific knowledge in the nuclear sphere was virtually 
the exclusive preserve of a few countries. For effective nuclear exchange on 
a world scale, many countries would have had to have received appropriate 
technical assistance already in order to provide themselves with a basic 
infrastructure. 

GC(XXIII)/OE.2l6 
page 11 

37. Peru provided a good example of the position of most developing countries 
where nuclear power was concerned. It was a country undergoing rapid development 
and had large energy requirements. Its hydro resources required a considerable 
thermal complement in which nuclear power would have to play a part. Having 
performed preliminary studies with the help of its own and Agency experts, and 
embarking as it was currently on research into the possibility of developing a 
domestic fuel supply and fuel export potential, the country would, before deciding 
to construct its first nuclear power stati on, have to have acquired a technical 
capacity enabling it to ensure that the power station would comply with the 
highest standards of safety and quality. It would have to have highly qualified 
staff, draw up the necessary legislation and set up the appropriate regulatory 
and monitoring bodies. A Government's decision to construct a power station 
depended mainly on economic and political factors and could be taken at any 
moment, on condition that the country in question possessed the necessary 
scientific and technical infrastructure. It was on those considerations that 
Peru's nuclear activities were founded, at a time when international co-operation 
and horizontal transfer of technology, organized on a basis that was not strictly 
commercial, could produce very favourable results. 
38. Mr. OMOLODOM (Nigeria) congratulated the President on his election. 
The fact that the present session was being held in India demonstrated the 
international community's recognition of India's contribution to peace and 
justice. 
39- In order for the Agency to be able to fulfil its functions - both those 
related to the development of nuclear applications and those related to safeguards 
- its Member States needed to be equitably represented in all its organs. 
A trend towards democratization had manifested itself over the previous three 
years, but that process ought to be accelerated. Nigeria had always associated 
itself with other Member States which had proposed an increase in the number of 
seats set aside for two seriously under-represented regions, one of which, 
Africa, was the area least represented in the Agency. In 1977 Nigeria had been 


GC(XXIII)/0E.2l6 
page 12 

a co-sponsor of a draft amendment designed to give three additional seats to 
Africa and two to the Middle East and South Asia. That draft had encountered 
stiff opposition; hut, even so, the principle of equality of Member States 

remained one of the fundamental principles of the Statute and the current session 
should provide an opportunity for reconsidering the composition of the Board and 
for adapting it to the new situation in order to ensure equitable representation 

of all areas. 

40. More and more countries needed nuclear technology in order to become 
industrialized. Although Nigeria was an oil-producing country, it believed that 
oil should be reserved for uses other than the production of energy, for 
which purpose efforts should be made to find renewable sources. 
41. Developing countries could not develop nuclear applications if the Agency 
did not organize the transfer of technology in a way that would benefit them. 
The energy crisis, which affected all countries, could only be solved on an 
international basis and the Agency should redouble its efforts in the pursuit 
of its promotional activities. Those were at present being neglected, receiving 
as they did far less emphasis than safeguards activities. The Agency assisted 
developing countries by providing them with expert services and equipment and 
by granting fellowships to their nationals, in order to further the transfer 
of nuclear science and technology for peaceful purposes and the development of 
their applications in agriculture, biology, the mining industry and so on. That 
assistance was, however, not increasing quickly enough owing to a lack of 
resources. Every year, the target for voluntary contributions was established 
only after long negotiations, because the industrialized countries and the 
developing countries did not have the same conception of the Agency's role. Since 
regulatory activities had so far occupied a position of privilege, and transfer 
of technology was becoming more and more urgent, it was essential that sufficient 
resources be allocated to technical assistance. 
42. There were two obstacles in the way of the development of nuclear technology: 
first, many ecological, pacifist or radical movements were exaggerating the risk 
of nuclear accidents and were weakening the nuclear policies of their Governments. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
page 13 

The Agency should inform the public better and make the true situation plain. 
Secondly, suppliers were imposing conditions that were becoming more and more 
strict. Nigeria, a State party to NPT, accepted the principles which had 
inspired that Treaty. At the same time, it regretted that transfers of nuclear 
technology for the benefit of South Africa were taking place and it condemned 
all collaboration with a country which practised apartheid. Developing countries 
had for a long time been warning Western countries, including Prance, of the 
dangers that their collaboration with South Africa entailed. France had stated 
that the conditions it imposed on the supply of nuclear technology were even 
stricter than those of NPT. The question arose, then, how South Africa had 
recently been able to test a nuclear explosive device. It appeared that a 
diversion from peaceful applications had occurred at the time when deliveries 
were being made by Prance, and that the Board of Governors had decided to turn 
a blind eye to that hazard. What, then, was the point of compelling Member States 
to sign NPT and to accept restrictions that impeded their nuclear development? 
Was it hoped that the countries of Africa would not react? It was essential 
that the Agency re-examine its policy on the transfer of technology to developing 
countries. For the time being, countries possessing that technology were holding 
on to it jealously in order to exert pressure on the Third World. 

43. With regard to technical assistance, Nigeria congratulated the Director 
General and the Secretariat on the work they had done and thanked them for the 
assistance that it itself had received in the spheres of agronomy, animal production, 
tsetse fly control and data acquisition and analysis systems used in 
nuclear research and for teaching. Nigeria had benefited from expert services 
and fellowships. However, the Agency should increase its assistance to all 
developing countries, for example by organizing more of the courses which they 
needed. 

GC(XXIII)/0E.216 
page 14 

44. Nigeria, believing -that nuclear technology could contribute to its development, 
had recently set up a Federal Ministry of Science and Technology responsible 
for drawing up an energy programme, for co-ordinating the development of all 
sources of energy and for giving impetus to the training of nuclear engineers. 
45. In conclusion, he declared that his country was gratified by the expulsion 
of the delegate of South Africa, but felt obliged to condemn the indulgent 
attitude of certain Western countries towards South Africa. 
46. Mr. KOLYHAN (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) noted that the 
1970s had been dominated by dStente in political relations between States, thanks 
to the action of the USSR and the Socialist countries, supported by other 
countries committed to peace. During the 1980s the policy of de'tente should be 
pursued further, and even more asiduously. In that connection, the conclusion 
between the USSR and the United States of America .of the Strategic Arms Limitation 
Treaty (SALT II) was to be welcomed, and it was to be hoped that the Treaty 
would come into force very soon. The proposals announced by Mr. Leonid Brezhnev 
in Berlin in October 1979 were also important. 
47. His delegation was convinced that the security of States required the abandonment 
of hegemonistic policies, the conclusion of a treaty calling for renunciation 
of the use of force in international relations, and further agreements to 
strengthen safeguards in the non-nuclear-weapon States. A speedy conclusion of 
the talks between the USSR, the United States of America and the United Kingdom 
concerning a complete ban on the testing of nuclear weapons was desirable, and 
the efforts being made to set up denuclearized zones in different parts of the 
world were to be welcomed. In furthering the cause of universal and total 
disarmament, the Byelorussian SSR considered that all nuclear-weapon States 
should participate in the disarmament agreements, both those in force and those 
yet to come. 
48. His delegation welcomed the progress made by the Agency over the period under 
consideration, particularly in spheres such as nuclear power, reactors, nuclear 
safety, environmental protection, evaluation of the nuclear fuel cycle and the 
elaboration of codes of practice and guides. It was also important that the 
Agency should participate in the preparations for the second HPT Review Conference 
. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
page 15 

49. The Byelorussian SSR viewed with concern the possibility of an increase in 
the number of countries having nuclear installations not covered by safeguards 
and of an expansion of the "nuclear club". That represented a special threat to 
the Near East and southern Africa, as could be seen from South Africa's attempts, 
in close co-operation with the western arms manufacturers and Israel, to acquire 
nuclear weapons. 
50. The Agency had the important task of strengthening safeguards, and it was 
essential in that connection to improve the organization and co-ordination of 
the inspection work and to concentrate efforts on the most sensitive parts of 
the nuclear fuel cycle. The Agency should also improve its safeguards data 
analysis system and make a comparative study of its own data and the information 
provided by Member States. 
51. His delegation supported the Agency's efforts to give priority to longterm 
planning and large-scale projects: that approach should make it easier 
for Member States to achieve good balance in their peaceful nuclear energy 
programmes. International co-operation in that field should, however, be very 
closely linked to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
52. Energy needs could only be satisfied, at least in the foreseeable future, 
by the use of coal and nuclear energy, and the Agency should try to dispel the 
fears and counter the protests connected with the construction of nuclear power 
stations. In future years, nuclear power could develop only through the introduction 
of fast reactors. However, the construction of such reactors involved 
a danger of proliferation, and the safeguards programme should accordingly be 
provided with improved methods of controlling the amounts of plutonium in all 
stages of the fuel cycle; likewise, all problems related to the establishment of 
regional fuel cycle centres should be studied. It was similarly important to 
complete the safeguards programme, the codes of practice and the guides by 
establishing recommendations for the safety of fast reactors. 
53. With regard to the budget for 1980, the Byelorussian delegation urged the 
Secretariat to reduce non-productive administrative expenditure and limit the 
scale of programmes and seminars devoted to topics covered by other international 
organizations such as UNESCO and UNIEO (for example, solar energy and 

GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
page 16 

other non-traditional energy sources). It supported the proposal that the draft 
budget should include estimates covering a period of at least two years and felt 
that the rate of increase of expenditure should not exceed a few per cent per 
year, except in the case of safeguards and technical assistance. 

54« The Byelorussian SSR had attained considerable success in its research on 
radiation physics, especially in connection with the practical applications 
to agriculture and medicine. Preparatory work had also been carried out in 
connection with the construction of a dual-purpose nuclear plant for generating 
process heat and electricity. 

55« The Byelorussian SSR was taking an active part in the Agency's programmes 
and would make a contribution of 25 000 roubles to the technical assistance 
fund in 1980. 

56. Mr. BAKU! (Morocco) congratulated the President and thanked the host 
country for the warm welcome it had accorded the Conference. 
57. As the Director General had pointed out, natural energy resources were 
becoming scarce and the use of nuclear energy seemed to be the only way of 
satisfying existing demand. At the same time, however, nuclear power programmes 
had slowed down in 1978 under the pressure of public opinion trends 
brought about by the fear of nuclear accidents or proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
58. The Agency should thus seek to promote even more strongly the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy and should increase its efforts to prevent any 
diversion of material to military purposes. More States had become party 
to HPT. The number would, however, be greater still if the nuclear-weapon 
States genuinely respected their commitments, including that of ensuring the 
safety of States party to NFT. The Moroccan delegation believed therefore 
that the Agency should prevent both vertical and horizontal proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, ensure the security of non-nuclear-weapon States which were 
party to HPT and assist those States in developing the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. To that end, it should both strengthen international 
co-operation to enable the developing countries to overcome their economic 
difficulties and also reinforce its safeguards system and apply it to all the 
activities of non-nuclear-weapon States. ' Those States, and there were many of 
them, which had concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency had the right to 
benefit from all the advantages of nuclear energy, especially access to nuclear 
technology and guaranteed supplies. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2l6 
page 17 

59. Morocco had considerable reserves of oil, coal and uranium, for which it was 
expanding its work on prospecting and exploitation. It had started an accelerated 
programme for the construction of hydroelectric stations and for the 
utilization of renewable sources of energy. Thermal power stations, of which 
half operated on coal, were supplying 6556 of the electricity consumed at present, 
the rest being provided by hydroelectric plants. Morocco had large hydro 
reserves and was planning to develop them for the irrigation of one million 
hectares by the year 2000 as well as for the generation of electricity. A 
study had also been carried out on the extent and the future utilization of oil 
shales, and Morocco was planning to build a plant for extracting the oil from 
the shales and a 1000-MW thermal power station fired by that oil. Uranium 
had been discovered in phosphates in the western Haut-Atlas and the Haute-
Moulouja, and it could be extracted at the phosphoric acid stage of fertilizer 
production. The Moroccan Government had therefore decided to construct a nuclear 
power station which could come into service after 1990 and would help meet the 
increasing demand for electricity. The Government was also applying nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, health and geology. 

60. In all its activities, Morocco needed technical assistance from the Agency 
and was grateful for the aid it had already received. Technical assistance was 
vital to the developing countries and the Moroccan delegation hoped that the 
resources allocated to it would be raised to the same level as those for safeguards. 
It entirely agreed with the revised formulation of the Guiding 
Principles and General Operating Rules to Govern the Provision of Technical 
Assistance. Finally, it appreciated the warm relations it enjoyed with the 
Agency. 
61. Mr. SAMANIEGO (Ecuador), after requesting the Temporary President to convey 
his delegation's congratulations to Mr. Sethna on his election as President, 
said that 1979 had been a very important year for his country. Since it had 
returned to constitutional rule, Ecuador had been able to undertake, through its 
Atomic Energy Commission, the first studies aimed at setting up a nuclear research 
centre endowed with a research reactor and laboratories for the production of 
radioisotopes, the labelling of biologically important molecules and the improved 
use of neutron activation analysis techniques. The centre would be built in 
co-operation with the Spanish Muolear Energy Board, and Ecuador had signed a 
working protocol with Spain to that effect. Ecuador also hoped to obtain the 

GC(XXIII)/OR.216 


page 18 


Agency's co-operation in the project. It had benefited from collaboration with 
Argentina and Chile in the training of specialized personnel. Ecuador was making 
good use of the technical assistance it received under the Agency's programme 
for its long-term projects and hoped to be able to utilize equipment and technical 
assistance financed in non-convertible currencies. It also hoped that the 
proposal it had made in the Board would encourage the Agency to continue to 
concern itself with the problem of small nuclear power plants, because the 
developing countries had few energy resources and needed nuclear energy for their 
development. New studies were needed on the possibility of installing small 
and medium power reactors. The Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission was to 
hold a conference on that topic in 1980. 


62. With regard to the technical assistance provided by the Agency in the form 
of fellowships, Ecuador, whose need was not confined to technicians, hoped that 
such fellowships would also be made available for the training of scientists. 
63. In 1979 Ecuador had hosted several important international meetings on 
atomic energy. The Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission had organized a 
meeting on the applications of isotopes and radiation. The Commission had 
also put in hand a number of regional projects, including a uranium prospecting 
programme to be financed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America had held its 
fourth regular meeting in Quito, where it had been announced that the major Powers 
had already signed the relevant protocols. Finally, the Latin American Energy 
Organization had held an experts' meeting to prepare for the setting up of a fund 
to finance study projects on new sources of energy. 
64. The Ecuadorian delegation congratulated the Secretariat on the contribution 
it had made to the work of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) 
and was pleased to see the progress towards standardization of international 
obligations in the peaceful uses of atomic energy represented by the Convention 
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials. 
65» Finally, the Ecuadorian delegation wished to express to the people and the 
Government of India and to the Indian Atomic Energy Commission its gratitude for 
the generous hospitality it had received. 


66. Mr. NGONGO KAMANDA (Zaire) congratulated the President on his election 
and thanked the Indian Government for its generous hospitality. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.216 
page 19 


67. The twenty-third session of the General Conference was being held at a 
crucial moment for the energy future of the world. The Three Mile Island 
incident had strengthened the anti-nuclear groups. On the other hand, the rise 
in the price of oil had shown that existing energy supplies were precarious and 
that nuclear energy was essential. The Agency could help to turn the situation 
in favour of nuclear energy; it could do that, for example, by implementing 
the supplementary reactor safety programme which had been proposed by the 
Director General and for which Member States should provide adequate funds. 
68. Zaire hoped that the development of the Agency's activities would not be to 
the detriment of technical assistance. The Agency should preserve a proper 
balance between safeguards and the provision of the technical assistance 
essential to the developing countries, who were putting all their hopes in 
nuclear energy. The importance of research programmes should not be forgotten, 
especially those dealing with agriculture, biology and the tsetse fly. 
69. The amendment to Article VI.2 of the Statute was again included on the 
agenda. In the face of the energy crisis, it was essential, if the Agency was 
to preserve its credibility, for Member States to concert their efforts, and 
that in turn required that all regions should be represented equitably on the 
Board of Governors. 
70. Zaire reaffirmed its belief in the concept of the peaceful utilization 
of atomic energy and in the principles set out in NPT. It would give its full 
support to the second NPT Review Conference, which was to be held shortly. It 
believed that INFCE had been extremely useful and it approved the concept of 
regional plutonium management under the auspices of the Agency. 
71. Finally, the Zaire delegation wished to thank the participants for the 
understanding they had shown in allocating the African group two seats on the 
General Committee. It hoped that that spirit would continue, and in the name of 
the African group it thanked those who had voted for the rejection of the 
credentials of the South African delegation. 
72. Mr. PEREIRA BASTOS (Portugal) associated himself with earlier speakers 
who had congratulated the President on his election and expressed their gratitude 
to the Indian Government. He thanked the Agency for the assistance it had given 
Portugal for training purposes, especially in the fields of uranium prospecting, 
nuclear safety, irradiation of foodstuffs, and the production and application 

GC(XXHl)/OR.2l6 
page 20 

of radioisotopes. Because that assistance was so useful, the Agency should 
allocate greater funds to it . 

73. The .Agency had an important role to play in preventing the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. Portugal, which was a party to DPI?, had concluded a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency and had completed the documentation for 
facility attachments. It had followed with interest the work of IMFCE and 
hoped that the results would remove doubts about the use of nuclear energy and 
would promote its development. 
74. Portugal had very little coal and its electricity was being produced by 
hydroelectric plants or by means of imported fuel. Suclear energy would enable 
it to accelerate its economic development. The fact that it had uranium 
deposits was an additional reason for building nuclear power stations. In 
that connection, it believed that the codes and safety guides were extremely 
valuable for countries which were embarking on nuclear energy programmes. 
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m. 


GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
August 1980* 


International Atomic Energy Agency 


GENERAL Distr. 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 


TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 

RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AM) SEVENTEENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi 
on Monday, 10 December 1979, at 10.45 a.m. 

President: Mr. SETHNA (India) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 


Paragraphs 


agenda** 


-Introduction 
1 


12 
Examination of delegates1 credentials 2 -4 


13 
Election of Members to the Board of 
Governors 5-2 4 


General debate and annual report 

for 1978 (resumed) 
25 - 128 

Statements 
by the delegates of: 

Uruguay 25 - 34 
Turkey 35 - 41 
United Arab Emirates 42 - 49 
United Republic of Tanzania 50 - 63 
Cuba 64 - 74 
Ghana 75 - 82 
Mongolia 83 - 93 
Chile 94 - 106 
Zambia 107 - H 8 
Sri Lanka 119 - 128 

*_/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 18 January 1980. 

**/ GC(XXIII)/620. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 

80-2847 


ac(mn)/0H.2i7 
page 2 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 3 
INTRODUCTION 
8. The PRESIDENT informed the General Conference of the result of the 

1. The PRESIDENT, enumerating the items of business to he dealt with by 
the Conference that day, which included consideration of the report of the 
Committee of the Whole, commended the Members of that Committee on having brought 
their work to a successful conclusion and paid particular tribute to its 
Chairman for the adroit way he had steered the Committee through its complex 
and delicate task. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (<3C(XXIII)/622, 623) 

2. The PRESIDENT, introducing that item and noting that his oral report 
on the 31st meeting of the General Committee, on which the written report in 
document GC(XXIII)/622 was based, had already been accepted by the plenary on 
Wednesday, 5 December 1979» at it s 211th meeting, drew attention to document 
GC(XXIII)/623, containing the report of the General Committee on it s examination 
of delegates' credentials, and asked whether any delegate wished to comment on 
the subject. 
3. Mr. SILVA ARANDA (Peru) said he wished to announce that he had just 
received official credentials for his delegation and transmitted them to the 
Secretariat. 
4. The two reports of the General Committee contained in documents GC(XXIII)/622 
and GC(XXIII)/623. together with the draft resolution contained in the latter. 
were adopted. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXIII)/6l4, 62l) 

5. The PRESIDENT reminded the Conference that 11 Members had to be 
elected to the Board from the geographical areas specified in paragraph 2 of 
document GC(XXIII)/6l4, to ensure that the Board would be constituted in 
accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute. 
6. At the invitation of the President, a member of the Australian delegation 
and a member of the Indian delegation acted as tellers. 
7. A vote was taken by secret ballot to elect 11 Members of the Board of 
Governors. 
voting. 

9. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Latin America 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 18 
Valid votes: 140 
Recraired majority: 36 
Votes obtained: 


Mexico 77 
Chile 58 
Cuba 2 
Venezuela 2 
Bolivia 1 


10. Having obtained the required majority. Mexico and Chile were elected to 
the Board. 
11. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Western Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 2 
Valid votes: 156 
Required majority: 40 
Votes obtained: 


Switzerland 79 
Ireland 77 


12. Having obtained the required majority. Switzerland and Ireland were 
elected to the Board. 
13. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Eastern Europe 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 13 
Valid votes: 146 
Required majority: 37 
Votes obtained: 


German Democratic 
Republic 73 


Yugoslavia 73 


GC(Xnil)/OR.217 
page 4 

14. Haying obtained, "the required majority, -the German Democratic Republic and 
Yugoslavia were elected to the Board. 
15. The result of the election of two Members from the area of Africa was as 
follows: 
Abstentions: 7 
Valid votes: 152 
Required majority: 39 
Votes obtained; 


Kenya 76 
Niger 75 
Sudan 1 


16. Having obtained the required majority. Kenya and Niger were elected to the 
Board. 
17. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia was as follows: 
Abstentions: 6 
Valid votes: 74 
Required majority: 38 
Votes obtained: 


Pakistan 74 

18. Having obtained the required majority. Pakistan was elected to the Board. 
19. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Far Bast 
was as follows: 
Abstentions: 20 
Valid votes: 59 
Required majority: 30 
Votes obtained: 


Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea 59 


20. Having obtained the required majority, the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea was elected to the Board. 
0C(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 5 

21. The result of the election of one Member from the area of the Middle East 
and South Asia or of South Bast Asia and the Pacific or of the Par East was as 
follows: 
Abstentions: 3 
Valid votes: 77 
Required majority: 39 
Votes obtained: 


Philippines 76 

Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea 1 


22. Having obtained the required majority, the Philippines were elected to the 
Board. 
23. The PRESIDENT, after congratulating the 11 Members so elected, recalled 
that under Article VI.D of the Statute they would hold office from the end of the 
current session until the end of the twenty-fifth regular session of the General 
Conference, i.e. for a period of two years. 
24. He thanked the delegations of Australia and India which had provided tellers, 
the two tellers themselves, and their Secretariat assistants. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1978 (GC(XXIII)/6lO) (resumed) 

25. Mr. BSRGER (Uruguay) said that holding the twenty-third regular 
session of the General Conference in India represented an act of special 
symbolism and significance. It not only recognized the great progress in nuclear 
science achieved by India but also constituted a reconfirmation on the part of 
the developing countries of the principle that, without nuclear energy, mankind 
could not meet its growing needs for energy and food. 
26. Uruguay was aspiring to a degree of nuclear development in harmony with its 
potentialities and requirements, and was carrying out programmes of uranium 
prospecting, construction of research reactors, radiation safety and the use of 
radioisotopes in medicine, agriculture and industry. The country was now 
envisaging the construction of a second research reactor to supplement the 
10-kW facility already in operation, and the realization of that project would 
naturally call for significant assistance from the IAEA and friendly countries. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 6 

27 • Since Uruguay had no resources of natural gas, petroleum or coal, serious 
consideration was being given to the generation of nuclear power as a supplement 
to existing hydro resources. As the size of the steam-raising equipment required 
was less than the present minimum economic capacity of nuclear power stations, 
Uruguay had a special interest in developing medium and small nuclear power 
plants. That was the reason for his country's promotion of a meeting to he held 
in Montevideo in 198O in co-operation with the Inter-American Nuclear Energy 
Commission, and hopefully with the support of IAEA. 

28. In view of the complexity and technical difficulties attending the 
implementation of a nuclear power programme in a small developing country such 
as Uruguay, his Government believed that a real increase in international, and 
especially regional, co-operation would be essential. 
29. Uruguay was a strong supporter of the IAEA's activities in promoting 
international nuclear co-operation and was placing experts at the Agency's 
disposal in that connection. As a logical consequence of its policy of 
intensifying regional nuclear co-operation his Government had the honour of 
formally proposing, there and then, the conclusion of a regional co-operation 
agreement for Latin America, under the IAEA's auspices. It was felt that the 
success of the similar arrangement introduced by the Agency in Asia and the 
Pacific could be repeated in Latin America. 
30. Uruguay had offered to host various other IAEA meetings and had recently 
shown interest in participating in a regional project involving industrial 
applications of non-destructive testing, planned for the region by UNDP. A 
working group on the subject was meeting in Montevideo with the support of the 
Uruguayan National Atomic Energy Commission. 
31. Although his delegation was gratified at the excellent work being performed 
by the Agency, as emerged from the reports submitted by the Secretariat, it 
could not but express its concern at the rapid increase in the Agency's budget, 
and felt obliged to urge that maximum efforts should be made to prevent the 
budget growing at its present rate. His delegation maintained its existing 
policy of support for the principle of financing technical assistance by means 
of voluntary contributions. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 7 

32. It was also essential to strike and keep an equitable balance between 
promotional and regulatory activities, and as a party to NPT Uruguay desired that 
the Treaty should be implemented both in the letter and in the spirit. That 
meant a halt should be called to both horizontal and vertical nuclear proliferation. 
33« Uruguay believed that the Agency should continue in its role as a promoter 
of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology, and applauded the Agency's 
efforts to improve execution of the technical assistance programme. He wished 
to take the present opportunity of expressing his country's thanks for the 
assistance received from the IAEA, which had been of decisive importance in 
realizing various Uruguayan nuclear programmes. 

34« Finally, he wished to express his country's gratitude for the co-operation 
and assistance received in recent years from Argentina, Brazil and Chile. 

35. Mr. ISCEN (Turkey) thanked the Government of India for its hospitality 
and for the arrangements made at the Conference Centre. 
36. In his statement to the Conference, the Director General had outlined the 
world energy situation and underlined the importance of nuclear power production. 
37. Turkey, one of the developing countries severely affected by the energy 
crisis, had initiated nuclear power programmes as part of its economic development 
plans aimed at increasing future electric capacity. To that end, the Turkish 
Electricity Authority was completing the preparatory stage of a 600 MW nuclear 
power plant. Present plans were that the plant would be commissioned in 1987. 
With respect to nuclear research activities in Turkey, the 250 kW Triga Mark II 
research reactor at the Istanbul Technical University had become operational 
in September 1979- Furthermore, construction work on a 5 MW TR-2 reactor, 
within the same pool as the TR-1, was under way at the Cekmece Nuclear 
Research and Training Centre in Istanbul, and it was scheduled to come into 
operation in the spring of 1980. 
38. The importance of nuclear power for developing countries had been pointed 
out by many delegates and strongly emphasized by the Director General, 
One of the major problems in that connection was the assurance of long-term fuel 
supply. The results of the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (lUFCE) would 
provide guidance when it came to devising an international mechanism for that 
purpose. His delegation commended the achievements of MFCE, the work on developing 
a system for international plutonium storage under the auspices of the IAEA and 
the project on international fuel management. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.2l7 
page 8 

39. Turkey had completed the necessary legislative and governmental processes 
for adherence to NPT and hoped to deposit its instrument of ratification in the 
coming months. However, his delegation agreed with the Director General and 
many previous speakers that the existing imbalances within the Treaty should he 
corrected and that additional conditions should not he imposed. Efforts should 
be made to improve the balance at the second NPT Review Conference. 
40. Turkey strongly supported the IAEA and other bodies internationally 
concerned with nuclear activities, believing that international co-operation in 
that field was closely related to international peace and stability. His 
Government welcomed the UN decision to organize an international conference on 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in I983, as well as a conference on new and 
renewable energy sources scheduled for 1981. The work of the IAEA in framing 
regulations and implementing technical assistance projects was unique in the 
world. Turkey had benefited from the regulatory studies undertaken by the Agency, 
and certain safety, licensing and controlling codes and guides had been translated 
into Turkish for future application. His delegation extended its thanks to the 
Agency for its valuable contribution to technical assistance projects in Turkey 
and for successfully organizing the Interregional Nuclear Law and Safety 
Regulations Seminar held in Istanbul the previous September. However, it had to 
be stressed that the technical assistance funds made available to the developing 
countries from the Agency's budget were inadequate. Turkey supported 
a shift of technical assistance funding from the General Fund to the 
Regular Budget. That was the only method of satisfying the technical assistance 
requirements of the developing countries. He wished to take the opportunity of 
announcing that the Turkish Government had pledged payment of its full assessed 
contribution to the General Fund for 1980. 

41. Finally, his delegation heartily welcomed the Agency's Supplementary Nuclear 
Power Safety Programme as contained in the document GC(XXIII)/INF/l86. He hoped 
that the Agency would give to safety-related issues as much weight as it had 
hitherto accorded to its safeguards activities, particularly in the post-Three 
Kile Island era. Safety at nuclear power plants was clearly a far more important 
issue for the developing countries than for the developed nations, a fact which 
underlined the importance of the Agency's personnel training programmes. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 9 

42. Mr. AL OWAIS (United Arab Emirates) said his Government had 
followed the successful activities of the Agency aimed at accelerating and 
enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. The arms race, particularly in the nuclear field, had to 
be stopped and the proliferation of nuclear weapons prevented, but the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy were playing an increasing role in the rapid development 
of science and technology and in the enhancement of prosperity and progress for 
mankind. 
43. The United Arab Emirates strongly supported the Agency's technical 
assistance and training programmes though there was a need for major changes to 
make them more effective. The provision of technical assistance constituted a 
major, high-priority function of the Agency and was the most important activity 
of direct benefit to the majority of Member States. 
44. The United Arab Emirates was again in a position to pledge a voluntary 
contribution to the General Fund equal to its assessed amount. 
45» Although the United Arab Emirates was producing a reasonable quantity of 
oil for world use, it was clear that, because of the continuing increase in the 
demand for oil, production would peak and then start to decline. The world's 
need for oil would then probably overtake supplies and the energy shortage would 
have to be partially satisfied from other sources. 

46. To ensure a smooth transition, greater international co-operation was 
essential. Vigorous research and development together with conservation and 
fuel-switching programmes should be promoted on an international scale. 
47. Nuclear energy had been reported to be an extremely safe and clean power 
source; nevertheless, after the Three Mile Island incident a fresh demand 
had arisen for safety standards to be maintained and improved. The protection 
of man and his environment should be a prime consideration in all projects. 
The use of nuclear power should not be expanded unless the safety problems were 
mastered satisfactorily. 
48. The United Arab Emirates reiterated its full support and continued 
co-operation to enable the Agency to implement the tasks entrusted to it. The 
Agency had an important role to play in the international development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy - an objective to which the developing countries 
attached the highest priority in the endeavour to raise the living standards 
of their people. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 10 

49. In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates wished to take the opportunity to 
express it s sincere gratitude to the Government and the people of India for the 
facilities they had provided and the warm hospitality they had shown. 
50. Mr. KAftJMBO (United Republic of Tanzania) said he wished to thank the 
Government of India for hosting the present General Conference and for the warm 
hospitality accorded to those attending it. 
51. The past year had been marked by many important events and developments in 
the field of nuclear energy, among which were the Three Mile Island nuclear 
accident in the United States and the convening of the United Nations Conference 
on Science and Technology for Development (UHCSTD) in Vienna. The efforts of 
the Secretariat and the initiative it had shown in connection with the nuclear 
power plant accident in the USA, together with the Agency's contribution to ' 
UNCSTD, were highly appreciated. 
52. His delegation's views on the strengthening of the Agency's role and it s 
programmes in nuclear safety activities were well known and had been clearly 
expressed in the Board of Governors in June 1979. The Director General's 

efforts to supplement the Agency's 1979/80 nuclear safety programme 

by voluntary contributions, together with the findings of the relevant meeting of 
experts convened in May 1979, had Tanzania's full support. 

53. When Tanzania had originally decided in 1975 to join the Agency, the country 
did not have the requisite manpower or institutional framework to handle nuclear 
energy matters. Hence membership of the Agency had been prompted by a genuine 
desire to gain from the benefits of nuclear energy for the development of the 
Tanzanian people. His Government was grateful for assistance from the Agency 
in short-term training courses in immunoassay techniques, as well as in soil 
fertility and soil moisture regime studies, and it had also benefited from shortterm 
consultancies to assist in the creation of a radiation protection service 
unit and establishment of a nuclear medicine facility for diagnostics and 
treatment. In addition, IAEA experts had visited Tanzania for periods of three 
to six months to advise on the teaching of nuclear physics at the University 
of Dar-es-Salaam. Under a bilateral agreement Tanzania was embarking on an 
extensive uranium exploration programme and it would continue to look to the 
Agency for guidance and assistance. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 11 

54. The Agency's programme for 1979-1984 and budget for 198O clearly reflected 
the Agency's activities and commitments in accordance with the Statute. The 
programme and budget for 1979 showed an increase in expenditure, which was 
unavoidable in a decade of escalating costs; hence the Director General's 
modest but genuine effort to reduce the prevailing imbalance in funding 
between the safeguards programme and other Agency programmes, in particular 
the technical assistance and training programme, was commendable. His 
delegation endorsed the Board's recommendation for a budget modification 
requiring an additional assessment of $3.9 million to offset the decline in 
value of the United States dollar against the Austrian schilling. 

55« It was a matter of concern, however, that, despite repeated appeals by 
developing countries for greater emphasis to be given to the technical assistance 
programme through the allocation of more funds from the Regular Budget, the 
Agency had not done so. Thus, in the budget for 198O only $3 197 000 had been 
allocated to the technical assistance and training programme. Conversely, the 
safeguards programme had been allocated $19 396 000 - the largest increase, 
compared with the adjusted programme cost estimate for 1979. He therefore 
joined other delegations in urging the Agency once again to make greater efforts 
to restore the balance between the budgetary allocations for the safeguards and 
technical assistance programmes. 

56. With regard to non-proliferation, in 1979i ten years after KPT had come 
into being, its achievement was the fact that there had not been a nuclear 
war, yet the potential for such a war had increased tremendously. The ardent 
advocates of HPT had used every opportunity to insist that non-nuclear States 
should not acquire or use nuclear technology for non-peaceful purposes, 
while they themselves were increasingly engaged in an arms race. 
57. It was true that since the Treaty had been formulated the world had been 
fortunate enough to have responsible Governments among the super-Powers which 
had not waged a nuclear war. But there was no guarantee that such would 
continue indefinitely in view of the spiralling arms race. Hence adherence to 
HPT held no advantage to non-nuclear-weapon countries like Tanzania. Moreover, 
the existence of nuclear weapons in some States led almost inevitably to their 
development in others. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 12 

58. It was therefore clear that the future of HPT was heavily shrouded in 
uncertainties. While the Director General's assertion that the Agency safeguards 
programme was the only guarantee against the spread of nuclear weapons was true, 
the programme was at the same time hampered fey the presence of a number of drawbacks. 
For example, the auditing system was inadequate in that a State violating 
its commitments would have to be remarkably inept to be caught through auditing 
errors. When a material was converted to and from gaseous, liquid and solid 
states, as was necessary in the fuel cycle, losses and inaccuracies were 
inevitable, and what might be termed the "bomb-sized gaps" were not covered by 
the existing safeguards systems. 
59« A second drawback was that coups, revolutions and other dramatic changes 
in governments often resulted in the invalidation of agreements made by the 
previous leaders, 

60. A third weakness of the HPT safeguards programme was that the Agency had no 
authority to take any action against a country violating the regulations, but 
could only make the fact public. Indeed, most countries considered that 
occasional inspections impinged upon their sovereignty and few, if any, would 
ever allow an international team to confiscate diverted weapons-grade materials. 
61. Moreover, selling hardware necessarily implied selling knowledge. Sales of 
nuclear hardware were subject to safeguards, but duplicate facilities by the 
receiving country were not subject to inspection. 
62. To sum up, HPT, like the other six multinational treaties for arms control, 
suffered from the same pitfall of serving the interests of a few countries, 
rather than the majority of the world community. It was hoped that those issues 
would be brought to the attention of the second HPT Review Conference to be held in 
1980 so that the weaknesses could be minimized or removed. 
63. With regard to the proposal for the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute with a view to increasing the representation of Africa and of the Middle 
Bast and South Asia on the Board, discussion of which had been going on for two 
years, his delegation wished to reiterate its support for the principle of 
equitable geographical representation on the Board of Governors, and believed 
that increased representation of those two regions would ensure greater 
involvement by them in the Agency's activities in view of their increased 
importance: the one as a supplier of nuclear raw material, and the other the 
major source of fossil fuel and potential importer of nuclear technology. It was 
earnestly to be hoped that the matter would be resolved amicably and without delay. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 13 

64. Mr. CASTRO DIAZ (Cuba) said that since the preceding session of the 
General Conference many developments had taken place on the international scene 
which affected the Agency's mission of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. The Agency had made considerable efforts to prevent the spread of 
nuclear weapons. Some recent events confirmed that those efforts must be 
intensified. Particular mention might be made of the rumour about the detection 
in the territory of South Africa of a possible nuclear explosion, which 
constituted a danger to the peoples who were fighting against colonialism, neocolonialism, 
racism and apartheid in southern Africa. The Cuban delegation was 
deeply concerned at the danger involved in the possession of nuclear weapons by 
an aggressive, militarist and racist regime with expansionist aspirations. 
65. Cuba warmly welcomed the agreement on the limitation of strategic weapons 
between the Onited States and the Soviet Union and urged its full ratification. 
The spirit of detente which made the agreement possible should be extended to 
the other regions where it was necessary to put an end to displays of force, 
threats and provocations, especially in the Caribbean, the Persian Gulf, the 
Indian Ocean and South-East Asia, by imperialism and its new allies. 
66. The complexity and the amount of resources needed for nuclear development 
called for international collaboration in the case of countries poor in natural 
energy resources. The Director General had rightly pointed out that developing 
countries needed more and more power to meet their growing needs; using or not 
using atomic energy was not an issue for them. 
67. The Cuban delegation therefore supported the Member States which advocated 
an increase in the resources allocated for financing nuclear programmes in 
underdeveloped countries. It was wrong to assume that producing nuclear weapons 
was the height of aspiration of any country which proposed to assimilate and 
expand the various uses of nuclear energy for its development. 
68. Only a rational and planned use of the available scarce resources in poorer 
countries would justify the huge investment required by nuclear programmes. 

GC(XXm)/OR.2l7 
page 14 

69« In his speech at the twenty-fourth session of the United Nations General Assem 
bly, the chairman of the movement of non-aligned countries, Dr. Fidel Castro, had 
pointed out that it was an illusion to think that the problems of the world could 
be resolved by nuclear weapons. Bombs could kill the hungry, the sick, the 
ignorant but not hunger, sickness and ignorance, nor could they suppress the just 

revolt of the peoples; besides, in a holocaust the rich, too, would die, who had 
more to lose in this world. Dr. Castro had called for the abandonment of weapons 
and urged tackling the most pressing problems in a civilized manner. That was 
the most sacred duty of all States and essential for human survival. 

70. The objectives of Cuba's economic development for the period up to the year 
2000 called for a substantial increase in its power generating capacity. The 
shortage of conventional fuels also made it imperative for Cuba to plan for 
nuclear power to meet its own needs. 
71. Preparatory work was being done in the central southern part of Cuba for the 
construction of the country's first nuclear power station and the corresponding 
safeguards agreement was being worked out with the Agency. The Cuban Nuclear 
Research Centre was undergoing modernization and work on the application of 
nuclear techniques was being expanded with special importance being given to 
radiological protection, nuclear safety and the training of personnel. 
72. The Cuban Government had decided to modify the functions of the Atomic 
Enercy Commission and to set up a Secretariat for nuclear affairs under the 
Council of Ministers. 
73. Cuba had always paid special attention to the technical assistance 
activities of the Agency, through which it had received both equipment and advice. 
Though Cuba was prepared to contribute to a voluntary fund it believed that 
other methods of making contributions, such as the provision of experts, should 
be studied. 
74. Together with other peace-loving countries, Cuba would continue to work 
towards the use of atomic energy for the good and the economic development of 
mankind rather than its impoverishment or destruction. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 15 

75« Mr. ALLOTEY (Ghana) said that the gratitude of his delegation went to 
the Government and people of India for their warm hospitality and for the 
excellent arrangements which had been made for the General Conference. He also 
commended the Director General for his opening address and thanked the Secretariat 
and the supporting staff for their dedication. 

76. The current session would go down in history for its impressive achievements, 
including the rejection of the credentials of the South African delegation. 
Ghana wanted to record its appreciation of the support given to the Group of 77 
by other countries in not allowing the delegation of the illegal and obnoxious 
apartheid regime to attend. 
77. Ghana shared the concern of other countries at the alarming rate of increase 
in the 1980 budget and hoped that it would be an exception and that the Secretariat 
would strive to maintain a policy of minimum growth in future budgets. It ought 
still to be possible, without impairing the basic efficiency of the Agency, to 
make further economies, especially in the areas of travel, administrative 
services, operational costs and safeguards. 
78. Ghana's position in respect of the funding of technical assistance was well 
known. The promotional functions of the Agency were suffering at the expense 
of the regulatory activities. Ghana believed that the time had come for a 
comprehensive review of the situation and considered that technical assistance 
should in the future be funded from assured and predictable sources. If the 
multi-year and multi-purpose projects being funded by the Agency were to have 
any meaningful impact on the recipient countries, the funds available for 
technical assistance would have to be substantially increased. 
79» The Ghana delegation associated itself with all the statements made by the 
delegates from the Group of 77 on the need for the Board of Governors to give 
further consideration to the amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute and to 
submit its observations to the twenty-fourth regular session of the General 
Conference. 


GC(XXIII)/OR.217 

page 16 

80. The Government of Ghana believed -that the International Centre for Theoretical 
Physics at Trieste was a shining example of international co-operation which had 
helped to break down the feeling of isolation experienced by scientists from 
developing countries. It was therefore with great pleasure that it had leamt of 
the award of the Nobel Prize in Physics to Professor Abdus Salam, and it wished 
to extend to him its warmest congratulations. 
81. Ghana also wished to announce that it was prepared to offer its Nuclear 
Centre as a regional training centre for scientists in Africa. The Centre 
already had facilities for courses leading up to the master's degree level in 
the medical, biological and agricultural applications of radioactive isotopes, 
radiochemistry and physics, 
82. Ghana's faith in the work of the Agency was reflected in its continuous 
and active support. It was to be hoped that the Agency would go from strength 
to strength in its task of bringing the benefits of the peaceful uses of the 
atom to all mankind. 
83. Mr. SOENOM (Mongolia) thanked the Government and people of India for 
their warm welcome. 
84. The present session of the General Conference was taking place at a time 
when the main trends in international relations remained the strengthening of 
detente, peaceful coexistence and international co-operation. Significant events 
had occurred in the last year which had a direct bearing on the goals of the 
IAEA, in particular the conclusion of the second Soviet-American Strategic Arms 
Limitation Treaty (SALT II) in Vienna during the month of June. That Treaty represented 
a real contribution to world peace, reducing as it did the danger of nuclear 
war, and it also paved the way for further strengthening of the non-proliferation 

regime and the gradual elimination of all nuclear arms. It was of the utmost 
importance that the Treaty should enter into force as soon as possible. 

85. His delegation was honoured to declare its full support for the historical 
initiative announced by the Soviet Union on 6 October in Berlin - an initiative 
aimed at preventing the escalation of the nuclear arms race, and one which had 
opened up the prospect of the adoption of real disarmament measures in the 
future. All peace-loving States welcomed the decision of the Soviet Union 
to withdraw, in the course of one year, 20 000 troops, 1000 tanks and other 
military equipment from the German Democratic Republic, as well as its 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 17 

willingness to cut the number of medium-range rockets deployed in the western 
part of the Soviet Union, provided that no further American rockets with nuclear 
warheads were stationed in Western Kurope. The historic significance of the 
Soviet move stood out starkly in the light of the plans of militarist circles 
in the United States of America and in other NATO States to do just that. His 
delegation firmly believed that the IAEA could play a large part in achieving 
the aims of the Soviet initiative. 

86. Looking to the future, his delegation attached great importance to the 
second conference convened to review the operation of the Non-proliferation 
Treaty, scheduled for August 1980, since strengthening of the non-proliferation 
regime was one of the most urgent tasks facing the world. The irresponsible 
actions of some States, such as South Africa, created a real danger of 
horizontal proliferation, and two nuclear Powers as well as a number of "nearnuclear" 
States were still outside the non-proliferation regime. One of the 
Powers, namely China, was in fact continuing to carry out nuclear tests in the 
atmosphere. 
87. His delegation recognized and supported the role of the Agency in strengthening 
the non-proliferation regime through the application of reliable safeguards, 
and called on all Member States which had not yet done so to conclude safeguards 
agreements with the Agency as soon as possible. 
88. The Mongolian delegation welcomed the successful formulation, under the 
auspices of the IAEA, of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material. 
89. His delegation had carefully studied the annual report for 1978. Also, 
it found that the well-thought-out programme for 1979-1984 contained everything 
that was necessary and realistic to enable the Agency to carry out the 
tasks it faced. With respect to the Regular Budget for 198O, his delegation 
felt that, while the main programmes should not be cut, the situation should be 
kept constantly under review with a view to paring unproductive expenditure and 
realizing every possible economy. 

GC(XHIl)/OR.217 
page 18 

90. The Agency deserved special commendation for it s nuclear energy information 
services, the success of the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) being 
indicated by the large increase in the number of countries participating in the system. 

91. The technical assistance provided by the Agency was of great importance to 
nuclear research programmes in developing countries, which it helped in tackling 
their economic problems. His delegation supported the Agency's activities in 
that field and extended its thanks for the assistance Mongolia had received. 
92. His Government also attached great importance to the Agency's programmes on 
environmental protection and the applications of radioisotopes. It was 
gratifying to note that Agency programmes on the protection of the environment 

were being carried out in Mongolia and that work had begun on the use of gamma 

sources for irradiating various agricultural products. Training vas also being 

carried out at the establishments in ciuestion. His Government greatly appreciated 
the work of the Agency in all those fields and hoped it would assist in implementing 
future programmes involving the use of nuclear energy. 

93. Finally, his delegation supported the increase in the target for voluntary 
contributions to $10.5 million. 
94. Mr. VASQPBZ FLORES (Chile), after thanking the Government of India for 
its most generous hospitality and for the excellent facilities made available 
to the Conference, said that he would proceed to a brief account of the progress 
of nuclear affairs in his country. 
95. The eleventh meeting of the Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission had been 
held in Santiago from 2 to 7 July 1979» and among the international organizations 
represented he was pleased to note that the IAEA, represented by the Deputy 
Director General of the Department of Technical Assistance and Publications, had 
played a particularly prominent role. 
96. The meeting had been viewed as extremely valuable from the standpoint 
of the peaceful development of nuclear energy in the region and had contributed 
substantially to the implementation of bilateral and regional co-operation 
agreements. 
97. The Inter-American Nuclear Energy Commission likewise hoped that the 
technical assistance offered by the Agency could be given concrete form in 
the very near future. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.217 
page 19 

98. At bilateral level, Chile and Paraguay had agreed on a plan of action for 
co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy, involving nuclear medicine, 
isotope hydrology and uranium prospecting. 
99» In July 1979 a co-operation agreement on the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
had been signed with Uruguay, and the first stage in its implementation had been 
reached with the visit of the Uruguayan Minister of Industry and Energy to Chile. 

100. Turning to technical progress achieved, he was pleased to announce that 
Chile had commissioned the multi-purpose irradiation plant at the "Lo Aguirre" 
Huclear Centre, which was providing valuable services to the national economy. 
The plant had been constructed on the basis of a design jointly prepared by 
engineers from the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission and the Spanish Nuclear 
Energy Board. The research reactor at the "Lo Aguirre" Nuclear Centre was due 
to come on to power shortly, under the relevant agreement between the abovementioned 
two bodies. 
101. At regional level, it had been of considerable importance to Chile to have 
been the organizing country for the first course on uranium prospecting 
technicpies held in Latin America, which had been attended by participants from 
ten countries in the region. 
102. In nuclear medicine the Medical Radiation Institute had successfully 
continued it s studies on perfecting techniques for the application of radiation 
in many branches of health protection; important working groups composed 
of specialists from Argentina, Bolivia, the United States and Uruguay 
had met. In July 1979 the first computer in Chile to be used for processing 
nuclear medicine imaging data had been commissioned. 

103. Chile wished to confirm its steadfast support for the Agency's activities 
in the fields of non-proliferation, safeguards and technical assistance. 
However, it hoped that in the near future it would be possible to achieve a 
better balance in the distribution of funds intended for technical assistance 
and for safeguards. 
104. Conscious of its responsibilities in the field of international co-operation, 
Chile desired to reiterate to the Agency its preparedness to place at the 
disposal of Member States the use of its material and human resources. His 
country was offering a modest number of fellowships for trainees from other 
developing countries. 

GC(XJCIIl)/OR.217 
page 20 

105. During the past year Chile had 1)6611 happy to act as host to the Agency's 
Director General, who had expressed gratification at the progress achieved in 
nuclear affairs since his last visit in 1971. 
106. In conclusion he said that his Government had expressely instructed him to 
acknowledge the loyal support and co-operation which Chile had received from 
friendly countries such as Argentina and Brazil. 
107. Mr. ZIMBA (Zambia) said his delegation was gratified to note that the 
People's Republic of Angola had been given observer status at that session. It 
would naturally have been much happier if Angola had been sitting as a full 
member of the Agency, and he urged not only Angola but also other sovereign States 
in Zambia's part of the world, namely Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Lesotho and 
Swaziland, and indeed all remaining independent States in the region, to become 
members at their earliest opportunity. Zambia strongly believed that part of 
those countries' immediate development needs could be met through peaceful 
applications of atomic energy in such fields as agriculture, medicine, water 
resources and further exploration for energy resources. His delegation further 
hoped that all the liberation movements in Southern Africa would also be 
accorded observer status at future sessions since, as representatives of the 
oppressed masses, they were the governments of tomorrow. 
108. Zambia cherished her membership of the Agency and would continue to 
support the Agency's Statute insofar as i t reflected the legitimate needs and 
aspirations of the majority of the Agency's Members. He wished to pay tribute 
to the wise and able administration of the Agency by the Director General and 
his staff, who could count on Zambia's support in that most difficult task. 
109. During 1978 Zambia had received assistance from the Agency in agriculture, 
medicine, training and raw materials prospection. It was grateful for that 
assistance, especially since it represented a slight improvement on the 
assistance received the previous year, but it still felt that, in absolute terms, 
the assistance provided could have been greater and more effective. While 
Zambia appreciated the problems associated with the recruitment of experts for 
certain projects, it found it difficult to believe that the same could be the 
case with regard to the provision of equipment for approved projects. Expert 
services, provided out of phase with equipment for a given project, tended to 
diminish the effectiveness of such assistance and his delegation hoped that 
GC(mil)/OR.217 
page 21 

steps would be taken to eliminate that problem in the future. With regard to the 
revised Guiding Principles and General Operating Rules to Govern the Provision 
of Technical Assistance by the Agency, his delegation remained opposed to the 
clause making the provision of technical assistance dependent upon accession to 
KPT and acceptance of safeguards, because i t believed that to be a discriminatory 
practice which would not help to solve the problem of nuclear proliferation. 

110. In Zambia's view, the manner in which the technical assistance programme 
was funded was bad. Zambia believed that, for the programme to have the maximum 
impact in the many developing Member States, i t should be substantially funded 
from the Regular Budget. His delegation supported initiatives aimed at 
realizing that goal. 
111. Zambia was fortunate in having adequate hydroelectric resources, and that 
state of affairs would obtain for quite some time to come, although there might be 
a need for other sources of energy, including nuclear energy, by the turn of the 
century. Zambia's present efforts in the nuclear field, therefore, were mostly 
confined to the application of nuclear techniques in food and agriculture, life 
sciences and the training of manpower for both present and future needs, 
112. Over the past ten years, extensive exploration activity had resulted in the 
discovery of radioactive mineral ores in the country. Although Zambia did not 
have any immediate use for uranium, i t had decided to exploit the country's 
uranium resources to help alleviate the energy shortage in the rest of the world. 
It believed that that decision would help promote international understanding and 
interdependence. 
113. His delegation maintained that the existing representation formula for the 
Board of Governors was grossly unfair to the regions of Africa and of the Middle 
East and South Asia and reiterated its firm support for the original proposal 
to amend Article VI.A.2 of the Statute so as to give those regions three and 
two more seats respectively. His delegation noted with dismay that the Board of 
Governors had made little or no progress in finding a fair and just solution to 
that problem since the previous regular session in Vienna, However, it remained 
hopeful that the Board would continue to consider the issue until a just solution 
was reached in the not too distant future. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.217 

page 22 

114. The idea of nuclear explosive devices of whatever description being 
introduced in the African region had had a most disquieting influence on that 
continent and, he believed, the rest of the world. Recently it had been reported 
that a nuclear explosion had been detected over an area covering most of the 
central and southern parts of the continent, including the Republic of Zambia. 
That was the second time in about two years that there had been talk about 
explosion of a nuclear device in that region. As much as one would like to 
dismiss the adage that there was no smoke without fire, the circumstances of the 
whole affair indicated that one could not. His delegation deplored the 
extremely callous manner in which member countries in the region most concerned 
had been informed about the recent explosion by those who had detected the event. 
11^. That fact, coupled with the dead silence from those who should have explained 
the explosion at the Conference, which was the right and proper forum for 
discussing nuclear matters, clearly showed the eagerness with which the culprit 
was sheltered by the same people who professed to lead the fight against the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. He asked why there should be such duplicity. 
His delegation condemned all those countries which had directly or indirectly 
assisted in building the culprit's capability to a level where it could detonate 
a nuclear device. 

116. His country had always stated that it was not in the best interest of the 
human race to condone, let alone encourage, the vile system of apartheid or 
indeed to be seen to shield the apartheid regime from universal condemnation. 
At the twenty-second regular session in Vienna the Zambian delegation had made the 
following statement in that regard: "He have cautioned against actions that give 
the apartheid regime a semblance of international respectability. The Agency's 
association with South Africa in the field of nuclear science and technology only 
benefits a minority section of that country's population. We find hardly any 
justification for collaboration between this Agency and the apartheid regime 
which has consistently flouted all accepted norms of human decency, unless there 
be a change in that country for the betterment of the majority and a return to 
decent human values." His delegation had further stated: "The Agency could play 
its part in helping to bring about this change. As a first step, my delegation 
would like to know how many of the South African nationals employed in the Agency 
are drawn from the country's indigenous majority of the population. If none, as 
we strongly believe the situation to be, we request the Secretariat to institute 
immediate measures which will ensure that further recruitment from that country 
represents broad-based selection covering the various ethnic groups." 
GC(xnil)/OR.217 
page 23 

117. Hitherto Zambia had not had any definitive response from the Secretariat. 
During the discussion on the General Committee's report on credentials, the 
Secretariat had come swiftly to the support of-South Africa. Amongst other things, 
the Conference had been told that South Africa was in fact considering signing 
KPT some time in 1981 or 1982, the cloud of suspicion over the recent nuclear 
explosion notwithstanding. His delegation found that double standard approach 
to the handling of the NPT issue in relation to South Africa most disturbing 
and regarded the whole train of events as a deliberate effort to protect the 
apartheid regime. 
118. Despite all that, Zambia would be contributing its full assessed share to 
the General Fund for 198O in demonstration of its commitment to the Agency's 
activities, especially the technical assistance programme, 
119. Mr. BHARMAWARDAHA (Sri Lanka) said that Sri Lanka's atomic energy programme 
had originally started with the invitation of a mission from the Agency to come and 
assist Sri Lanka in formulating an atomic energy programme. As a result, the 
first step had been taken in 1961, with the setting up of the Radioisotope 
Centre. In 1969, "the Atomic Energy Authority had been established under the 
guidance of the Agency. 
120. In utilizing the limited resources available for the country's atomic energy 
programmes, Sri Lanka had concentrated on areas of relevance for it s development 
and for the welfare of its people. The most important development programme at 
present was the Mahaveli project, which involved the diversion of the longest 
river in the country into the dry zone in the central and northen regions. It 
was aimed at making Sri Lanka self-sufficient in food and supplying hydroelectric 
power sufficient for at least another 12 years. 
121. A number of problems associated with it, such as the measurement of flow rates 
and the measurement of seepage of water through dams and irrigation channels, had 
required nuclear techniques for their solution, and the Agency was now supporting 
some of those investigations. 

GC(XXIII)/0B.217 
page 24 

122. In the area of nuclear agriculture the main effort was focused on fertilizer 
uptake studies, aimed at eventual replacement of imported fertilizers by local 
apatite. 
123. Coastal erosion and the silting up of fishery harbours were problems 
causing concern. A project to study the sediment movement patterns in the 
coastal area was being implemented with UNDP and Agency support. There had also 
been a feasibility study for food preservation by irradiation with assistance 
from the Agency. On the basis of that study it was intended to set up a multipurpose 
pilot facility for food preservation, vulcanization of rubber and 
sterilization by irradiation. The use of nuclear techniques in medicine was 
another area earmarked for further expansion. 
124. To meet its electricity needs Sri Lanka was almost totally dependent on 
hydroelectric power resources. The electricity demand had risen in 1978 by 20$. 
There were no resources of oil, coal or gas, but no decision had yet been taken 
as to what other type of energy would be developed in the 1990s, when the hydro 
resources were no longer sufficient. 
125. With the assistance of the Agency, a uranium and thorium prospecting 
project was now under way, and a small number of persons were being trained 
in nuclear power planning. 
126. The present era was one in which co-operation between the countries in Asia 
and the Pacific was very important, and it was essential for those countries to 
pool their resources and exploit the peaceful potential of nuclear energy in an 
effort to improve the quality of life. Sri Lanka therefore supported the Agency's 
Regional Co—operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related 
to Nuclear Science and Technology (RCA) programmes. 
127. Sri Lanka had already hosted three Agency training courses, one Agency 
symposium and two Agency workshops. In 1980 it would be hosting the joint 
IAEA/PAG International Symposium on Combination Processes in Pood Preservation. 
Sri Lanka, furthermore, would also be willing to be the host country for a 
permanent Agency activity, such as a regional centre. 
GC(XXIII)/OR. 217 
page 25 

128. Sri Lanka was engaged in a determined development programme and would not 
hesitate to use any technique, whether simple or sophisticated, to promote the 
development effort. Atomic energy was one of the essential tools for rapid 
elimination of poverty and human suffering in developing countries. Hence, his 
delegation whole-heartedly supported the Agency's programmes aimed at the 
utilization of peaceful nuclear techniques for the benefit of mankind. 
The meeting rose at 12.52 p.m. 


GC(XXIII)/OR.218 
August 1980* 


Internationa) Atomic Energy Agency 
GENERAL Distr. 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 
ENGLISH 


TWENTY-THIRD REGULAR SESSION: 4-10 DECEMBER 1979 


RECORD OF THE TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTEENTH 
PLENARY MEETING 


Held at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi, 
on Monday, 10 December 1979, at 3.10 p.m. 


President; Mr. SETHNA (India) 


CONTENTS 


Item of the „ , 
agenda** Paragraphs 

- 
Report by the Chairman of the Committee 1 - 15 
of the Whole on the following items: 
The Agency's accounts for 1978 
The Agency's budget for 1979 
The Agency's budget for 1980 
Scale of assessment of Members' 

contributions for 1980 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute 

14 Appointment of the External Auditor 16 -17 

15 Elections to the Agency's Staff 18 -19 
Pension Committee 

16 Report on voluntary contributions 20 -21 
pledged to the General Fund for 1980 

- Closing of the session 
22 - 32 
*/ A provisional version of this document was issued on 29 January 1980. 

**/ GC(XXIII)/620. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXIII)/INF/l88/Rev.5. 

80-2851 


0C(XXIII)/OR.218 
page 2 

REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

1. Mr. COSTA ALONSO (Mexico), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the Committee's report on items 8, 9, 10, 11 and 17 of the agenda, 
which had been referred to it by the General Conference for examination. 
2. The Committee recommended the General Conference to adopt the following 
draft resolutions: 
- the draft resolution contained in Part I of document GC(XXIII)/6ll 
(item 8 - the Agency's accounts for 1978); 
- the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIII)/6l8 (item 17 - the 
Agency's budget for 1979), and 
- draft resolution A contained in Annex VII of document GC(XXIII)/6l2/Mod.l, 
and draft resolutions B and C contained in Annex VII of document GC(XXIII)/6l2 
(item 9 - the Agency's budget for 1980). 
3. The Agency's budget for 1980 (item 9) had been approved by the majority of 
delegations although some of them had stressed the need to rationalize the 
Agency's expenditure in order to offset the impact of world-wide inflation. 
Others had expressed their concern at the imbalance between the scant resources 
assigned to activities involving promotion and technical assistance and those 
allocated for Agency operating costs and expenditure on safeguards. Some 
delegations had advocated reclassifying the accounts in such a way as to permit 
the real cost of the safeguards item to be determined by including in it the 
part corresponding to operating and general service costs. 
4. During the discussions some delegations had emphasized the need for revision 
of the staff recruitment procedures so as to bring them into line with the 
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on establishing 
a balance between posts allotted to the nationals of the developing and developed 
countries. 
5. In connection with item 9, the Committee had examined a draft resolution 
on including in the Agency's Regular Budget the funds for financing technical 
assistance. On that point the Committee had decided by acclamation to recommend 
the General Conference to adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXIII)/624. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.2l8 
page 3 

6. The Committee also recommended the General Conference to approve the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXIII)/613, and the Annex to that resolution, 
contained in document GC(XXIII)/6l3/tood,l (item 10 of the Agenda - Scale of 
assessment of Members' contributions for 1980). 
7. As far as item 11 was concerned (Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute), 
the Committee recommended the General Conference to approve the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXIII)/625. Some delegations had reserved the right to 
raise the matter of equitable representation on the Board of Governors when it 
next dealt with that point. 
8. The PRESIDENT thanked the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and 
proposed that the draft resolutions and proposals relating to the items of the 
Agenda that had been referred to it should be considered by the General Conference 
with a view to their adoption. 
9. It was so decided. 
The Agency's accounts for 1978 
10. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIII)/6ll was adopted. 
The Agency's budget for 1979 
11. The draft resolution contained in document GC(XXIII)/6l8 was adopted. 
The Agency's budget for 1980 
12. The draft resolutions contained in documents GC(XXIII)/612, 612/Mod.l and 
624 were adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members* contributions for 1980 

13. The draft resolutions contained in documents GC(XXIII)/6l3 and 6l3/frod.l 
were adopted. 
Amendment of Article VI.A.2 of the Statute 

14. The draft resolution contained in document OC(XXIII)/625 was 
adopted. 
15. Mr. BARR0S0 FELTRER (Spain) expressed his delegation's satisfaction at 
the adoption by the General Conference of the resolution on Article VI of the 
Statute (GC(XXIII)/625). His country fully understood the desire of certain 
Hember States to serve on the Board of Governors more frequently, since Spain 
itself was not satisfied with the frequency of its participation in the work 
of the Board, as had been pointed out in his delegation's statement during the 

GC(XXIII)/OR.a8 
page 4 

general debate and in the Committee of the Whole. He would he interested to 
study any proposal for a change in the composition of the Board that could help 
to meet his country's wishes, as well as those of other Member States in the 
same position. 

APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

16. The PRESIDENT proposed that Mr. Peschar, Auditor General of the 
Netherlands, should be reappointed to the post of External Auditor for 1980-1981. 

IT. The President's proposal was adopted. 

ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 

18. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was at present 
represented on the Staff Pension Committee by two members - Mr. Sastradidjaja 
(Indonesia) and Mr. Estrada Oyuela (Argentina), and by Mr. Modranszky (Hungary) 
and Mr. Scheller (Federal Republic of Germany), as the alternates. Since three 
of them were no longer able to serve on the Committee, he proposed that the 
General Conference should elect Mr. Scheller (Federal Republic of Germany) and 
Miss Castano (Philippines) as members, and Mr. Rybka (Hungary) and 
Mr. Alvarez Vita (Peru) as alternates. 

19. Mr. Scheller (Federal Republic of Germany) and Miss Castano (Philippines) 
were elected as members of the Agency's Staff Pension Committee and Mr. Rybka 
(Hungary) and Mr. Alvarez Vita (Peru) as alternates. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE GENERAL HIND FOR 1980 
(GC(XXIII)/6l9/Rev .4) 

20. The PRESIDENT stated that by 7 December 1979, 53 Member States had 
pledged voluntary contributions amounting to $5 825 369t *o which had to be 
added pledges of $7350 by the United Arab EmirateB, 82100 by Zambia, and 
$15 000 by Portugal, making a total $5 849 819. Because of the dates fixed 
for the adoption of their national budgets, some Member States were not yet 
able to pledge their contributions, but would do so at a later stage. 
21. He pointed out that the pledges so far amounted only to 
55.755 of the target figure and were far below what had been achieved at 
previous sessions. He therefore appealed to Member States that had not yet 
done so to pledge their voluntary contributions at their earliest convenience, 
for which purpose they should get in touch with the Agency Secretariat in Vienna. 
Without the pledges it would be difficult for the Agency to plan its technical 
assistance programme and speed up its activities in that field. 
GC(XXIII)/OR.218 
page 5 

CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

22. Mr. CASTRO MADERO (Argentina), on behalf of the countries of 
Latin America, commended the President for the skill and wisdom with which he 
had conducted the deliberations of the General Conference. India's achievements 
in the nuclear field were an example to everyone, and the hospitality of the 
Indian people had contributed to the success of the present session. 
23. Mr. NGONGO KAMANDA (Zaire) wished to pay a tribute, an behalf of the 
countries of Africa, to the equanimity and understanding shown by the President 
and to convey the appreciation of the countries of his region to the Indian 
Government. 
24. Mr. KIRK (United States of America), speaking for the countries of 
North America, thanked the President for the way in which he had conducted the 
deliberations of the twenty-third session and expressed his gratitude to the 
Indian Government. 
25. Mr. KHAN (Pakistan), acting as spokesman for the area of the 
Middle East region and South Asia, said that all credit for the results achieved 
during the present session was due to the President and that the hospitality 
of the Indian Government would never be forgotten. 
26. Mr. OSZTROVSZKI (Hungary), speaking on behalf of the countries of 
Eastern Europe, expressed his appreciation for the wisdom and patience that the 
President had shown. He wished to convey his gratitude to the Indian Government 
and to commend it on the advances made in the nuclear field. 
27. Mr. KHOR (Malaysia) said that the countries of South East Asia and the 
Pacific would always remember the present session with pleasure, and thanked the 
President for the skill with which he had conducted the discussions. 
28. Mr. SIAZON (Philippines), speaking on behalf of the countries of the 
Far East, referred to the success of the twenty-third session, the credit for 
which was largely due to its President. All those attending it would be sorry 
to leave India, which had accorded them such a warm welcome. 
29. Mr. CROMARTIE (United Kingdom), as spokesman for Western Europe, 
cordially thanked the President, who had been instrumental in making the work of 
the Conference a success, as well as the host country for extending such 
generous hospitality. 

GC(XXIII)/OR.218 
page 6 

30. The PRE5IDE8T thanked all the delegates for their kind words and 
expressed his gratitude to the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, the 
Chairman of the General Committee, the Director General and the Secretariat, 
and to all participants for having helped to make the present session a success. 
Before closing the twenty-third session, he invited all those present to observe 
a minute's silence for prayer or meditation. 
31. All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 
32. The PRESIDENT declared the twenty-third session of the General Conference 
closed. 
The meeting rose at 4.5 P.m. 


